


PART THE FIRST 


BOOK I 


[1712-1719] 

I am commencing an undertaking, hitherto without precedent, and 
which will never find an imitator. I desire to set before my fellows 
the likeness of a man in all the truth of nature, and that man my- 
self. 

Myself alone! I know the feelings of my heart, and I know men. 
I am not made like any of those I have seen; I venture to believe 
that I am not made like any of those who are in existence. If I am 
not better, at least I am different. Whether Nature has acted rightly 
or wrongly in destroying the mould in which she cast me, can only 
be decided after I have been read. 

Let the trumpet of the Day of Judgment sound when it will, 
I will present myself before the Sovereign Judge with this book in 
my hand. I will say boldly: “This is what I have done, what I have 
thought, what I was. I have told the good and the bad with equal 
frankness. I have neither omitted anything bad, nor interpolated 
anything good. If I have occasionally made use of some immaterial 
embellishments, this has only been in order to fill a gap caused by 
lack of memory. I may have assumed the truth of that which I 
knew might have been true, never of that which I knew to be false. 
I have shown myself as I was: mean and contemptible, good, high- 
minded and sublime, according as I was one or the other. I have 
unveiled my inmost self even as Thou hast seen it, O Eternal Be- 
ing. Gather round me the countless host of my fellow-men; let 
them hear my confessions, lament for my unworthiness, and blush 
for my imperfections. Then let each of them in turn reveal, with 
the same frankness, the secrets of his heart at the foot of the 
Throne, and say, if he dare, ‘I was better than that man? ” 


3 


4 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


I was born at Geneva, in the year 1712, and was the son of Isaac 
Rousseau and Susanne Bernard, citizens. The distribution of a very 
moderate inheritance amongst fifteen children had reduced my 
father’s portion almost to nothing; and his only means of liveli- 
hood was his trade of watchmaker, in which he was really very 
clever. My mother, a daughter of the Protestant minister Bernard, 
was better off. She was clever and beautiful, and my father had 
found difficulty in obtaining her hand. Their affection for each 
other had commenced almost as soon as they were born. When 
only eight years old, they walked every evening upon the Treille;t 
at ten, they were inseparable. Sympathy and union of soul strength- 
ened in them the feeling produced by intimacy. Both, naturally full 
of tender sensibility, only waited for the moment when they should 
tind the same disposition in another—or, rather, this moment 
waited for them, and each abandoned his heart to the first which 
opened to receive it. Destiny, which appeared to oppose their pas- 
sion, only encouraged it. The young lover, unable to obtain pos- 
session of his mistress, was consumed by grief. She advised him to 
travel, and endeavour to forget her. He travelled, but without re- 
sult, and returned more in love than ever. He found her whom he 
loved still faithful and true. After this trial of affection, nothing 
was left for them but to love each other all their lives. This they 
swore to do, and Heaven blessed their oath. 

Gabriel Bernard, my mother’s brother, fell in love with one of 
my father’s sisters, who only consented to accept the hand of the 
brother, on condition that her own brother married the sister. Love 
arranged everything, and the two marriages took place on the same 
day. Thus my uncle became the husband of my aunt, and their 
children were doubly my first cousins. At the end of a year, a child 
was born to both, after which they were again obliged to separate. 

My uncle Bernard was an engineer. He took service in the Em- 
pire and in Hungary, under Prince Eugéne. He distinguished 
himself at the siege and battle of Belgrade. My father, after the 
birth of my only brother, set out for Constantinople, whither he 
was summoned to undertake the post of watchmaker to the Sultan. 
During his absence, my mother’s beauty, intellect and talents gained 


1A fashionable promenade in Geneva. 


DEATH OF HIS MOTHER 5) 


for her the devotion of numerous admirers.? M. de la Closure, the 
French Resident, was one øf the most eager to offer his. His passion 
must have been great, for, thirty years later, I saw him greatly af- 
fected when speaking to me of her. To enable her to resist such 
advances, my mother had more than her virtue: she loved her hus- 
band tenderly. She pressed him to return; he left all, and returned. 
I was the unhappy fruit of this return. Ten months later I was 
born, a weak and ailing child; I cost my mother her life, and my 
birth was the first of my misfortunes. 

I have never heard how my father bore this loss, but I know 
that he was inconsolable. He believed that he saw his wife again 
in me, without being able to forget that it was I who had robbed 
him of her; he never embraced me without my perceiving, by his 
sighs and the convulsive manner in which he clasped me to his 
breast, that a bitter regret was mingled with his caresses, which 
were on that account only the more tender. When he said to me, 
“Jean Jacques, let us talk of your mother,” I used to answer, “Well, 
then, my father, we will weep!’—and this word alone was suff- 
cient to meve him to tears. “Ah!” said he, with a sigh, “give her 
back to me, console me for her loss, fill the void which she has 
left in my soul. Should I love you as I do, if you were only my son?” 
Forty years after he had lost her, he died in the arms of a second 
wife, but the name of the first was on his lips and her image at 
the bottom of his heart. 

Such were the authors of my existence. Of all the gifts which 
Heaven had bestowed upon them, a sensitive heart is the only one 


2 Her talents were too brilliant for her position, since her father, the min- 
ister, who worshipped her, had educated her with great care. She drew, sang, 
accompanied herself on the téorbe;* she read much, and wrote tolerable 
verses. During the absence of her husband and her brother, while walking 
with her sister-in-law and their two children, she delivered the following 
impromptu, when someone happened to mention them: 

Ces deux messieurs, qui sont absents, 
Nous sont chers de bien des manières: 
Ce sont nos amis, nos amants: 
Ce sont nos maris et nos fréres, 
Et les péres de ces enfants. 


* A stringed instrument, resembling a lute. 


6 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


they bequeathed to me; it had been the source of their happiness, 
but for me it proved the source of all the misfortunes of my life. 

I was brought into the world in an almost dying condition; little 
hope was entertained of saving my life. I carried within me the 
germs of a complaint which the course of time has strengthened, 
and which at times allows me a respite only to make me suffer 
more cruelly in another manner. One of my father’s sisters, an 
amiable and virtuous young woman, took such care of me that 
she saved my life. At this moment, while I am writing, she is still 
alive, at the age of eighty, nursing a husband younger than herself, 
but exhausted by excessive drinking. Dear aunt, I forgive you for 
having preserved my life; and I deeply regret that, at the end of 
your days, I am unable to repay the tender care which you lavished 
upon me at the beginning of my own.? My dear old nurse Jac- 
queline is also still alive, healthy and robust. The hands which 
opened my eyes at my birth will be able to close them for me at 
my death. 

I felt before I thought: this is the common lot of humanity. I ex- 
perienced it more than others. I do not know what I did until I was 
five or six years old. I do not know how I learned to read; I only 
remember my earliest reading, and the effect it had upon me; from 
that time I date my uninterrupted self-consciousness. My mother had 
left some romances behind her, which my father and I began to 
read after supper. At first it was only a question of practising me in 
reading by the aid of amusing books; but soon the interest became 
so lively, that we used to read in turns without stopping, and spent 
whole nights in this occupation. We were unable to leave off until 
the volume was finished. Sometimes, my father, hearing the swal- 
lows begin to twitter in the early morning, would say, quite 
ashamed, “Let us go to bed; I am more of a child than yourself.” 

In a short time I acquired, by this dangerous method, not only 
extreme facility in reading and understanding what I read, but a 
knowledge of the passions that was unique in a child of my age. I 
had no idea of things in themselves, although all the feelings of 

? The name of this aunt was Madame Gonceru. In March, 1767, Rousseau 


settled upon her an income of one hundred livres, and, even in the time of 
his greatest distress, always paid it with scrupulous exactitude. 


HIS LOVE OF READING J 


actual life were already known to me. I had conceived nothing, but 
felt everything. These confused emotions which I felt one after the 
other, certainly did not warp the reasoning powers which I did not 
as yet possess; but they shaped them in me of a peculiar stamp, and 
gave me odd and romantic notions of human life, of which experi 
ence and reflection have never been able wholly to cure me. 
[1719—-1723.]—The romances came to an end in the summer of 
1719. The following winter brought us something different. My 
mother’s library being exhausted, we had recourse to the share of 
her father’s which had fallen to us. Luckily, there were some good 
books in it; in fact, it could hardly have been otherwise, for the 
library had been collected by a minister, who was even a learned 
man according to the fashion of the day, and was at the same time a 
man of taste and intellect. The “History of the Empire and the 
Church,” by Le Sueur; Bossuet’s “Treatise upon Universal History”; 
Plutarch’s “Lives of Famous Men”; Nani’s “History of Venice”; 
Ovid’s “Metamorphoses”; La Bruyére; Fontenelle’s “Worlds”; 
his “Dialogues of the Dead”; and some volumes of Moliére—all 
these were brought over into my father’s room, and I read to him out 
of them while he worked. I conceived a taste for them that was rare 
and perhaps unique at my age. Plutarch, especially, became my 
favourite author. The pleasure I took in reading him over and over 
again cured me a little of my taste for romance, and I soon preferred 
Agesilaus, Brutus, and Aristides to Orondates, Artamenes, and Juba, 
This interesting reading, and the conversations between my father 
and myself to which it gave rise, formed in me the free and republi» 
can spirit, the proud and indomitable character unable to endure 
slavery or servitude, which has tormented me throughout my life in 
situations the least fitted to afford it scope. Unceasingly occupied 
with thoughts of Rome and Athens, living as it were amongst their 
great men, myself by birth the citizen of a republic and the son of a 
father whose patriotism was his strongest passion, I was fired by his 
example; I believed myself a Greek or a Roman; I lost my identity 
in that of the individual whose life I was reading; the recitals of the 
qualities of endurance and intrepidity which arrested my attention 
made my eyes glisten and strengthened my voice. One day, while ] 
was relating the history of Scaevola at table, those present were 


8 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROYSSEAU 


alarmed to see me come forward and hold my hand over a chafing- 
dish, to illustrate his action. 

I had a brother seven years older than myself, who was learning 
my father’s trade. The excessive affection which was lavished upon 
myself caused him to be somewhat neglected, which treatment I 
cannot approve of. His education felt the consequences of this neg- 
lect. He took to evil courses before he was old enough to be a regular 
profligate. He was put with another master, from whom he was 
continually running away, as he had done from home. I hardly ever 
saw him; I can scarcely say that I knew him; but I never ceased to 
Jove him tenderly, and he loved me as much as a vagabond can love 
anything. I remember that, on one occasion, when my father was 
chastising him harshly and in anger, I threw myself impetuously 
between them and embraced him closely. In this manner I covered 
his body with mine, and received the blows which were aimed at 
him; I so obstinately maintained my position that at last my father 
was obliged to leave off, being either disarmed by my cries and 
tears, or afraid of hurting me more than him. At last, my brother 
turned out so badly that he ran away and disappeared altogether. 
Sometime afterwards we heard that he was in Germany. He never 
once wrote to us. From that time nothing more has been heard of 
him, and thus I have remained an only son. 

If this poor boy was caretessly brought up, this was not the case 
with his brother; the children of kings could not be more carefully 
looked after than I was during my early years—worshipped by all 
around me, and, which is far less common, treated as a beloved, 
never as a spoiled child. Till I left my father’s house, I was never 
once allowed to run about the streets by myself with the other 
children; in my case no one ever had to satisfy or check any of those 
fantastic whims which are attributed to Nature, but are all in 
reality the result of education. I had the faults of my age: I was a 
chatterbox, a glutton, and, sometimes, a liar. I would have stolen 
fruits, bonbons, or eatables; but I have never found pleasure in 
doing harm or damage, in accusing others, or in tormenting poor 
dumb animals. I remember, however, that I once made water in a 
saucepan belonging to one of our neighbours, Madame Clot, while 
she was at church. I declare that, even now, the recollection of this 


HIS PASSION FOR MUSIC 9 


makes me laugh, because Madame Clot, a good woman in other 
respects, was the most confirmed old grumbler I have ever known. 
Such is the brief and true story of all my childish offences. 

How could I become wicked, when I had nothing but examples 
of gentleness before my eyes, and none around me but the best people 
in the world? My father, my aunt, my nurse, my relations, our 
friends, our neighbours, all who surrounded me, did not, it is true, 
obey me, but they loved me; and I loved them in return. My wishes 
were so little excited and so little opposed, that it did not occur to 
me to have any. I can swear that, until I served under a master, I 
never knew what a fancy was. Except during the time I spent in 
reading or writing in my father’s company, or when my nurse took 
me for a walk, I was always with my aunt, sitting or standing by her 
side, watching her at her embroidery or listening to her singing; 
and I was content. Her cheerfulness, her gentleness and her pleasant 
face have stamped so deep and lively an impression on my mind that 
I can still see her manner, look, and attitude; I remember her affec- 
tionate language: I could describe what clothes she wore and how 
her head was dressed, not forgetting the two little curls of black 
hair on her temples, which she wore in accordance with the fashion 
of the time. 

I am convinced that it is to her I owe the taste, or rather passion, 
for music, which only became fully developed in me a long time 
afterwards. She knew a prodigious number of tunes and songs 
which she used to sing in a very thin, gentle voice. This excellent 
‘woman’s cheerfulness of soul banished dreaminess and melancholy 
from herself and all around her. The attraction which her singing 
possessed for me was so great, that not only have several of her songs 
always remained in my memory, but even now, when I have lost 
her, and as I grew older, many of them, totally forgotten since the 
days of my childhood, return to my mind with inexpressible charm, 
Would anyone believe that I, an old dotard, eaten up by cares and 
troubles, sometime find myself weeping like a child, when I mumble 
one of those little airs in a voice already broken and trembling? One 
of them, especially, has come back to me completely, as far as the 
tune is concerned; the second half of the words, however, has ob- 
stinately resisted all my efforts to recall it, although I have an in- 


lu THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


distinct recollection of the rhymes. Here is the beginning, and all 
that I can remember of the rest: 

Tircis, je n’ose 

Ecouter ton chalumeau 

Sous |’ormeau: 

Car on en cause 

Déjà dans notre hameau. 


un berger 
s'engager 
pce age sans danger 
Et toujours l'épine est sous la rose.* 


I ask, where is the affecting charm which my heart finds in this 
song? it is a whim, which I am quite unable to understand; but, 
be that as it may, it is absolutely impossible for me to sing it through 
without being interrupted by my tears. I have intended, times with- 
out number, to write to Paris to make inquiries concerning the re- 
mainder of the words, in case anyone should happen to know them; 
but I am almost certain that the pleasure which I feel im recalling 
the air would partly disappear, if it should be proved that others 
besides my poor aunt Suson have sung it. 

Such were my earliest emotions on my entry into life; thus began 
to form or display itself in me that heart at once so proud and tender, 
that character so effeminate but yet indomitable, which, ever waver- 
ing between timidity and courage, weakness and self-control, has 
throughout my life made me inconsistent, and has caused abstinence 
and enjoyment, pleasure and prudence equally to elude my grasp. 

This course of education was interrupted by an accident, the 

*This song, well-known in Paris, is still sung by the working classes. The 
sixth and following lines run: 

“Un cœur s’expose 
A trop s’engager 
Avec un berger, 
Et toujours l'épine est sous la rose.” 
[Tircis, I dare not listen to your pipe under the elm; people are beginning to 


talk about it in the village. It is dangerous for a heart to have too much to do 
with a shepherd; there is no rose without its thorn.] 


HE IS “SENT TO sBOSSEY Ik 


consequences of which have exercised an influence upon the re- 
mainder of my life. My fasher had a quarrel with a captain in the 
French army, named Gautier, who was connected with some of 
the members of the Common Council. This Gautier, a cowardly and 
insolent fellow (whose nose happened to bleed during the affray), 
in order to avenge himself, accused my father of having drawn his 
sword within the city walls. My father, whom they wanted to send 
to prison, persisted that, in accordance with the law, the accuser 
ought to be imprisoned as well as himself. Being unable to have his 
way in this, he preferred to quit Geneva and expatriate himself for 
the rest of his life, than to give way on a point in which honour and 
liberty appeared to him to be compromised. 

I remained under the care of my uncle Bernard, who was at the 
time employed upon the fortifications of Geneva. His eldest daugh- 
ter was dead, but he had a son of the same age as myself. We were 
sent together to Bossey, to board with the Protestant minister Iam- 
bercier, in order to learn, together with Latin, all the sorry trash 
which is included under the name of education. 

Two years spent in the village in some degree softened my Roman 
roughness and made me a child again. -At Geneva, where no tasks 
were imposed upon me, I loved reading and study, which were al- 
most my only amusements; at Bossey, my tasks made me love the 
games which formed a break in them. The country: was so new tc 
me, that my enjoyment of it never palled. I conceived so lively an 
affection for it, that it has never since died out. The remembrance of 
the happy days I have spent there filled me with regretful longing 
for its pleasures, at all periods of my life, until the day which has 
brought me back to it. M. Lambercier was a very intelligent person, 
who, without neglecting our education, never imposed excessive 
tasks upon us. The fact that, in spite of my dislike of restraint, I have 
never recalled my hours of study with any feeling of disgust—an¢ 
also that, even if I did not learn much from him, I learnt without 
difficulty what I did learn and never forgot’ it—is sufficient proof 
that his system of instruction was a good one. 

The simplicity of this country life was of inestimable value to 
me, in that it opened my heart to friendship. Up to that time I had 
only known lofty but imaginary sentiments. The habit of living 


£2 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


peacefully together with my cousin Bernard drew us together in 
tender bonds of union. In a short time, my feelings towards him 
became more affectionate than those with which I had regarded my 
brother, and they have never been effaced. He was a tall, lanky, 
weakly boy, as gentle in disposition as he was feeble in body, who 
never abused the preference which was shown to him in the house 
as the son of my guardian. Our tasks, our amusements, our tastes 
were the same: we were alone, we were of the same age, each of 
us needed a companion: separation was to us, in a manner, annihila- 
tion. Although we had few opportunities of proving our mutual 
attachment, it was very great; not only were we unable to live an 
instant apart, but we did not imagine it possible that we could ever 
be separated. Being, both of us, ready to yield to tenderness, and 
docile, provided compulsion was not used, we always agreed in 
everything. If, in the presence of those who looked after us, he had 
some advantage over me in consequence of the favour with which 
they regarded him, when we were alone I had'an advantage over 
him which restored the equilibrium. When we were saying our 
lessons, I prompted him if he hesitated; when I had finished my 
exercise, I helped him with his; and in our amusements, my more 
active mind always led the way. In short, our two characters har- 
monised so well, and the friendship which united us was so sincere, 
that, in the five years and more, during which, whether at Bossey 
or Geneva, we were almost inseparable, although I confess that we 
often fought, it was never necessary to separate us, none of our quar- 
rels ever lasted longer than a quarter of an hour, and neither of us 
ever made any accusation against the other. These observations are, 
if you will, childish, but they furnish an example which, since the 
time that there have been children, is perhaps unique. 

The life which I led at Bossey suited me so well that, had it only 
lasted longer, it would have completely decided my character. Ten- 
der, affectionate and gentle feelings formed its foundation. I believe 
that no individual of our species was naturally more free from vanity 
than myself. I raised myself by fits and starts to lofty flights, but 
immediately fell down again into my natural languor. My liveliest 
desire was to be loved by all who came near me. I was of a gentle 
disposition; my cousin and our guardians were the same. During 


MADEMOISELLE LAMBERCIER 3 13 


two whole years I was neither the witness nor the victim of any 
violent feeling. Everythingenourished in my heart those tendencies 
which it received from Nature. I knew no higher happiness than to 
see all the world satisfied with me and with everything. I shall never 
forget how, if I happened to hesitate when saying my catechism in 
church, nothing troubled me more than to observe signs of restless- 
ness and dissatisfaction on Mademoiselle Lambercier’s face. That 
alone troubled me more than the disgrace of failing in public, 
which, nevertheless, affected me greatly: for, although little sus- 
ceptible to praise, I felt shame keenly; and I may say here that the 
thought of Mademoiselle’s reproaches caused me less uneasiness than 
the fear of offending her. 

When it was necessary, however, neither she nor her brother 
were wanting in severity; but, since this severity was nearly always 
just, and never passionate, it pained me without making me in- 
subordinate. Failure to please grieved me more than punishment, 
and signs of dissatisfaction hurt me more than corporal chastisement. 
It is somewhat embarrassing to explain myself more clearly, but, 
nevertheless, I must do so. How differently would one deal with 
youth, if one could more clearly see the remote effects of the usual 
method of treatment, which is employed always without discrimina- 
tion, frequently without discretion! The important lesson which may 
be drawn from an example as common as it is fatal makes me decide 
to mention it. 

As Mademoiselle Lambercier had the affection of a mother for 
us, she also exercised the authority of one, and sometimes carried it 
so far as to inflict upon us the punishment of children when we had 
deserved it. For some time she was content with threats, and this 
threat of a punishment that was quite new to me appeared very 
terrible; but, after it had been carried out, I found the reality less 

' terrible than the expectation; and, what was still more strange, this 
chastisement made me still more devoted to her who had inflicted it. 
It needed all the strength of this devotion and all my natural docil- 
ity to keep myself from doing something which would have de- 
servedly brought upon me a repetition of it; for I had found in the 
pain, even in the disgrace, a mixture of sensuality which had left me 
less afraid than desirous of experiencing it again from the same 


14 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


hand. No doubt some precocious sexual instinct was mingled with 
this feeling, for the same chastisement inflicted by her brother would 
not have seemed to me at all pleasant. But, considering his disposi- 
tion, there was little cause to fear the substitution; and if I kept 
myself from deserving punishment, it was solely for fear of dis- 
pleasing Mademoiselle Lambercier; for, so great is the power exer- 
cised over me by kindness, even by that which is due to the senses, 
that it has always controlled the latter in my heart. 

The repetition of the offence, which I avoided without being 
afraid of it, occurred without any fault of mine, that is to say, of my 
will, and I may say that I profited by it without any qualm of con- 
science. But this second time was also the last; for Mademoiselle 
Lambercier, who had no doubt noticed something which convinced 
her that the punishment did not have the desired effect, declared that 
it tired her too much, and that she would abandon it. Until then we 
had slept in her reom, sometimes even in her bed during the winter. 
Two days afterwards we were put to sleep in another room, and 
from that time I had the honour, which I would gladly have dis- 
pensed with, of being treated by her as a big boy. 

Who would believe that this childish punishment, inflicted upon 
me when only eight years old by a young woman of thirty, disposed 
of my tastes, my desires, my passions, and my own self for the re- 
mainder of my life, and that in a manner exactly contrary to that 
which should have been the natural result? When my feelings were 
once inflamed, my desires so went astray that, limited to what I 
had already felt, they did not trouble themselves to look for any- 
thing else. In spite of my hot blood, which has been inflamed with 
sensuality almost from my birth, I kept myself free from every taint 
until the age when the coldest and most sluggish temperaments be- 
gin to develop. In torments for a long time, without knowing why, I 
devoured with burning glances all the pretty women I met; my 
imagination unceasingly recalled them to me, only to make use of 
them in my own fashion, and to make of them so many Mlles. 
Lambercier. 

Even after I had reached years of maturity, this curious taste, 
always abiding with me and carried to depravity and even frenzy, 
preserved my morality, which it might naturally have been expected 


PRECOCIOUS SENSUALITY I5 


to destroy. If ever a bringing-up was chaste and modest, assuredly 
mine was. My three aunts were not only models of propriety, but 
reserved to a degree which has long since been unknown amongst 
women. My father, a man of pleasure, but a gallant of the old 
school, never said a word, even in the presence of women whom he 
loved more than others, which would have brought a blush to a 
maiden’s cheek; and the respect due to children has never been so 
much insisted upon as in my family and in my presence. In this 
respect I found M. Lambercier equally careful; and an excellent 
servant was dismissed for having used a somewhat too free expres- 
sion in our presence. Until I was a young man, I not only had no 
distinct idea of the union of the sexes, but the confused notion which 
I had regarding it never presented itself to me except in a hateful, 
and disgusting form. For common prostitutes I felt a loathing 
which has never been effaced: the sight of a profligate always filled 
me with contempt, even with affright. My horror of debauchery be- 
came thus pronounced ever since the day when, walking to Little 
Sacconex by a hollow way, I saw on both sides holes in the ground, 
where I was told that these creatures carried on their intercourse. 
The thought of the one always brought back to my mind the copu- 
lation of dogs, and the bare recollection was sufficient to disgust me. 

This tendency of my bringing-up, in itself adapted to delay the 
first outbreaks of an inflammable temperament, was assisted, as I 
have already said, by the direction which the first indications of 
sensuality took in my case. Only busying my imagination with what 
I had actually felt, in spite of most uncomfortable effervescence of 
blood, I only knew how to turn my desires in the direction of that 
kind of pleasure with which I was acquainted, without ever going 
as far as that which had been made hateful to me, and which, with- 
out my having the least suspicion of it, was so closely related to the 
other. In my foolish fancies, in my erotic frenzies, in the extravagant 
acts to which they sometimes led me, I had recourse in my imagina- 
tion to the assistance of the other sex, without ever thinking that it 
was serviceable for any purpose than that for which I was burning 
to make use of it. 

In this manner, then, in spite of an ardent, lascivious and pre- 
cocious temperament, I passed the age of puberty without desir- 


16 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ing, even without knowing of any other sensual pleasures than those 
of which Mademoiselle Lambercier had most innocently given me 
the idea; and when, in course of time, I became a man, that which 
should have destroyed me again preserved me. My old childish 
taste, instead of disappearing, became so associated with the other, 
that I could never banish it from the desires kindled by my senses; 
and this madness, joined to my natural shyness, has always made 
me very unenterprising with women, for want of courage to say all 
or power to do all. The kind of enjoyment, of which the other was 
only for me the final consummation could neither be appropriated 
by him who longed for it, nor guessed by her who was able to bestow 
it. Thus I have spent my life in idle longing, without saying a word, 
in the presence of those whom I loved most. Too bashful to declare 
my taste, I at least satisfied it in situations which had reference to it 
and kept up the idea of it. To lie at the feet of an imperious mistress, 
to obey her commands, to ask her forgiveness—this was for me a 
sweet enjoyment; and, the more my lively imagination heated my 
blood, the more I presented the appearance of a bashful lover. It 
may be easily imagined that this manner of making love does not 
lead to very speedy results, and is not very dangerous to the virtue 
of those who are its object. For this reason I have rarely possessed, 
but have none the less enjoyed myself in my own way—that is to 
say, in imagination. Thus it has happened that my senses, in har- 
mony with my timid disposition and my romantic spirit, have kept 
my sentiments pure and my morals blameless, owing to the very 
tastes which, combined with a little more impudence, might have 
plunged me into the most brutal sensuality. 

I have taken the first and most difficult step in the dark and dirty 
labyrinth of my confessions. It is easier to admit that which is crimi- 
nal than that which is ridiculous and makes a man feel ashamed. 
Henceforth I am sure of myself; after having ventured to say so 
much, I can shrink from nothing. One may judge what such con- 
fessions have cost me, from the fact that, during the whole course 
of my life, I have never dared to declare my folly to those whom I 
loved with the frenzy of a passion which deprived me of sight and 
hearing, which robbed me of my senses and caused me to tremble 
all over with a convulsive movement. I have never brought myself, 


i 


THE INCIDENT OF THE COMBS 17 


even when on most intimate terms, to ask women to grant me the 
only favour of all which was wanting. This never happened to me 
but once—in my childhood, with a girl of my own age; even then, it 
was she who first proposed it. 

While thus going back to the first traces of my inner life, I find 
elements which sometimes appear incompatible, and yet have united 
in order to produce with vigour a simple and uniform, effect; and | 
find others which, although apparently the same, have formed com- 
binations so different, owing to the co-operation of certain circum- 
stances, that one would never imagine that these elements were in 
any way connected. Who, for instance, would believe that one of 
the most powerful movements of my soul was tempered in the same 
spring from which a stream of sensuality and effeminacy has en- 
tered my blood? Without leaving the subject of which I have just 
spoken, I shall produce by means of it a very different impression. 

One day I was learning my lesson by myself in the room next to 
the kitchen. The servant had put Mademoiselle Lambercier’s combs 
in front of the fire-place to dry. When she came back to fetch them, 
she found one with a whole row of teeth broken. Who was to blame 
for the damage? No one except myself had entered the room. On 
being questioned, I denied that I had touched the comb. M. and 
Mademoiselle Lambercier both began to admonish, to press, and to 
threaten me; I obstinately persisted in my denial; but the evidence 
was too strong, and outweighed all my protestations, although it 
was the first time that I had been found to lie so boldly. The matter 
was regarded as serious, as in fact it deserved to be. The mischievous- 
ness, the falsehood, the obstinacy appeared equally deserving of 
punishment; but this time it was not by Mademoiselle Lambercier 
that chastisement was inflicted. My uncle Bernard was written to, 
and he came. My poor cousin was accused of another equally grave 
offence; we were involved in the same punishment. It was terrible. 
Had they wished to look for the remedy in the evil itself and to 
deaden for ever my depraved senses, they could not have set to work 
better, and for a long time my senses left me undisturbed. s 

They could not draw from me the desired confession. Although 
I was several times brought up before them and reduced to a pitiable 
condition, I remained unshaken. I would have endured death, and 


18 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


made up my mind to do so. Force was obliged to yield to the dia- 
bolical obstinacy of a child—as they called my firmness. At last I 
emerged from this cruel trial, utterly broken, but triumphant. 

It is now nearly fifty years since this incident took place, and I 
have no fear of being punished again for the same thing. Well, then, 
I declare in the sight of heaven that I was innocent of the offence, 
that I neither broke nor touched the comb, that I never went near 
the fire-place, and had never even thought of doing so. It would be 
useless to ask me how the damage was done: I do not know, and I 
cannot understand; all that I know for certain is, that I had nothing 
to do with it. 

Imagine a child, shy and obedient in ordinary life, but fiery, 
proud, and unruly in his passions: a child who had always been led 
by the voice of reason and always treated with gentleness, justice, 
and consideration, who had not even a notion of injustice, and who 
for the first time becomes acquainted with so terrible an example of 
it on the part of the very people whom he most loves and respects! 
What an upset of ideas! what a disturbance of feelings! what revo- 
lution in his heart, in his brain, in the whole of his little intellectual 
and moral being! Imagine all this, I say, if possible. As for myself, I 
feel incapable of disentangling and following up the least trace of 
what then took place within me. - 

I had not yet sense enough to feel how much appearances were 
against me, and to put myself in the place of the others. I kept to 
my own place, and all that I felt was the harshness of a frightful 
punishment for an offence which I had not committed. The bodily 
pain, although severe, I felt but little: all I felt was indignation, 
rage, despair. My cousin, whose case was almost the same, and who 
had been punished for an involuntary mistake as if it had been a 
premeditated act, following my example, flew into a rage, and 
worked himself up to the same pitch of excitement as myself. Both 
in the same bed, we embraced each other with convulsive transports: 
we felt suffocated; and when at length our young hearts, somewhat 
relieved, were able to vent their wrath, we sat upright in bed and 
began to shout, times without number, with all our might: Carnifex! 
carnifex! carnifex! ® 


5 Executioner, torturer. 


g 
l EFFECTS OF UNJUST PUNISHMENT Ig 


While I write these words, I feel that my pulse beats faster; those 
moments will always be pfésent to me though I should live a hun- 
dred thousand years. That first feeling of violence and injustice has 
remained so deeply graven on my soul, that all the ideas connected 
with it bring back to me my first emotion; and this feeling; which, 
in its origin, had reference only to myself, has become so strong in 
itself and so completely detached from all personal interest, that, 
when I see or hear of any act of injustice—whoever is the victim of 
it, and wherever it is committed—my heart kindles with rage, as if 
the effect of it recoiled upon myself. When I read of the cruelties of 
a ferocious tyrant, the crafty atrocities of a rascally priest, I would 
gladly set out to plunge a dagger into the heart of such wretches, 
although I had to die for it a hundred times. I have often put myself 
in a perspiration, pursuing or stoning a cock, a cow, a dog, or any 
animal which I saw tormenting another merely because it felt itself 
the stronger. This impulse may be natural to me, and I believe that 
it is; but the profound impression left upon me by the first injustice 
I suffered was too long and too strongly connected with it, not to 
have greatly strengthened it. 

With the above incident the tranquillity of my childish life was 
over. From that moment I ceased to enjoy a pure happiness, and 
even at the present day I feel that the recollection of the charms of 
my childhood ceases there. We remained a few months longer at 
Bossey. We were there, as the first man is represented to us—still in 
the earthly paradise, but we no longer enjoyed it; in appearance our 
condition was the same, in reality it was quite a different manner of 
existence. Attachment, respect, intimacy, and confidence no longer 
united pupils and guides: we no longer regarded them as gods, who 
were able to read in our hearts; we became less ashamed of doing 
wrong and more afraid of being accused; we began to dissemble, to 
be insubordinate, to lie. All the vices of our age corrupted our inno- 
cence and threw a veil of ugliness over our amusements. Even the 
country lost in our eyes that charm of gentleness and simplicity 
which goes to the heart. It appeared to us lonely and sombre: it 
seemed as it were covered with a veil which concealed its beauties 
from our eyes. We ceased to cultivate our little gardens, our plants, 
our flowers. We no longer scratched up the ground gently, or cried 


+ 
20 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


with joy when we saw the seed which we had sown beginning to 
sprout. We were disgusted with the life, and others were disgusted 
with us; my uncle took us away, and we separated from M. and 
Mademoiselle Lambercier, having had enough of each other, and 
feeling but little regret at the separation. i 

Nearly thirty years have passed since I left Bossey, without my 
recalling to mind my stay there with any connected and pleasurable 
recollections; but, now that I have passed the prime of life and am 
approaching old age, I feel these same recollections springing up 
again while others disappear; they stamp themselves upon my mem- 
ory with features, the charm and strength of which increase daily, 
as if, feeling life already slipping away, I were endeavouring to 
grasp it again by its commencement. The most trifling incidents of 
that time please me, simply because they belong to that period. I 
remember all the details of place, persons, and time. I see the maid 
or the manservant busy in the room; a swallow darting through the 
window, a fly settling on my hand while I was saying my lesson: 
I see the whole arrangement of the room in which we used to live; 
M. Lambercier’s study on the right, a copperplate engraving of all 
the Popes, a barometer, a large almanack hanging on the wall, the 
raspberry bushes which, growing in a garden situated on very high 
ground facing the back of the house, shaded the window and some- 
times forced their way through it. I am quite aware that the reader 
does not want to know all this; but I am bound to tell him. Why 
have I not the courage to relate to him in like manner all the trifling 
anecdotes of that happy time, which still make me tremble with joy 
when I recall them? Five or six in particular—but let us make a bar- 
gain. I will let you off five, but I wish to tell you one, only one, pro- 
vided that you will permit me to tell it in as much detail as possible, 
in order to prolong my enjoyment. 

If I only had your pleasure in view, I might choose the story of 
Mademoiselle Lambercier’s backside, which, owing to an unfor- 
tunate somersault at the bottom of the meadow, was exhibited in 
full view to the King of Sardinia, who happened to be passing by; 
but that of the walnut-tree on the terrace is more amusing for me 
who took an active part in it, whereas I was merely a spectator of 
the somersault; besides, I declare that I found absolutely nothing to 


THE -WALNUT-TREE 2I 


laugh at in an accident which, although comic in itself, alarmed me 
for the safety of a person whom I loved as a mother and, perhaps, 
even more. 

Now, O curious readers of the important history of the walnut- 
tree on the terrace, listen to the horrible tragedy, and keep from 
shuddering if you can! 

Outside the gate of the court, on the left of the entrance, there was 
a terrace, where we often went to sit in the afternoon. As it was en- 
tirely unprotected from the sun, M. Lambercier had a walnut-tree 
planted there. The process of planting was carried out with the 
greatest solemnity. The two boarders were its godfathers; and, while 
the hole was being filled up, we each of us held the tree with one 
hand and sang songs of triumph. In order to water it, a kind of 
basin was made round the foot. Every day, eager spectators of this. 
watering, my cousin and I became more strongly convinced, as was 
natural, that it was a finer thing to plant a tree on a terrace than a 
flag upon a breach, and we resolved to win this glory for ourselves 
without sharing it with anyone. 

With this object, we proceeded to cut a slip from a young willow, 
and planted it on the terrace, at a distance of about eight or ten feet 
from the august walnut-tree. We did not forget to dig a similar 
trench round our tree; the difficulty was how to fill it, for the water 
came from some distance, and we were not allowed to run and fetch 
it. However, it was absolutely necessary to have some for our wil- 
low. For a few days, we had recourse to all kinds of devices to get 
some, and we succeeded so well that we saw it bud and put forth 
little leaves, the growth of which we measured every hour, con- 
vinced that, although not yet a foot high, it would soon afford us a 
shade. 

As our tree so completely claimed our attention that we were 
quite incapable of attending to or learning anything else, and were 
in a sort of delirium: as our guardians, not knowing what was the 
matter with us, kept a tighter hand upon us, we saw the fatal mo- 
ment approaching when we should be without water, and were in- 
consolable at the thought of seeing our tree perish from drought. At 
length necessity, the mother of invention, suggested to us how to 
save ourselves from grief and the tree from certain death; this was, 


22 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


to make a channel underground, which should secretly conduct part 
of the water intended for the walnut-tree to our willow. This under- 
taking was at first unsuccessful, in spite of the eagerness with which 
it was carried out. We had made the incline so clumsily that the 
water did not run‘at all. The earth fell in and stopped up the chan- 
nel; the entrance was filled with mud; everything went wrong. But 
nothing disheartened us: Labor omnia vincit improbus. We dug 
our basin deeper, in order to allow the water to run; we cut some 
bottoms of boxes into smal! narrow planks, some of which were laid 
flat, one after the other, and others set up on both sides of these at 
an angle, thus forming a triangular canal for our conduit. At the 
entrance we stuck small pieces of wood, some little distance apart, 
which, forming a kind of grating or lattice-work, kept back the mud 
and stones, without stopping the passage of the water. We carefully 
covered our work with well-trodden earth; and when all was ready, 
we awaited, in the greatest excitement of hope and fear, the time of 
watering. After centuries of waiting, the hour at length arrived; M. 
Lambercier came as usual to assist at the operation, during which 
we both kept behind him, in order to conceal our tree, to which very 
luckily he turned his back. + 

No sooner had the first pail of water been poured out, than we saw 
some of it running into our basin. At this sight, our prudence de- 
serted us: we began to utter cries of joy which made M. Lambercier 
turn round; this was a pity, for he took great delight in seeing how 
good the soil of the walnut-tree was, and how greedily it absorbed 
the water. Astonished at seeing it distribute itself into two basins, he 
cried out in his turn, looked, perceived the trick, ordered a pickaxe 
to be brought, and, with one blow, broke off two or three pieces from 
our planks; then, crying loudly, “An aqueduct, an aqueduct!” he 
dealt merciless blows in every direction, each of which went straight 
to our hearts. In a moment planks, conduit, basin, willow, everything 
was destroyed and uprooted, without his having uttered a single 
word, during this terrible work of destruction, except the exclama- 
tion which he incessantly repeated. “An aqueduct!” he cried, while 
demolishing everything, “an aqueduct, an aqueduct!” 

It will naturally be imagined that the adventure turned out badly 


€ Persistent effort overcomes all difficulties. 


HIS PROFESSION DEBATED 23 


for the little architects: that would be a mistake: it was all over. 
M. Lambercier never uttered a single word of reproach, or looked 
upon us with displeasure, and said nothing more about it; shortly 
afterwards, we even heard him laughing loudly with his sister, for 
his laughter could be heard a long way off; and what was still more 
astonishing, when the first fright was over, we ourselves were not 
much troubled about the matter. We planted another tree some- 
where else, and often reminded ourselves of the disaster that over- 
took the first, by repeating with emphasis, “An aqueduct, an aque- 
duct!” Hitherto I had had intermittent attacks of pride, when I was 
Aristides or Brutus; then it was that I felt the first well-defined 
promptings of vanity. To have been able to construct an aqueduct 
with our own hands, to have put a cutting in competition with a 
large tree, appeared to me the height of glory. At ten years of age I 
was a better judge on this point than Cæsar at thirty. 

The thought of this walnut-tree and the little history connected 
with it has remained so vivid in my memory, or returned to it, that 
one of the plans which gave me the greatest pleasure, on my journey 
to Geneva, in 1754, was to go to Bossey and revisit the memorials of 
my boyish amusements, above all, the dear walnut-tree, which by 
that time must have been a third of a century old; but I was so con- 
tinually occupied, so little my own master, that I could never find the 
moment to afford myself this satisfaction. There is little prospect of 
the opportunity ever occurring again; yet the wish has not disap- 
peared with the hope; and I am almost certain that, if ever I should 
return to those beloved spots and find my dear walnut-+tree still 
alive, I should water it with my tears. 

After my return to Geneva, I lived for two or three years with my 
uncle, waiting until my friends had decided what was to be done 
with me. As he intended his own son to be an engineer, he made 
him learn a little drawing and taught him the elements of Euclid. 
I learned these subjects together with him, and acquired a taste for 
them, especially for drawing. In the meantime, it was debated 
whether I should be a watchmaker, an attorney, or a minister. My 
own preference was for the last, for preaching seemed to me to be a 
very fine thing; but the small income from my mother’s property, 
which had to be divided between my brother and myself, was not 


24 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


sufficient to allow me to prosecute my studies. As, considering my 
age at that time, there was no immediate need to decide, I remained 
for the present with my uncle, making little use of my time and, in 
addition, as was only fair, paying a tolerably large sum for my board. 
My uncle, a man of pleasure like my father, was unable, like him, to 
tie himself down to his duties, and troubled himself little enough 
about us. My aunt was somewhat of a pietist, and preferred to sing 
psalms rather than attend to our education. We were allowed almost 
absolute freedom, which we never abused. Always inseparable, we 
were quite contented with our own society; and, having no tempta- 
tion to make companions of the street boys of our own age, we 
learned none of the dissolute habits into which idleness might have 
led us. I am even wrong in saying that we were idle, for we were 
never less so in our lives; and the most fortunate thing was, that all 
the ways of amusing ourselves, with which we successively became 
infatuated, kept us together busy in the house, without our being 
even tempted to go out into the street. We made cages, flutes, shuttle- 
cocks, drums, houses, squirts,’ and cross-bows. We spoilt my good 
old grandfather’s tools in trying to make watches as he did. We had 
a special taste for wasting paper, drawing, painting in water-colours, 
illuminating, and spoiling colours. An Italian showman, named 
Gamba-Corta, came to Geneva; we went to see him once and never 
wanted to go again. But he had a marionette-show, and we pro- 
ceeded to make marionettes; his marionettes played comedies and we 
composed comedies for ours. For want of a squeaker, we imitated 
Punch’s voice in our throat, in order to play the charming comedies, 
which our poor and kind relations had the patience to sit and listen 
to. But, my uncle Bernard having one day read aloud in the family 
circle a very fine sermon which he had composed himself, we aban- 
doned comedy and began to write sermons. These details are not 
very interesting, I confess, but they show how exceedingly well- 
conducted our early education must have been, seeing that we, al- 
most masters of our time and ourselves at so tender an age, were so 
little tempted to abuse our opportunities. We had so little need of 

7 Equiffles. According to a note in the Firmin-Didot edition, this word is the 


Genevese equivalent of canonnière, “a pop-gun,” but Littré explains it as a 
“squirt.” 


FIRST LOVE | 25 


making companions, that we even neglected the chances of doing so. 
When we went for a walk,we looked at their amusements as we 
passed by without the slightest desire, or even the idea of taking part 
in them. Our friendship so completely filled our hearts, that it was 
enough for us to be together to make the simplest amusements a 
delight. 

Being thus inseparable, we began to attract attention: the more so 
as, my cousin being very tall while I was very short, we made an 
oddly-assorted couple. His long, slim figure, his little face like a 
boiled apple, his gentle manner, and his slovenly walk excited the 
children’s ridicule. In the patois of the district he was nicknamed 
Barna Bredanna, and, directly we went out, we heard nothing but 
“Barna Bredanna!” all round us. He endured it more quietly than . 
I did: I lost my temper and wanted to fight. This was just what the 
little rascals desired. I fought and was beaten. My poor cousin helped 
me as well as he could; but he was weak, and a single blow of the 
fist knocked him down. Then I became furious. However, although 
I received blows in abundance, I was not the real object of attack, 
but Barna Bredanna; but my obstinate anger made matters so much 
worse, that, in future, we only ventured to go out during school- 
hours, for fear of being hooted and followed. 

Behold me already a redresser of wrongs! In order to be a regular 
Paladin I only wanted a lady; I had two. From time to time I went 
to see my father at Nyon, a little town in the Vaud country, where 
he had settled. He was very much liked, and his son felt the effects 
of his popularity. During the short time I stayed with him, friends 
vied with each other in making me welcome. A certain Madame de 
Vulson, especially, bestowed a thousand caresses upon me, and, to 
crown all, her daughter took me for her lover. It is easy to under- 
stand the meaning of a lover eleven years old for a girl of twenty- 
two. But all these roguish young women are so ready to put little 
puppets in front in order to hide larger ones, or to tempt them with 
the idea of an amusement which they know how to render attrac- 
tive! As for myself, I saw no incongruity between us and took the 
matter seriously; I abandoned myself with all my heart, or rather 
with all my head—for it was only in that part of me that I was in 
love, although madly—and my transports, excitement and frenzy 


26 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


produced scenes enough to make anyone split his sides with laugh- 
ing. 

I am acquainted with two very distinct and very real kinds of 
love, which have scarcely anything in common, although both are 
very fervent, and which both differ from tender friendship. The 
whole course of my life has been divided between these two kinds 
of love, essentially so different, and I have even felt them both at the 
same time; for instance, at the time of which I am speaking, while I 
took possession of Mademoiselle de Vulson so openly and so tyran- 
nically that I could not endure that any man should approach her, 
I had several meetings, brief but lively, with a certain little Made- 
moiselle Goton, in which she deigned to play the schoolmistress, and 
that was all; but this all, which was really all for me, seemed to me 
the height of happiness; and, already feeling the value of the mys- 
tery, although I only knew how to make use of it as a child, I paid 
Mademoiselle de Vulson, who had scarcely any suspicion of it, in 
the same coin, for the assiduity with which she made use of me to 
conceal other amours. But, to my great regret, my secret was dis- 
covered, or not so well kept on the part of my little schoolmistress as 
on my own; we were soon separated; and, some time afterwards, on 
my return to Geneva, while passing through Coutance, I heard some 
little girls cry, in an undertone, “Goton tic-tac Rousseau!” 

This little Mademoiselle Goton was really a singular person. 
Without being pretty, she had a face which was not easy to forget, 
and which I still recall to mind, often too tenderly for an old fool. 
Neither her form, nor her manner, nor, above all, her eyes were in 
keeping with her age. She had a proud and commanding air, which 
suited her part admirably, and which in fact had suggested the first 
idea of it to us. But the oddest thing about her was a mixture of im- 
pudence and reserve which it was difficult to comprehend. She took 
the greatest liberties with me, but never allowed me to take any with 
her. She treated me just like a child, which makes me believe, either 
that she was no longer one herself, or that, on the contrary, she was 
still childish enough to see nothing but an amusement in the danger’ 
to which she exposed herself. 

I belonged entirely, so to say, to each of these two persons, and so 
completely, that, when I was with one, I never thought of the other. 


f 


| 
l 


MADEMOISELLE GOTON 27 


In other respects, there was not the slightest similarity between the 


feelings with which they inspired me. I could have spent all my life 


with Mademoiselle de Vulson, without ever thinking of leaving her; 


but, when I approached her, my joy was tranquil and free faa 


emotion. I loved her above all in fashionable society; the witty sallies, 


~railleries, and even the petty jealousies attracted and interested me; 


I felt a pride and glory in the marks of preference she bestowed upon 
me in the presence of grown-up rivals whom she appeared to treat 
with disdain. I was tormented, but I loved the torment. The ap- 
plause, encouragement, and laughter warmed and inspirited me. I 
had fits*of passion and broke out into audacious sallies. In society, I 
was transported with love; in a téte-a-téte I should have been con- 
strained, cold, perhaps wearied. However, I felt a real tenderness for 
her; I suffered when she was ill; I would have given my own health . 
to restore her own, and, observe! I knew very well from experience 
the meaning of illness and health. When absent from her, I thought 
of her and missed her; when I was by her side, her caresses reached 
my heart—not my senses. I was intimate with her with impunity; 
my imagination demanded no more than she granted; yet I could 
not have endured to see her do even as much for others. I loved her 
as a brother, but I was as jealous of her as a lover. 

I should have been as jealous of Mademoiselle Goton as a Turk, 
a madman, or a tiger, if I had once imagined that she could accord 
the same treatment to another as to myself; for even that was a 
favour which I had to ask on my knees. I approached Mademoiselle 
de Vulson with lively pleasure, but without emotion; whereas, if I 
only saw Mademoiselle Goton, I saw nothing else, all my senses 
were bewildered. With the former I was familiar without familiar- 
ity; while on the contrary, in the presence of the latter, I was as bash- 
ful as I was excited, even in the midst of our greatest familiarities. I 
believe that, if I had remained with her long, I should have died; 
the throbbings of my heart would have suffocated me. I was equally 
afraid of displeasing either; but I was more attentive to the one and 


-more obedient to the other. Nothing in the world would have made 


me annoy Mademoiselle de Vulson; but if Mademoiselle Goton had 
ordered me to throw myself into the flames, I believe I should have 
obeyed her immediately. 


28 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


My amour, or rather my meetings, with the latter, continued 
only for a short time—happily for both of us. Although my rela- 
tions with Mademoiselle de Vulson had not the same danger, they 
were not without their catastrophe, after they had lasted a little 
longer. The end of all such connections should always be somewhat 
romantic, and furnish occasion for exclamations of sorrow. Although 
my connection with Mademoiselle de Vulson was less lively, it was 
perhaps closer. We never separated without tears, and it is re- 
markable into what an overwhelming void I felt myself plunged as 
soon as I had left her. I could speak and think of nothing but her; 
my regret was genuine and lively; but I believe that, at bottom, this 
heroic regret was not felt altogether for her, and that, without my 
perceiving it, the amusements, of which she was the centre, played 
their part in it. To moderate the pangs of absence, we wrote letters 
to each other, pathetic enough to melt the heart of a stone. At last I 
triumphed; she could endure it no‘ longer, and came to Geneva to 
see me. This time my head was completely turned; I was drunk and 
mad during the two days she remained. When she left I wanted to 
throw myself in the water after her, and the air resounded with my 
screams. Eight days afterwards she sent me some bonbons and 
gloves, which I should have considered a great compliment, if I had 
not learnt at the same time that she was married, and that the visit 
with which she had been pleased to honour me was really made in 
order to buy her wedding-dress. I will not attempt to describe my 
fury; it may be imagined. In my noble rage I swore that I would 
never see the faithless one again, being unable to imagine a more ter- 
rible punishment for her. She did not, however, die of it; for, 
twenty years afterwards, when on a visit to my father, while row- 
ing with him on the lake, I asked who the ladies were whom I saw 
in a boat not far from ours. “What!” said my father with a smile, 
“does not your heart tell you? it is your old love, Mademoiselle de 
Vulson that was, now Madame Cristin.” I started at the almost for- 
gotten name, but I told the boatmen to change their course. Al- 
though I had a fine opportunity of avenging myself at that moment, 
I did not think it worth while to perjure myself and to renew a quar- 
rel, twenty years old, with a woman of forty. 

[1723~1728].—Thus the most valuable time of my boyhood was 


APPRENTICED TO AN ENGRAVER 29 


wasted in follies, before my future career had been decided upon. 
After long deliberation as tø the bent of my natural inclination, a 
profession was determined upon for which I had the least taste; 1 
was put with M. Masseron, the town clerk, in order to learn, under 
his tuition, the useful trade of a fee-grabber.8 This nickname was 
extremely distasteful to me; the hope of gaining a number of crowns 
in a somewhat sordid business by no means flattered my pride; the 
occupation itself appeared to me wearisome and unendurable; the 
constant application, the feeling of servitude completed my dislike, 
and I never entered the office without a feeling of horror, which 
daily increased in intensity. M. Masseron, on his part, was ill-satisfied 
with me, and treated me with contempt; he continually reproached 
me with my dulness and stupidity, dinning into my ears every day 
that my uncle had told him that I knew something, whereas, in 
reality, I knew nothing; that he had promised him a sharp lad, and 
had given him a jackass. At last I was dismissed from the office in 
disgrace as being utterly incapable, and M. Masseron’s clerks de 
clared that I was good for nothing except to handle a file. 

My calling being thus settled, I was apprenticed, not, however, to 
a watchmaker, but to an engraver. The contempt with which I had 
been treated by M. Masseron had made me very humble, and I 
obeyed without a murmur. My new master, M. Ducommun, was a 
rough and violent young man, who in a short ume succeeded in 
tarnishing.all the brightness of my childhood, stupefying my loving 
and lively nature, and reducing me, in mind as well as in position, 
to a real state of apprenticeship. My Latin, my antiquities, my his- 
tory, were all for a long time forgotten; I did not even remember 
that there had ever been any Romans in the world. My father, when 
I went to see him, no longer found in me his idol; for the ladies I 
was no longer the gallant Jean Jacques; and I felt so certain myself 
that the Lamberciers would not have recognised their pupil in me, 
that I was ashamed to pay them a visit, and have never seen them 
since. The vilest tastes, the lowest street-blackguardism took the 
place of my simple amusements and effaced even the remembrance 
of them. I must, in spite of a most upright training, have had a great 
propensity to degenerate; for the change took place with great rapid- 


8 Grapignan: a slang term for a lawyer. 


30 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ity, without the least trouble, and never did so precocious a Cæsar so 
rapidly become a.Laridon.? 

The trade in itself was not disagreeable to me; I had a decided 
taste for drawing; the handling of a graving-tool amused me; and 
as the claims upon the skill of a watchmaker’s engraver were lim- 
ited, I hoped to attain perfection. I should, perhaps, have done so, 
had not my master’s brutality and excessive restraint disgusted me 
with my work. I stole some of my working hours to devote to simi- 
lar occupations, but which had for me the charm of freedom. I en- 
graved medals for an order of knighthood for myself and my com- 
panions. My master surprised me at this contraband occupation, and 
gave me a sound thrashing, declaring that I was training for a 
coiner, because our medals bore the arms of the Republic. I can 
swear that I had no idea at all of bad, and only a very faint one of 
good, money. I knew better how the Roman 4s was made than our 
three-sou pieces. 

My master’s tyranny at length made the work, of which I should 
have been very fond, altogether unbearable, and filled me with vices 
which I should otherwise have hated, such as lying, idleness and 
thieving. The recollection of the alteration produced in me by that 
period of my life has taught me, better than anything else, the dif- 
ference between filial dependence and abject servitude. Naturally 
shy and timid, no fault was more foreign to my disposition than 
impudence; but I had enjoyed an honourable liberty, which hitherto 
had only been gradually restrained, and at length disappeared alto- 
gether. I was bold with my father, unrestrained with M. Lambercier, 
and modest with my uncle; I became timid with my master, and 
from that moment I was a lost child. Accustomed to perfect equality 
in my intercourse with my superiors, knowing no pleasure which 
was not within my reach, seeing no dish of which I could not have 
a share, having no desire which I could not have openly expressed, 
and carrying my heart upon my lips—it is easy to judge what I was 
bound to become, in a house in which I did not venture to open my 
mouth, where I was obliged to leave the table before the meal was 


? The name given by La Fontaine, in the fable, called “l'Éducation,” to degen- 
erate dogs: “Oh! combien de Césars deviendront Laridons.” 


HIS MASTER’S BRUTALITY 31 


half over, and the room as soon as I had nothing more to do there; 
where, incessantly fettered to my work, I saw only objects of enjoy- 
ment for others and of privation for myself; where the sight of the 
liberty enjoyed by my master and companions increased the weight 
of my servitude; where, in disputes about matters as to which I was 
best informed, I did not venture to open my mouth; where, in short, 
everything that I saw became for my heart an object of longing, 
simply because I was deprived of all. From that time my ease of 
manner, my gaiety, the happy expressions which, in former times, 
when I had done something wrong, had gained me immunity from 
punishment—all were gone. I cannot help laughing when I remem- 
ber hew, one evening, at my father’s house, having been sent to bed 
without any supper for some piece of roguery, I passed through the 
kitchen with my melancholy piece of bread, and, seeing the joint 
turning on the spit, sniffed at it. All the household was standing 
round the hearth, and, in passing, I was obliged to say good-night to 
everybody. When I had gone the round, I winked at the joint, which 
looked so nice and smelt so good, and could not help bowing to it 
as well, and saying in a mournful voice, “Good-night, roast beef!” 
This naive sally amused them so much that they made me stop to 
supper. Perhaps it might have had the same effect with my master, 
but I am sure that it would never have occurred to me, and that I 
should not have had the courage, to say it in his presence. 

In this manner I learnt to covet in silence, to dissemble, to lie, and, 
lastly, to steal—an idea which, up to that time, had never even en- 
tered my mind, and of which since then I have never been able to 
cure myself completely. Covetousness and weakness always lead in 
that direction. This explains why all servants are rogues, and why 
all apprentices ought to be; but the latter, in a peaceful state of 
equality, where all that they see is within their reach, lose, as they 
grow up, this disgraceful propensity. Not having had the same ad- 
vantages, I have not been able to reap the same benefits. 

It is nearly always good, but badly-directed principles, that make 
a child take the first step towards evil. In spite of continual priva- 
tions and temptations, I had been more than a year with my master 
without being able to make up my mind to take anything, even 


32 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


eatables. My first theft was a matter of obliging some one else, but 
it opened the door to others, the motive of which was not so praise- 
worthy. 

My master had a journeyman, named M. Verrat, whose house 
was in the neighbourhood, and had a garden some way off which 
produced very fine asparagus. M. Verrat, who was not too well sup- 
plied with money, conceived the idea of stealing some of his mother’s 
young asparagus and selling it in order to provide himself with two 
or three good breakfasts. As he was unwilling to run the risk him- 
self, and was not very active, he selected me for the expedition. After 
some preliminary cajoleries, which the more easily succeeded with 
me as I did not see their aim, he proposed it to me as an idea that 
had struck him on the spur of the moment. I strongly opposed it; he 
persisted. I have never been able to resist flattery: I gave in. I went 
every morning to gather a crop of the finest asparagus, and carried it 
to the Molard, where some good woman, who saw that I had just 
stolen it, told me so to my face in order to get it cheaper. In my 
fright I took whatever she chose to offer me, and took it to Verrat. 
The amount was immediately converted into a breakfast, of which 
I was the purveyor, and which he shared with another companion; 
I myself was quite satisfied with a few scraps, and never even 
touched their wine. 

This little arrangement continued several days, without its even 
occurring to me to rob the robber, and to levy my tithe of the pro- 
ceeds of M. Verrat’s asparagus. I performed my part in the transac- 
tion with the greatest loyalty; my only motive was to please him who 
prompted me to carry it out. And yet, if I had been caught, what 
blows, abuse, and cruel treatment should I have had to endure, while 
the wretch, who would have been sure to give me the lie, would 
have been believed on his word, and I should have suffered double 
punishment for having had the impudence to accuse him, seeing 
that he was a journeyman, while I was only an apprentice! So true 
it is that, in every condition of life, the strong man who is guilty 
saves himself at the expense of the innocent who is weak. 

In this manner I learned that stealing was not so terrible a thing 
as I had imagined, and I soon knew how to make such good use of 
my discovery, that nothing I desired, if it was within my reach, was 


THE APPLE-HUNT 33 


safe from me. I was not absolutely ill-fed, and abstinence was only 
rendered difficult to me frém seeing that my master observed it so 
ill himself. The custom of sending young people from the table 
when the most appetising dishes are brought on appears to me ad- 
mirably adapted to make them gluttons as well as thieves. In a short 
time I became both the one and the other; and, as a rule, I came off 
very well; occasionally, when I was caught, very badly. 

I shudder, and at the same time laugh, when I remember an apple- 
hunt which cost me dear. These apples were at the bottom of a 
store-room, which was lighted from the kitchen by means of a high 
grating. One day, when I was alone in the house, I climbed upon 
the kneading-trough, in order to look at the precious fruit in the 
garden of the Hesperides, which was out of my reach. I went to 
fetch the spit to see if I could touch the apples; it was too short. To 
make it longer, I tied on to it another little spit which was used for 
small game, for my master was very fond of sport. I thrust several 
times without success; at last, to my great delight, I felt that I had 
secured an apple. I pulled very gently; the apple was close to the 
grating; I was ready to catch hold of it. But who can describe my 
grief, when I found that it was too large to pass through the bars? 
How many expedients I tried, to get it through! I had to find sup- 
ports to keep the spit in its place, a knife long enough to divide the 
apple, a lath to hold it up. At last I managed to divide it, and hoped 
to be able to pull the pieces towards me one after the other; but no 
sooner were they separated than they both fell into the store-room 
Compassionate reader, share my affliction! 

I by no means lost courage; but I had lost considerable time. I was 
afraid of being surprised. I put off a more lucky attempt till the 
following day, yore. returned to my work as quietly as if I had done 
nothing, without thinking of the two tell-tale witnesses in the store- 
room. 

The next day, finding the opportunity favourable, I made a fresh 
attempt. I climbed upon my stool, lengthened the spit, adjusted it, 
and was ready to make a lunge. . . . but, unfortunately, the dragon 
was not asleep; all at once the door of the store-room opened, my 
master came out, folded his arms, looked at me, and said, “Cour 
age!” ... . the pen falls from my hand: 


34 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


In consequence of continuous ill-treatment I soon became less 
sensitive to it, and regarded it as a kind of compensation for theft, 
which gave me the right to continue the latter. Instead of looking 
back and considering the punishment, I looked forward and thought 
of revenge. I considered that, if I were beaten as a rogue, I was en- 
titled to behave like one. I found that stealing and a flogging went 
together, and constituted a sort of bargain, and that, if I performed 
my part, I could safely leave my master to carry out his own. With 
this idea, I began to steal more quietly than before. I said to myself: 
“What will be the result? I shall be fogged. Never mind; I am made 
to be flogged.” 

I am fond of eating, but am not greedy; I am sensual, but not a 
gourmand; too many other tastes prevent that. I have never troubled 
myself about my food except when my heart has been unoccupied: 
and that has so seldom been the case during my life that I have 
scarcely had time to think about dainties. For this reason I did not 
long confine my thievish propensities to eatables, but soon extended 
them to everything which tempted me; and, if I did not become a 
regular thief, it was because I have never been much tempted by 
money. Leading out of the common workshop was a private room 
belonging to my master, the door of which I found means to open 
and shut without being noticed. There I laid under contribution his 
best tools, drawings, proofs—in fact, everything which attracted 
me and which he purposely kept out of my reach. At bottom, these 
thefts were quite innocent, being only committed to serve him; but 
I was transported with joy at having these trifles in my power; I 
thought that I was robbing him of his talent together with its pro- 
ductions. Besides, I found boxes containing gold and silver filings, 
little trinkets, valuables and coins. When I had four or five sous in 
my pocket, I thought I was rich; and yet, far from touching any- 
thing of what I found there, I do not even remember that I ever 
cast longing eyes upon it. I looked upon it with more affright than 
pleasure. I believe that this horror of stealing money and valuables 
was in great part the result of my bringing-up. With it were com- 
bined secret thoughts of disgrace, prison, punishment and the gal- 
lows, which would have made me shudder if I had been tempted; 
whereas my tricks only appeared to me in the light of pieces of mis- 


CONTEMPT FOR MONEY 35 


chief, and in fact were nothjng else. They could lead to nothing but 
a sound flogging from my master, and I prepared myself for that 
beforehand. 

But, I repeat, I never felt sufficient longing to need to control my- 
self; I had nothing to contend with. A single sheet of fine drawing- 
paper tempted me more than money enough to buy a ream of it. 
This singularity is connected with one of the peculiarities of my 
character; it has exercised such great influence upon my conduct 
that it is worth while to explain it. 

I am a man of very strong passions, and, while I am stirred by 
them, nothing can equal my impetuosity; I forget all discretion, all 
feelings of respect, fear and decency; I am cynical, impudent, violent 
and fearless; no feeling of shame keeps me back, no danger frightens 
me; with the exception of the single object which occupies my 
thoughts, the universe is nothing to me. But all this lasts only for a 
moment, and the following moment plunges me into complete an- 
nihilation. In my calmer moments I am indolence and timidity 
itself; everything frightens and discourages me; a fly, buzzing past, 
alarms me; a word which I have to say, a gesture which I have to 
make, terrifies my idleness; fear and shame overpower me to such 
an extent that I would gladly hide myself from the sight of my 
fellow-creatures. If I have to act, I do not know what to do; if I 
have to speak, I do not know what to say; if anyone looks at me, I 
am put out of countenance. When I am strongly moved I some- 
times know how to find the right words, but in ordinary conversa- 
tion I can find absolutely nothing, and my condition is unbearable 
for the simple reason that I am obliged to speak. 

Add to this, that none of my prevailing tastes centre in things 
that can be bought. I want nothing but unadulterated pleasures, and 
money poisons all. For instance, I am fond of the pleasures of the 
table; but, as I cannot endure either the constraint of good society or 
the drunkenness of the tavern, I can only enjoy them with a friend; 
alone, I cannot do so, for my imagination then occupies itself with 
other things, and eating affords me no pleasure. If my heated blood 
longs for women, my excited heart longs still more for affection. 
Women who could be bought for money would lose for me all their 
charms; I even doubt whether it would be in me to make use of 


36 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


them. I find it the same with all pleasures within my reach; unless 
they cost me nothing, I find them insipid. I only love those enjoy- 
ments which belong to no one but the first man who knows how to 
enjoy them. 

Money has never appeared to me as valuable as it is generally 
considered, More than that, it has never even appeared to me par- 
ticularly convenient. It is good for nothing in itself; it has to be 
changed before it can be enjoyed; one is obliged to buy, to bargain, 

to be often cheated, to pay dearly, to be badly served. I should like 
` something which is good in quality; with my money I am sure to 
get it bad. If I pay a high price for a fresh egg, it is stale; for a nice 
piece of fruit, it is unripe; for a girl, she is spoilt. I am fond of good 
wine, but where am I to get it? At a wine merchants? Whatever I 
do, he is sure to poison me. If I really wish to be well served, what 
trouble and embarrassment it entails! I must have friends, corre- 
spondents, give commissions, write, go backwards and forwards, 
wait, and in the end be often deceived! What trouble with my 
money! my fear of it is greater than my fondness for good wine. 

Times without number, during my apprenticeship and after- 
wards, I have gone out with the intention of buying some delicacy. 
Coming to a pastrycook’s shop, I notice some women at the counter; 
I think I can already see them laughing amongst themselves at the 
little glutton. I go on to a fruiterer’s; I eye the fine pears; their smell 
tempts me. Two or three young people close by me look at me; a 
man who knows me is standing in front of his shop; I see a girl 
approaching in the distance: is it the housemaid? My short-sighted- 
ness causes all kinds of illusions. I take all the passers-by for ac- 
quaintances; everywhere I am intimidated, restrained by some ob- 
stacle; my desire increases with my shame, and at last I return home 
like a fool, consumed with longing, having in my pocket the means 
of satisfying it, and yet not having had the courage to buy anything. 

I should enter into the most insipid details if, in relating how my 
money was spent by myself or others, I were to describe the embar- 
rassment, the shame, the repugnance, the inconvenience, the annoy- 
ances of all kinds which I have always experienced. In proportion as 
the reader, following the course of my life, becomes acquainted with 


CONTEMPT FOR MONEY 37 


my real temperament, he will understand all this, without my tak- 
ing the trouble to tell him.” 

This being understood, it will be easy to comprehend one of my 
apparent inconsistencies—the union of an almost sordid avarice 
with the greatest contempt for money. It is a piece of furniture in 
which I find so little convenience, that it never enters my mind to 
long for it when I have not got it, and that, when I have got it, I keep 
it for a long time without spending it, for want of knowing how to 
make use of it in a way to please myself; but if a convenient and 
agreeable opportunity presents itself, I make such good use of it 
that my purse is empty before I know it. Besides this, one need not 
expect to find in me that curious characteristic of misers—that of 
spending for the sake of ostentation; on the contrary, I spend in 
secret for the sake of enjoyment; far from glorying in my expendi- 
ture, I conceal it. I feel so strongly that money is of no use to me, 
that I am almost ashamed to have any, still more to make use of it. 
If I had ever had an income sufficient to live comfortably upon, I 
am certain that I should never have been tempted to be a miser. I 
should have spent it all, without attempting to increase it; but my 
precarious circumstances make me careful. I worship freedom; I 
abhor restraint, trouble, dependence. As long as the money in my 
purse lasts, it assures my independence; it relieves me of the trouble 
of finding expedients to replenish it, a necessity which always in- 
spired me with dread; but the fear of seeing it exhausted makes me 

hoard it carefully. The money which a man possesses is the instru- 
ment of freedom; that which we eagerly pursue is the instrument of 
slavery. Therefore I hold fast to that which I have, and desire 
nothing. 

My disinterestedness is, therefore, nothing but idleness; the pleas- 
ure of possession is not worth the trouble of acquisition. In like man: 
ner, my extravagance is nothing but idleness; when the opportunity 
of spending agreeably presents itself, it cannot be too profitably 
employed. Money tempts me less than things, because between 
money and the possession of the desired object there is always an 
intermediary, whereas between the thing itself and the enjoyment 
of it there is none. If I see the thing, it tempts me; if I only see the 


38 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


means of gaining possession of it, it does not. For this reason I have 
tommitted thefts, and even now I sometimes pilfer trifles which 
tempt me, and which I prefer to take rather than to ask for; but 
neither when a child nor a grown-up man do I ever remember to 
have robbed anyone of a farthing, except on one occasion, fifteen 
years ago, when Í stole seven livres ten sous. The incident is worth 
recording, for it contains a most extraordinary mixture of folly and 
impudence, which I should have found difficulty in believing if it 
concerned anyone but myself. 

It took place at Paris. I was walking with M. de Franceuil in the 
Palais-Royal about five o'clock. He pulled out his watch, looked at 
jt, and said: “Let us go to the Opera.” I agreed; we went. He took 
two tickets for the amphitheatre, gave me one, and went on in front 
with the cther. I followed him; he went in. Entering after him, I 
found the door blocked. I looked, and seeing everybody standing 
ap, thought it would be easy to lose myself in the crowd, or at any 
gate to make M. de Franceuil believe that I had lost myself. I went 
put, took back my check, then my money, and went off, without 
Jhinking that as soon as I had reached the door everybody had taken 
their seats, and that M. de Franceuil clearly saw that I was no longer 
there? 

As nothing was ever more foreign to my disposition than such 
vehaviour, I mention it in order to show that there are moments of 
cemi-delirium during which men must not be judged by their ac- 
dons. I did not exactly want to steal the money, I wanted to steal the 
employment of it; the less of a theft it was, the greater its disgrace- 
fulness, 

I should never finish these details if I were to follow all the paths 
along which, during my apprenticeship, I descended from the sub- 
limity of heroism to the depths of worthlessness. And yet, although 
I adopted the vices of my position, I could not altogether acquire a 
taste for them. I wearied of the amusements of my companions; and 
‘when excessive restraint had rendered work unendurable to me, I 
grew tired of everything. This renewed my taste for reading, which 


* According to George Sand, in her “Histoire de ma Vie,” M. de Franceuil, 
who was her grandfather, has always absolutely denied the truth of this story. 


PASSION FOR READING 39 


I had for some time lost. This reading, for which I stole time from 
my work, became a new “offence which brought new punishment 
upon me. The taste for it, provoked by constraint, became a passion. 
and soon a regular madness. La Tribu, a well-known lender ot 
books, provided me with all kinds of literature. Good or bad, all 
were alike to me; I had no choice, and read everything with equal 
avidity. I read at the work-table, I read on my errands, I read in the 
wardrobe, and forgot myself for hours together; my head became 
giddy with reading; I could do nothing else. My master watched 
me, surprised me, beat me, took away my books. How many vol- 
umes were torn, burnt, and thrown out of the window! how many 
works were left in odd volumes in La Tribu’s stock! When I had 
no more money to pay her, I gave her my shirts, neckties and clothes; 
my three sous of pocket-money were regularly taken to her every 
Sunday. 

Well, then, I shall be told, money had become necessary to me- 
That is true; but it was not until my passion for reading had de- 
prived me of all activity. Completely devoted to my new hobby, I 
did nothing but read, and no longer stole. Here again is one of my 
characteristic peculiarities. In the midst of a certain attachment to 
any manner of life, a mere trifle distracts me, alters me, rivets my 
attention, and finally becomes a passion. Then everything is forgot- 
ten; I no longer think of anything except the new object which en 
grosses my attention. My heart beat with impatience to turn over 
the leaves of the new book which I had in my pocket; I pulled it out 
as soon as I was alone, and thought no more of rummaging my 
master’s work-room. I can hardly believe that I should have stolen 
even if I had had more expensive tastes. Limited to the present, it 
was not in my way to make preparations in this manner for the 
future. La Tribu gave me credit, the payments on account were 
small, and, as soon as I had my book in my pocket, I forgot every- 
thing else. The money which came to me honestly passed in the 
same manner into the hands of this woman; and, when she pressed 
me, nothing was easier to dispose of than my own property. It re- 
quired too much foresight to steal in advance, and I was not even 
tempted to steal in order to pay. 


40 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


In consequence of quarrels, blows, and secret and ill-chosen read- 
ing, my disposition, became savage and taciturn; my mind became 
altogether perverted, and I lived like a misanthrope. However, if 
my good taste did not keep me from silly and insipid books, my good 
fortune preserved me from such as were filthy and licentious; not 
that La Tribu, a woman in all respects most accommodating, would 
have made any scruple about lending them to me; but, in order to 
increase their importance, she always mentioned them to me with an 
air of mystery which had just the effect of making me refuse them, 
as much from disgust as from shame; and chance aided my modest 
disposition so well, that I was more than thirty years old before I set 
eyes upon any of those dangerous books which a fine lady finds in- 
convenient because they can only be read with one hand. 

In less than a year I exhausted La Tribu’s little stock, and want 
of occupation, during my spare time, became painful to me. I had 
been cured of my childish and knavish propensities by my passion 
for reading, and even by the books I read, which, although ill- 
chosen and frequently bad, filled my heart with nobler sentiments 
than those with which my sphere of life had inspired me. Disgusted 
with everything that was within my reach, and feeling that every- 
thing which might have tempted me was too far removed from me, 
I saw nothing possible which might have flattered my heart. My 
excited senses had long clamoured for an enjoyment, the object of 
which I could not even imagine. I was as far removed from actual 
enjoyment as if I had been sexless; and, already fully developed and 
sensitive, I sometimes thought of my crazes, but saw nothing be- 
yond them. In this strange situation, my restless imagination en- 
tered upon an occupation which saved me from myself and calmed 
my growing sensuality. This consisted in feeding myself upon the 
situations which had interested me in the course of my reading, in 
recalling them, in varying them, in combining them, in making 
them so truly my own that I became one of the persons who filled 
my imagination, and always saw myself in the situations most agree- 
able to my taste; and that, finally, the fictitious state in which I 
succeeded in putting myself made me forget my actual state with 
which I was so dissatisfied. This love of imaginary objects, and the 


SUNDAY OUTINGS 4I 


readiness with which I occupied myself with them, ended by dis- 
gusting me with everything around me, and decided that liking for 
solitude which has never left me. In the sequel we shall see more 
than once the curious effects of this disposition, apparently so 
gloomy and misanthropic, but which is really due to a too affection- 
ate, too loving and too tender heart, which, being unable to find 
any in existence resembling it, is obliged to nourish itself with 
fancies. For the present, it is sufficient for me to have defined the 
origin and first cause of a propensity which has modified all my 
passions, and which, restraining them by means of themselves, has 
always made me slow to act, owing to my excessive impetuosity in 
desire. 

In this manner I reached my sixteenth year, restless, dissatisfied 
with myself and everything, without any of the tastes of my condi- 
tion of life, without any of the pleasures of my age, consumed by 
desires of the object of which I was ignorant, weeping without any 
cause for tears, sighing without knowing why—in short, tenderly 
caressing my chimeras, since I saw nothing around me which coun- 
terbalanced them. On Sundays, my fellow-apprentices came to fetch 
me after service to go and amuse myself with them. I would gladly 
have escaped from them if I had been able; but, once engaged in 
their amusements, I became more excited and went further than 
any of them; it was as difficult to set me going as to stop me. Such 
was always my disposition. During our walks outside the city I 
always went further than any of them without thinking about my 
return, unless others thought of it for me. Twice I was caught: the 
gates were shut before I could get back. The next day I was treated 
as may be imagined; the second time I was promised such a recep-" 
tion if it ever happened again, that I resolved not to run the risk of 
it; yet this third time, so dreaded, came to pass. My watchfulness 
was rendered useless by a confounded Captain Minutoli, who always 
shut the gate at which he was on guard half-an-hour before the 
others. I was returning with two companions. About half a league 
from the city I heard the retreat sounded: I doubled my pace: I 
heard the tattoo beat, and ran with all my might. I arrived out of 
breath and bathed in perspiration; my heart beat; from a distance 


42 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


I saw the soldiers at their posts; I rushed up and cried out with a 
voice half-choked. It was too late! Twenty paces from the outposts, 
I saw the first bridge raised. I shuddered when I saw those terrible 
horns rising in the air—a sinister and fatal omen of the destiny 
which that moment was opening for me. 

In the first violence of my grief I threw myself on the glacis and 
bit the ground. My companions, laughing at their misfortune, im- 
mediately made up their minds what to do. I did the same, but my 
resolution was different from theirs. On the spot I swore never to: 
return to my master; and the next morning, when they entered the: 
city after the gates were opened, I said good-bye to them for ever, 
only begging them secretly to inform my cousin Bernard of the reso- 
lution I had taken, and of the place where he might be able to see me 
once more. 

After I had entered upon my apprenticeship I saw less of him. 
For some time we used to meet on Sunday, but gradually each of 
us adopted other habits, and we saw one another less frequently. I 
am convinced that his mother had much to do with this change. He 
was a child of the upper city;!1 I, a poor apprentice, was only a child 
of Saint-Gervais. In spite of our relationship, there was no longer 
any equality between us; it was derogatory to him to associate with 
me. However, relations were not entirely broken off between us, 
and, as he was a good-natured lad, he sometimes followed the dic- 
tates of his heart instead of his mother’s instructions. When he was 
informed of my resolution, he hastened to me, not to try and dis- 
suade me from it or to share it, but to lessen the inconveniences of 
my flight by some small presents, since my own resources could not 

‘take me very far. Amongst other things he gave me a small sword, 
which had taken my fancy exceedingly, and which I carried as far 
as Turin, where necessity obliged me to dispose of it, and where, as 
the saying is, I passed it through my body. The more I have since 
reflected upon the manner in which he behaved towards me at this 
critical moment, the more I have felt convinced that he followed the 
“ Enfant du haut—i.e., of the upper, more fashionable part of the city; while: 


Saint-Gervais, on the right bank of the Rhône, was the quarter inhabited by the: 
poorer population. x 


REFLECTFONS ON DESTINY 43 


instructions of his mother, and perhaps of his father; for it is incon- 
ceivable that, left to himself, he would not have made some effort to 
keep me back, or would not have been tempted to follow; but, no! 
he rather encouraged me in my plan than tried to dissuade me; and, 
when he saw me quite determined, he left me without shedding 
many tears. We have never corresponded or seen each other since. 
It is a pity: his character was essentially good; we were made to love 
each other. 

Before I abandon myself to the fatality of my lot, allow me te turn 
my eyes for a moment upon the destiny which, in the mature of 
things, would have awaited me if I had fallen into the hands of a 
better master. Nothing was more suitable to my disposition or better 
adapted to make me happy than the quiet and obscure lot of a re- 
spectable artisan, especially of .a certain class such as that of the 
engravers of Geneva. Such a position, sufficiently lucrative to afford 
a comfortable livelihood, but not sufficiently so to lead to fortune, 
would have limited my ambition for the rest of my days, and, leaving 
me an honourable leisure to cultivate modest tastes, would have con- 
fined me within my own sphere, without offering me the means of 
getting out of it. My imaginative powers were rich enough to 
beautify all callings with their chimeras, and strong enough to trans- 
port me, so to speak, at will from one to another; so it would have 
been immaterial to me in what position I actually found myself. It 
could not have been so far from the place where I was to my first 
castle in the air, that I could not have taken up my abode there with- 
out any difficulty. From this alone it followed that the simplest 
vocation, that which involved the least trouble and anxiety, that 
which allowed the greatest mental freedom, was the one which 
suited me best: and that was exactly my own. I should have passed 
a peaceful and quiet life, such as my disposition required, in the 
bosom of my religion, my country, my family and my friends, in the 
monotony of a profession that suited my taste, and in a society after 
my own heart. I should have been a good Christian, a good citizen, a 
good father of a family, a good friend, a good workman, a good man 
in every relation of life. I should have loved my position in life, per- 
haps honoured it; and, having spent a life—simple, indeed, and 


44 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


obscure, but calm and serene-—I should have died peacefully in the 
bosom of my family. Though, doubtless, soon forgotten, I should at 
least have been regretted as long as anyone remembered me. 

Instead of that—what picture am I going to draw? Let us not 
anticipate the sorrows of my life; I shall occupy my readers more 
than enough with this melancholy subject. 


BOOK II 


[1728-173 ] 
However mournful the moment, when terror suggested to me the 
idea of flight, had appeared—the moment when I carried it into 
execution appeared equally delightful. While still a child, to leave 
my country, my parents, my means of support, my resources; to give 
up an apprenticeship half-served, without a sufficient knowledge of 
my trade to earn my livelihood; to abandon myself to the horrors 
of want, without any means of saving myself from it; to expose my- 
self, at the age of innocence and weakness, to all the temptations of 
vice and despair; to seek, in the distance, suffering, error, snares, 
servitude, and death, beneath a yoke far more unbending than that 
which I had been unable to endure—this was what I was going to 
do, this was the prospect which I ought to have considered. How 
different was that which my fancy painted! The independence which 
I believed I had gained was the only feeling which moved me. Free, 
and my own master, I believed I could do everything, attain to every- 
thing; I had only to launch myself forth, to mount and fly through 
the air. I entered the vast world with a feeling of security; it was to 
be filled with the fame of my achievements; at every step I was to 
find festivities, treasures, adventures, friends ready to serve me, 
mistresses eager to please me; I had only to show myself, to engage 
the attention of the whole world—and yet not the whole world; to a 
certain extent I could dispense with it, and did not want so much. 
Charming society was enough for me, without troubling myself 
about the rest. In my modesty I limited myself to a narrow, but 
delightfully select circle, in which my sovereignty was assured. A 
single castle was the limit of my ambition. As the favourite of the 
lord and the lady, as the lover of the daughter, as the friend of the 
son and protector of the neighbours, I was content—I wanted no 


more. 
45 


46 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


In the expectation of this modest future, I wandered for some days 
round the city, lodging with some peasants whom I knew, who all 
received me with greater kindness than any of the inhabitants of the 
city would have done. They took me in, lodged me, and fed me with 
too much kindness to make a merit of it. It could not be called 
charity; they did not bestow it with a sufficient air of superiority. 

Travelling and roaming about in this manner, I reached Config- 
non, in the district of Savoy, two leagues from Geneva. The name of 
the curé was M. de Pontverre. This name, famous in the history of 
the Republic, arrested my atention. I was curious to see what the 
descendants of the Knights of the Spoon? looked like. 

I called upon M. de Pontverre. He received me kindly, talked 
about the heresy of Geneva, the authority of the Holy Mother 
Church, and invited me to dinner. I found little to reply to argu- 
ments which ended in this manner, and I formed the opinion that 
curés who dined so well were at least as good as our ministers. I was 
certainly more learned than M. de Pontverre, in spite of his birth; 
but I was too good a guest to be as good a theologian, and his Frangi 
wine, which appeared to me excellent, argued so triumphantly in his 
favour that I should have been ashamed to stop the mouth of so 
admirable a host. I therefore gave in, or at least offered no open 
resistance. To see the carefulness I exhibited, one would have be- 
lieved me false; but that would have been a mistake. I only behaved 
with common courtesy, that is certain. Flattery, or rather condescen- 
sion, is not always a vice; it is more often a virtue, especially in young 
people. The kindness with which a person treats us endears him to 
us; we give in to him, not in order to abuse his kindness, but to avoid 
annoying him, or returning him evil for good. What interest had M. 
de Pontverre in receiving me, treating me kindly, or trying to con- 
vince me? No other than my own; my young heart told me that. I 
was moved with gratitude and respect for the good priest. I felt my 
superiority; I did not wish to overwhelm him with it as the reward 
of his hospitality. In this attitude there was nothing hypocritical; I 


* These Catholic knights, subjects of the Duke of Savoy, formed a league 
against the Genevese in the time of the Reformation, and were so called because 
they boasted of having “eaten their enemies with a spoon,” and carried a spoon 
hung round their necks. They were headed by a De Pontverre. 


M. DE PONTVERRE 47 


_ never thought of changing my religion; and, far from familiarising 
myself so rapidly with this igea, I only regarded it with a feeling of 
horror which was destined to keep it away from me for a long time; 
my only wish was to avoid annoying those who treated me kindly 
with the object of converting me; I wished to cultivate their good- 
will, and to leave them the hope of success, by appearing less com- 
pletely armed than I really was. My fault in that respect resembled 
_ the coquetry of respectable women, who sometimes, in order to at- 
tain their object, without allowing or promising anything, know 
how to excite greater hopes than they mean to fulfil. 

Reason, pity, and regard for discipline required that, far from 
assisting my folly, people should have saved me from the ruin 
which I ran to meet and sent me back to my family. That is what 
every truly virtuous man would have done or attempted to do. But, 
although M. de Pontverre was a good man, he was certainly not a 
virtuous man; on the contrary, he was an enthusiast who knew no 
other virtue except worshipping images and telling his beads—a 
kind of missionary who could think of nothing better for the good 
of the faith than writing libels against the ministers of Geneva. Far 
from thinking of sending me back to my home, he took advantage 
of the desire I felt to get away from it, to make it impossible for me 
to return even though I should wish to do so. It was any odds that 
he was sending me to perish in misery or to become a worthless 
scamp. But that was not what he looked at; he only saw a soul saved 
from heresy and restored to the Church. Honest man or scamp— 
what did it matter, provided I went to mass? One must not, how- 
ever, believe that this way of thinking is peculiar to Catholics; it is 
common to all dogmatic religions in which faith, not works, is con- 
sidered the principal thing. 

“God calls you,” said M. de Pontverre; “go to Annecy; there you 
will find a good and charitable lady, whom the King’s kindness has 
placed in a position to rescue other souls from the error from which 
she herself has been delivered.” The lady in question was Madame 
de Warens, a new convert, who in reality had been forced by the 
priests to share, with the rabble which came to sell its faith, a pension 
of two thousand francs which she received from the King of Sar- 
dinia. I felt very humiliated at requiring the assistance of a good and 


48 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


charitable lady. I was very desirous of having my wants supplied, 
but not of receiving alms, and a devotee did not sound very attractive 
to me. However, urged by M. de Pontverre, and hard pressed by 
hunger and pleased at the idea of making a journey with a definite 
object, I made up my mind, although with some difficulty, and set 
out for Annecy. I could easily have reached the place in one day; but, 
as I did not hurry, it took three. I never saw a chdteau on the right 
or left without going in search of the adventure which I felt sure 
awaited me there. I did not dare to enter the château or knock at the 
door, being naturally very shy; but I sang under the window which 
looked most promising from outside, and, after having tired out my 
lungs by continued efforts, was surprised that I beheld neither ladies 
nor maidens attracted by the beauty of my voice or the spirit of my 
songs, seeing that I knew some admirable compositions which my 
companions had taught me and which I sang in a manner equally 
admirable. 

At last I arrived: I saw Madame de Warens. That epoch of my 
life decided my character; I cannot bring myself to pass lightly over 
it. I was in the middle of my sixteenth year. Without being what is 
called a handsome lad, I was well set up, I had a pretty foot, a fine 
leg, an easy manner, lively features, a pretty little mouth, black hair 
and eyebrows, small and even sunken eyes, which, however, vigor- 
ously darted forth the fire with which my blood was kindled. Un- 
happily, I knew nothing of that, and it has never occurred to me 
during my life to think about my personal appearance except when 
it was too late to profit by it. With the timidity of my age was united 
that of a very loving disposition, always troubled by the fear of dis- 
pleasing. Besides, although my mind was tolerably well formed, I 
had never seen the world, and was entirely wanting in manners, and 
my knowledge, far from supplementing this defect, only served to 
intimidate me still more by making me feel how sadly I needed 
them. 

Fearing, therefore, that my first appearance would not prejudice 
Madame de Warens in my favour, I had recourse to other expedi- 
ents. I composed a beautiful letter in oratorical style, in which, inter- 
mingling phrases out of books with the language of an apprentice, I 
displayed all my eloquence in order to gain her goodwill. I enclosed 


MEETS MADAME DE WARENS 49 


M. de Pontverre’s letter in my own, and set out for the dreaded 
interview. Madame de War€ns was not at home. I was told that she 
had just gone to church. It was Palm-Sunday in 1728. I ran after her. 
I saw her; I overtook her; I addressed her. I ought to remember the 
spot. Since then I have often wetted it with my tears and covered it 
with my kisses. I should like to surround this happy spot with a 
railing of gold. I should like to draw upon it the homage of the 
world, Whoever loves to honour the monuments of the salvation of 
men should only approach them on his knees. 

It was in a passage behind her house, leading between a brook on 
the right, which separated the house from the garden, and the court- 
wall on the left, through a back-gate to the Franciscan? church. Just 
as she was going to enter, Madame de Warens, hearing my voice, 
turned round. How did the sight of her strike me! I had pictured to 
myself an old, grim, religious enthusiast; in my opinion, M. de 
Pontverre’s pious lady could be nothing else. Instead, I beheld a face 
full of charm, beautiful blue eyes—full of gentleness—a dazzling 
complexion, the outlines of an enchanting throat. Nothing escaped 
the rapid glance of the young proselyte—for at that moment I be- 
came hers, feeling convinced that a religion preached by such 
apostles must inevitably lead to paradise. With a smile, she took the 
letter which I presented to her with a trembling hand, opened it, 
glanced at that of M. de Pontverre, returned to mine, read it through, 
and would have read it again, had not her servant reminded her that 
it was time to go in. “Well, my child,” she said to me in a tone which 
made me tremble, “so you are wandering about the country at your 
age; that is indeed a pity.” Then, without waiting for me to answer, 
she added, “Go and wait for me; tell them to give you some break- 
fast. After mass I will come and talk to you.” 

Louise Eléonore de Warens was a young lady who belonged to 
the house of La Tour de Pil, an ancient and noble family of Vévai, 
a town in the canton of Vaud. When very young she had married 
M. de Warens, of the house of Loys, the eldest son of M. de Villardin, 

2 Les Cordeliers: a religious order, founded by St. Francis of Assisi in 1223. 


The name was afterwards also given to a club founded in 1790: by Danton, 
Marat, and Desmoulins, which held its meetings in the old Franciscan convent 


at Paris. 


50 THE CONFESSiONS OF ROUSSEAU 


of Lausanne. This marriage, which proved childless, was not a 
happy one, and Madame de Warens, driven by some domestic grief, 
seized the opportunity of the presence of King Victor Amadeus at 
Evian to cross the lake and throw herself at the feet of this prince, 
thus abandoning her husband, her family and her country through 
a piece of folly which much resembled mine, and which she, like 
myself, has had ample time to lament. The King, who was fond of 
posing as a zealous Catholic, took her under his protection, and 
settled on her an annuity of 1,500 Piedmontese livres, a tolerably 
large sum for a prince who, as a rule, was little inclined to be gener- 
ous. Afterwards, finding that he was reported to be in love with her 
in consequence of the manner in which he had received her, he sent 
her to Annecy under the escort of a detachment of his guards, where, 
under the spiritual guidance of Michel-Gabriel de Bernex, titular 
Bishop of Geneva, she renounced the Protestant faith in the Convent 
of the Visitation. 

She had been six years in Annecy when J arrived there, and was 
twenty-eight years of age, having been born. with the century. Her 
beauty was of the kind which lasts, consisting rather in the expres- 
sion than the features; besides, hers was still in its first brilliancy. She 
had a caressing and tender air, a gentle look, an angelic smile, a 
mouth like my own, ashen-grey hair of rare beauty, which she wore 
in a careless fashion, which gave her a very piquant appearance. She 
was small of stature, even short—somewhat dumpy, although not 
disagreeably so; but a more beautiful head and bosom, more beauti- 
ful hands and arms, could not have been seen. 

Her education had been very peculiar. Like myself, she had lost 
her mother at her birth, and, receiving instruction indiscriminately, 
just as it happened to offer itself, she had learnt a little from her 
governess, a little from her father, a little from her masters, and a 
great deal from her lovers, especially from one M. de Tavel, who, 
being a man of taste and learning, adorned the object of his affections 
with his own excellences. But so many different kinds of instruction 
impeded each other, and, as she pursued her studies without any 
regular system, her naturally sound understanding was by no means 
improved. Thus, although she knew something about the principles 
of philosophy and physics, she still preserved her father’s taste for 


CHARACTER OF MADAME 2 51 


empirical medicine and alchemy; she prepared elixirs, tinctures, 
balsams, and magisteries.? She claimed to possess secret remedies. 
Quacks, profiting by her weakness, got hold of her, pestered her, 
ruined her, and, in the midst of crucibles and drugs, squandered her 
intellect, her talents, and her charms, with which she might have 
graced the highest sotiety. 

But, although vile rascals abused her ill-directed education, in 
order to obscure the light of her reason, her excellent heart stood 
the test and always remained the same; her loving and gentle char- 
acter, her sympathy with the unfortunate, her inexhaustible good- 
ness, her cheerful, frank, and open disposition never changed; and, 
even when old age came upon her, surrounded by want, suffering, 
and calamities of all kinds, the calmness of her beautiful soul pre- 
served for her to the end of her life all the gaiety of her happiest days. 

Her errors were due to an inexhaustible fund of activity which 
needed ineessant occupation. She wanted no intrigues like other 
women, but enterprises to direct and carry out. She was born to take 
part m important affairs. In her place, Madame de Longueville 
would have been a mere intriguer; in the place of Madame de 
Longueville, she would have governed the State. Her talents were 
misplaced, and that which would have brought fame to her in a 
more exalted position proved her ruin in that in which she lived. In 
everything which was within the reach of her mental capacity, she 
always enlarged her plan in her head and saw its object magnified, 
the result of this being that she employed means better proportioned 
to her views than her strength; she failed through the fault of 
others; and, when her project failed to succeed, she was ruined, 
where others would scarcely have lost anything. This eagerness for 
business, which did her so much harm, was at least of great service 
to her, in her monastic retreat, in that it prevented her from settling 
there for the rest of her life as she had intended. The regular and 
simple life of the nuns, the idle gossip of the parlour, could not 
possibly be agreeable to a mind which was continually in movement, 
and which, inventing new systems every day, required freedom in 
order to devote itself to them. The good Bishop of Bernex, though 


3 A powder to which sovereign virtues were formerly attributed. 


52 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


not so clever as Francois de Sales, resembled him in many points 
and Madame de Warens, whom he called his daughter, and who 
resembled Madame de Chantal® in many other points, might have 
resembled her even in her retirement, had not the idle life of a con- 
vent been distasteful to her. It was not from want of zeal that this 
amiable woman did not devote herself to the trifling exercises of 
devotion, which appeared suitable to a new convert living under the 
guidance of a prelate. Whatever may have been the motive that in- 
duced her to change her religion, she was certainly sincere in that 
which she had embraced. She may have repented of having taken 
the step; certainly she never wished to retrace it. She not only died 
a good Catholic; she proved herself one during her lifetime; and I, 
who believe that I have read her inmost soul, dare to affirm that it 
was solely owing to a horror of affectation that she never played the 
devotee in public; her piety was too genuine for her to make a show 
of devotion. But this is not the place to discuss her principles; I shall 
have other opportunities of speaking of them. 

Those who deny the sympathy of souls may explain, if they can, 
how, from the first interview, from the first word, from the first 
look, Madame de Warens inspired me, not only with the liveliest 
feelings of attachment, but with a perfect confidence which has 
never belied itself. Granted that my sentiments for her were really 
love, which will at least appear doubtful to those who follow the 
history of our relations, how came it that this passion was from the 
outset accompanied by the feelings which it least inspires—peace of 
heart, calm, cheerfulness, confidence, trust? How was it that, when 
for the first time I approached an amiable, refined, and dazzlingly 
beautiful woman, a lady of higher position than my own, the like of 
whom I had never addressed, upon whom my destiny in a manner 
depended, according as she interested herself more or less on my be- 
half—how came it, I repeat, that, in spite of all this, I immediately 
felt as free and completely at my ease as if I had been perfectly cer- 
tain of pleasing her? How was it that I did not for a single moment 


“Bishop of Geneva (1567-1622). ? 
5 A lady, distinguished for her great piety, the foundress of the Order of the 
Visitation; she was canonized by Clement XIII. 


- 


HIS FEELINGS FOR HER 53 


experience a feeling of embarrassment, timidity, or awkwardness? 
Naturally bashful and easily put out of countenance, knowing 
nothing of the world, how was it that from the first day, from the 
first moment, I was able to assume with her the easy manners, the 
tender language, the familiar tone which prevailed between us ten 
years later, when oñr close intimacy had made it natural? Is it 
possible to love, I do not say without desires, for those I had, but 
without jealousy? Does not one at least wish to learn from the 
object of one’s affection whether one is loved in return? It has no 
more occurred to me in the course of my life ever to ask her this 
question than to ask myself whether I loved her; and she has never 
shown greater curiosity in regard to myself. There was certainly 
something singular in my feelings for this charming woman, and, 
in the course of the narrative, the reader will find unexpected 
singularities. 

It was a question what was to become of me; and, in order to 
discuss my future more at leisure, she kept me to dinner. It was the 
first meal in my life at which my appetite failed me; and her maid, 
who waited upon us, said that I was the first traveller of my age 
and class that she had ever seen in such a condition. This remark, 
which did me no harm in the eyes of her mistress, struck home to a 
great lout who was dining with us, and who devoured by himself 
quite a respectable dinner for six. As for myself, I was in a state of 
rapture which did not allow me to eat. My heart fed upon an entirely 
new feeling, with which my whole being was filled, and which left 
me no inclination for doing anything else. 

Madame de Warens wanted to know the details of my little his- 
tory; and in relating them I recovered all the fire and vivacity which 
I had lost during my apprenticeship. The more I interested this 
excellent soul in my favour, the more she lamented the lot to which 
I intended to expose myself. She did not venture to advise me to 
return to Geneva; in her position that would have been an act of 
treason to the Catholic faith; and she knew only too well how she 
was watched and, how her words were weighed. But she spoke to 
me so touchingly of my father’s affliction, that it was easy to see 
that she would have approved of my.going to console him. She did 
not know how. strongly, without. knowing it, she was pleading 


54 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


against herself. I think I have already said that my mind was made 
up; the more eloquent and persuasive her words, the more they 
went to my heart,the less I was able to make up my mind to separate 
from her. I felt that to return to Geneva would be to put an almost 
insurmountable barrier between herself and me, unless I again took 
the step which I shad already taken, and by which it was better to 
abide once and for all. I accordingly remained firm. Madame de 
Warens, seeing that her efforts were unavailing, did not persist in 
them, to avoid compromising herself, but she said to me, with a look 
of compassion, “Poor little one, you must go where God calls you; 
but when you are grown up, you will think of me.” I believe she 
herself had no idea how cruelly this prediction was to be fulfilled. 
The difficulty was great. How was I, young as I was, to find a 
livelihood so far from home? Having served scarcely half my ap- 
prenticeship, I was very far from knowing my trade. Even if I had 
known it, I should have been unable to earn a living by it in Savoy, 
for the country was too poor to support the arts. The lout who was 
eating our dinners for us, being obliged to stop to give his jaws a 
rest, made a proposal which he declared was inspired by heaven, 
but which, to judge from its results, was rather inspired by the 
opposite place. This proposal was that I should go to Turin, where I 
should find spiritual and bodily support in a hospice established for 
the instruction of catechumens, until, after I had been received into 
the bosom of the Church, I should find suitable employment by the 
kindness of the charitable. “As to the expenses of his journey,” con- 
tinued my friend, “his lordship the bishop will no doubt be kind 
enough to provide for them, if Madame suggests this holy work to 
him, and, doubtless, Madame la Baronne,” he added, bending over 
his plate, “who is so charitable, will also be eager to contribute 
towards them.” I found the idea of so much charity very distasteful; 
I was sick at heart, and said nothing. Madame de Warens, without 
embracing the suggestion as eagerly as it was offered, contented her- 
self with replying that everyone ought to do good to the best of his 
power, and that she would speak to the bishop about it; but my con- 
founded friend, who had a little interest of his own in the matter, 
and was afraid that she might not speak of it exactly as he wished, 
hastened to warn the almoners, and worked upon the good priests 


SETS OUT FOR TURIN 55 


so cleverly that, when Madame de Warens, who feared the journey 
for me, wished to speak about it to the bishop, she found that every- 
thing had been arranged, and he immediately handed her over the 
money destined for my humble travelling expenses. She did not 
venture to insist upon my remaining, for I was approaching an age 
when a woman of her own years could not with propriety express 
a desire to keep a young man with her. 

My journey being thus arranged by those who took charge of me, 
I was obliged to submit, and I even did so without much reluctance. 
Although Turin was further than Geneva, I judged that, being the 
capital, it was more closely connected with Annecy than a town of 
different faith and in a foreign land; and, besides, as I was setting 
out in obedience to Madame de Warens, I considered myself as 
remaining under her guidance and that was more than living in her 
neighbourhood. Lastly, the idea of a long journey flattered my fond- 
ness for roaming, which was already beginning to declare itself. It 
appeared to me a fine thing to cross mountains at my age, and to 
elevate myself above my comrades by the whole height of the Alps. 
There is a charm in seeing different countries which a Genevese can 
scarcely ever resist; I, therefore, gave my consent. My lout intended 
to set out in two days with his wife, and I was intrusted to their care. 
My funds, which Madame de Warens had augmented, were handed 
over to them. She also gave me privately a little pocket-money, and 
much good advice; and, on the Wednesday in Passion week, we set 
out on our journey. 

On the day after I left Annecy my father arrived, having followed 
on my track with his friend, M. Rival, a watchmaker like himself, 
a talented and even a witty man, who wrote better verses than La 
Motte, and was almost as good a speaker; in addition, he was a 
thoroughly good fellow; but his misplaced taste for literature led 
to no other result than sending one of his sons on the stage. 

These gentlemen saw Madame de Warens, and contented them- 
selves with lamenting my lot, instead of following and overtaking 
me, as they could easily have done, since they were on horseback 
while I was on foot. My uncle Bernard had done the same; he had 
gone as far as Confignon, whence he returned to Geneva, after he 
heard that I was at Annecy. It seemed as if my relations were in 


56 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


league with my unlucky star to hand me over to the destiny which 
awaited me. My brother had been lost through similar negligence, 
and so completely, that it has never been known what became of 
him. ; 

My father was not only a man of honour, he was a man of proved 
uprightness, and he had one of those strong souls which are capable 
of great virtues; in addition to which, he was a good father, espe- 
cially towards myself. He loved me very tenderly, but he also loved 
his pleasures, and, since I had lived apart from him, other tastes 
had rendered his paternal affection somewhat lukewarm. He had 
married again at Nyon; and although his wife was no longer of an 
age to present me with brothers, she had relations. This created 
another family, other aims, a new establishment, which no longer 
so frequently recalled the memory of myself. My father was growing 
old, and had nothing to live upon; but my brother and myself had 
a small property from our mother, the interest of which could be 
claimed by my father during our absence. This idea did not present 
itself to him directly, and by no means prevented him from doing 
his duty; but it exercised a secret influence without his being aware 
of it, and sometimes moderated his zeal, which he would have 
pushed further had it not been for that. That, I believe, was the 
reason why, having originally gone to Annecy to find me out, he 
did not follow me as far as Chambéri, where he would have been 
morally certain to find me. That again was the reason why, when I 
went to pay him a visit, as I frequently did after my flight, he always 
received me with the caresses of a father, but without making any 
serious efforts to keep me with him. 

This behaviour on the part of a father, whose tenderness and up- 
rightness I knew so well, led me to reflections upon myself, which 

have in no small degree contributed to keep my heart in a healthy 
condition. From these I have drawn the great moral lesson, perhaps 
the only one of any practical value, to avoid those situations of life 
which bring our duties into conflict with our interests, and which 
show us our own advantage in the misfortunes of others; for it is 
certain that, in such situations, however sincere our love of virtue, 
we must, sooner or later, inevitably grow weak without perceiving it, 


REFLECTIONS ON PHILOSOPHY 57 


and become unjust and wicked in act, without having ceased to be 
just and good in our hearts. 

This principle, deeply imprinted on the bottom of my heart, 
which, although somewhat late, in practice guided my whole con- 
duct, is one of those which have caused me to appear a very. strange 
and foolish creature in the eyes of the world, and, above all, amongst 
my acquaintances. I have been reproached with wanting to pose as 
an original, and different from others. In reality, I have never 
troubled about acting like other people or differently from them. I 
sincerely desired to do what was right. I withdrew, as far as it lay 
in my power, from situations which opposed my interests to those 
of others, and might, consequently, inspire me with a secret, though 
involuntary, desire of injuring them. 

Two years ago my Lord Marshal ‘wanted to put my name in his 
will; I strongly opposed this. I told him that I would not for the 
world know that my name was down in anyone’s will, least of all in 
his. He gave in; but insisted upon bestowing upon me a pension for 
life, to which I offered no opposition. It will be said that I gain by 
this alteration; that may be so, but I know, oh! father and benefactor, 
that, if I unhappily survive you, in losing you I have everything to 
lose and nothing to gain. 

That, in my opinion, is the true philosophy, the only philosophy 
which is really suited for the human heart. I am more impressed 
every day by its profound solidity, and in all my recent writings I 
have presented it under various aspects; but the public is superficial, 
and has not known how to recognise it. If, after I have finished my 
present task, I live long enough to undertake another, I propose te 
give, in the sequel to “Emile,” ê so attractive and striking an example 
of this maxim, that the reader will be compelled to notice it. But 
enough reflections for a traveller; it is time to continue my journey! 

I found it more agreeable than I had expected, and my lout was 
not so sulky as he looked. He was a man of middle age, who wore his 
black hair, which was beginning to grow grey, in a queue; he looked 
like a grenadier, had a strong voice, was pretty cheerful, could walk 
well and eat better, and practised all sorts of trades, for want of 


6 See the “New Héloise,” Part III., letter xx. 


58 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


knowing any. I believe he had proposed to establish some kind of 
manufactory at Annecy, and Madame de Warens had not failed to 
approve of the idea. It was in order to make the attempt to gain the 
minister’s approval also, that, well furnished with money, he was 
making the journey to Turin. Our friend possessed a talent for 
intrigue, always making himself agreeable to the priests; and, while 
showing great eagerness to serve them, he had caught from their 
school a certain pious jargon of which he made incessant use, and 
boasted of being a great preacher. He even knew one passage of the 
Bible in Latin; and, as he repeated it a thousand times a day, it was 
as if he had known a thousand. He was seldom short of money, 
when he knew that others had any in their purse. He was rather 
clever than a rogue, and, when he recited his capucinades’ in the 
tone of a recruiting officer, he fesembled Peter the Hermit preaching 
the Crusade sword in hand. 

As for his wife, Madame Sabran, she was a good woman enough, 
who was quieter during the day than at night. As I always slept in 
their room, her noisy sleeplessness often woke me, and would have 
kept me awake still more, if I had known the reason of it; but I had 
not the least suspicion; and my stupidity on this point left the duty 
of instructing me to nature alone. 

I proceeded gaily on my way with my pious guide and his lively 
companion. No mishap disturbed my journey; I was happier, in 
body and mind, than I have ever been in my life. Young, vigorous, 
in perfect health, without a care, full of confidence in myself and 
others, I was enjoying that short but precious moment of life when 
its expansive fulness, so to speak, enlarges our being in all our 
sensations, and beautifies in our eyes the whole aspect of nature by 
the charm of our existence. My pleasant restlessness had an object 
which restrained it and steadied my imagination. I looked upon 
myself as the work, the pupil, the friend, almost as the lover of 
Madame de Warens. The polite things she had said to me, the little 
caresses which she had bestowed upon me, the tender interest which 
she had seemed to take in me, her friendly looks, which appeared to 
me full of love, since they inspired me with that feeling—all this 
occupied my thoughts during the journey, and plunged me in 


7 Insipid discourses upon religious matters, like those of the Capucin friars. 


at 


HIS LOVE OF LEISURELY TRAVEL 59 


delicious reveries undisturbed by any fear or doubt concerning my 
future. I considered that, in sending me to Turin, they had under- 
taken to support me there, fnd to find me a suitable situation. I felt 
that I need not trouble further about myself; others had undertaken 
the charge. So I went én my way with light step, freed from this 
burden; youthful desires, enchanting hopes, brilliant plans filled 
my soul. Everything that I saw appeared to assure my early happi- 
ness. In the houses I pictured to myself rustic festivities; in the 
meadows, playful romps; on the banks of the rivers, baths, walks, 
fishing; on the trees, delicious fruit; under their shade, loving séte-a- 
tétes; on the mountains, pails full of milk and cream, a charming 
idleness, peace, simplicity, and the pleasure of going I knew not 
where. In short, nothing met my eyes without conveying to my 
heart some attraction of enjoyment. The grandeur, the variety, the 
real beauty of the sight around me rendered this attraction worthy 
of reason; even vanity claimed its share. It appeared to me an 
honour beyond my years to visit Italy while still so young, to have 
already seen so much of the world, to follow Hannibal across the 
mountains. Besides this, we frequently halted at good inns; I had a 
good appetite and plenty to satisfy it; for it was really not woth 
while to deny myself anything, since my own meals were nothing in 
comparison with those of M. Sabran. 

During the whole course of my life, I never remember a time 
when I have been so completely free from care and trouble as during 
the seven or eight days of our journey; for Madame Sabran’s rate 
of travelling, by which we were obliged to regulate our own, made 
it nothing but a long walk. This recollection has left me the liveliest 
taste for everything connected with it, especially for mountains and 
walks, I have never journeyed on foot except in my younger days, 
and then always with the greatest pleasure. Duties, business, lug- 
gage, soon obliged me to play the gentleman and take a carriage; 
gnawing cares, perplexities, and discomfort got in with me, and 
from that moment, instead of feeling, as before, nothing but the 
pleasure of travelling, my only anxiety was to reach the end of my 
journey. For a long time I endeavoured to find in Paris two com- 
panions of the same tastes as myself willing to spend fifty louis of 
their money and a year of their time upon a walking tour through 


60 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Italy with me, with only a single lad to carry our travelling-bags. 
Many appeared enchanted with the idea, but in reality considered it 
as nothing but a castle in the air, only fit to talk about without any 
idea of putting it into execution. I remember that Diderot and 
Grimm, with whom I once discussed the idea with enthusiasm, at 
last became enamoured of it. Once I thought the matter settled, but 
it all ended in their wanting to make a journey on paper, in which 
Grimm found nothing so delightful as making Diderot cammit a 
number of impieties and handing me over to the inquisition in his 
stead. 

My regret at arriving so soon at Turin was lessened by the pleasure 
of seeing a large city, and by the hope of soon playing a part worthy 
of myself; for already the fumes of ambition were mounting to my 
brain; already I regarded myself as infinitely raised above my former 
condition of apprentice, and I was far from suspecting that, in a 
short time, I was destined to fall far below it. 

Before I continue, I must excuse or justify myself to the reader for 
the trivial details into which I have already entered, or into which 
I shall enter in the course of my narrative, and which in his eyes can 
have no interest. The task which I have undertaken, of showing 
myself completely without reserve to the public, requires that noth- 
ing that concerns myself shall remain obscure or hidden; that I shall 
keep myself continually before its eyes; that it shall accompany me 
in all the errors of my heart, into all the secret corners of my life; 
that it shall not lose sight of me for a single instant, for fear that, if 
it finds in my narrative the least gap, the least blank, it may ask, 
What was he doing during that time? and accuse me of unwilling- 
ness to tell all. My writings expose me sufficiently to the spite of man- 
kind, without my exposing myself to it still more by my silence. 

My little pocket-money was gone. I had chattered, and my guides 
were not slow to take advantage of my indiscretion. Madame Sabran 
managed te get everything from me, even a small piece of ribbon 
covered with silver, which Madame de Warens had given me for 
my little sword, and which I regretted more than anything else. The 
sword itself would have remained in their hands if I had resisted less 
firmly. They had faithfully defrayed my expenses during the jour- 
ney, but they had left me nothing. I reached Turin without clothes, 


- ‘af - 


= 


ARRIVAL AT TURIN 61 


without money, without linen, and was obliged to leave entirely to 
my merits.the honour of the fortune I was going to make. 

I had some letters. I presented them, and was immediately con. 
ducted to the hospice for catechumens, to be instructed in the religion 
with which I was to purchase my livelihood. On my arrival, I beheld 
a large gate with iron bars, which was double-locked behind me as 
soon as I had passed through it. This introduction struck me as 
more imposing than agreeable, and was beginning to afford me food 
for reflection, when I was conducted into a tolerably large room. All 
its furniture consisted of a wooden altar, surmounted by a large 
crucifix, at the end of the room, in front of which stood four or five 
chairs, also made of wood, which looked as if they had been polished, 
but in reality had become shiny merely from constant use and rub- 
bing. In this assembly-room were four or five frightful villains—my 
fellow-students—who seemed to be rather the devil’s constables than 
aspirants to the honour of sons of God. Two of these rascals were 
Slavonians, who called themselves Jews or Moors, and, as they con- 
fessed to me, spent their life in wandering through Spain and Italy, 
embracing Christianity and submitting to be baptised where they 
found it worth their while. Another iron door was then thrown 
open, which divided into two a large balcony running along the 
courtyard. Through this door our sisters entered, catechumens who, 
like myself, were to be born again, not by means of baptism, but by 
a solemn abjuration of their faith. They were certainly the greatest 
sluts and the most disgusting vagabonds who ever contaminated the 
sheepfold of the Lord. Only one appeared to me pretty and attrac- 
tive; she was about my own age, perhaps two or three years older. 
She had roguish eyes, which sometimes met mine. This inspired me 
with a desire to make her acquaintance; but, during nearly two 
months, which she spent in the house after my arrival—she had 
already been there three months—I found it absolutely impossible to 
speak to her, so strictly had she been recommended to the care of our 
old jaileress, and so carefully was she watched by the holy mission- 
ary, who laboured with more zeal than diligence to convert her. She 
must have been extremely dull, although she did not appear so, for 
never did tuition require so long a time. The holy man always found 
her unfit for the act of abjuration; but she grew weary of her con’ 


62 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


finement, and declared that she wanted to leave—Christian or no 
Christian. They were obliged to take her at her word, while she 
still showed herself ready to become one, for fear she might become 
refractory and refuse. 

The little community was assembled in honour of the newcomer. 
A short address was delivered to us, in which I was exhorted to 
consent to respond to the favour which God extended to me, while 
the others were invited to pray for me and edify me by their 
example. After this, our virgins returned to their seclusion, and I 
had time to meditate with astonishment upon my own situation to 
my heart’s content. 

Next morning we were again assembled to receive instruction; 
and then, for the first time, I began to reflect upon the step I was 
going to take, and upon the circumstances which had led me to do so. 

I have said—I repeat it, and shall, perhaps, repeat it again, as I am 
daily more convinced of its truth—that, if ever a child received a 
sensible and sound education, it was myself. I belonged to a family 
which was distinguished by its manners from the common people; 
from all my relations I had learnt nothing but lessons of wisdom, 
and had had honourable examples before my eyes. My father, al- 
though fond of pleasure, was not only a man of strict integrity but 
of considerable religious feeling. A man of gallantry in the world 
and a Christian at heart, he had early instilled into me the senti- 
ments which he felt. Of my three aunts, who were all prudent and 
virtuous, the two eldest were pious; the youngest, a girl full of grace, 
talent and good sense, was perhaps even more pious, although she 
made less show of it. From the bosom of this estimable family I went 
to M. Lambercier, who, though a churchman and preacher, was at 
heart a believer, and nearly always practised what he preached. He 
and his sister, by gentle and judicious training, cultivated the princi- 
ples of piety which they found in my heart. These worthy people, 
with this object, employed means so sincere, so prudent and so 
sensible that, far from being wearied by their preaching, I always 
felt deeply affected by it and formed the best resolutions, which I 
rarely forgot to carry out when I thought of them. In the case of my 
aunt Bernard, her piety was somewhat more distasteful to me, be- 
cause she made a trade of it. While serving my apprenticeship I 


= 


MEDITATIONS UPON RELIGION 63 


scarcely thought of it, without, however, changing my views. I never 
came into contact with any young people who might have corrupted 


me; I became vagabond, buf not dissipated. 


I consequently knew as much about religion as was possible for 
a child of my age. I even knew more, for why should I conceal my 
thoughts? My childhood was not that of a child; I always felt and 
thought as a man. It was only when I grew up that I re-entered the 
class of ordinary individuals; as a child I did not belong to it. The 
reader will laugh to find me modestly representing myself as a 
prodigy. So be it; but when he has laughed sufficiently, let him find 
a child who, in his sixth year, is so attracted, interested and carried 
away by romances as to shed hot tears over them; then I shall feel 
that my vanity is ridiculous, and will confess that I am wrong. 

If I have said that we ought not to speak about religion to chil- 
dren, if we wish them to possess any, and, further, that they are 
incapable of knowing God, even according to our ideas, I have 
drawn this conviction from my observations, not from my own 
experience, for I knew that no conclusion could be drawn from it 
in regard to others. Find me Jean Jacques Rousseaus of six years old, 
and speak to them of God when they are seven; I will guarantee 
that you run no risk. 

I think it will be admitted that, in the case of a child, and even 
of a man, to have religion means to follow that in which he is born. 
This faith is sometimes lessened, rarely enlarged; dogmatic belief 
is one of the fruits of education. Besides this general principle 
which attached me to the religious creed of my fathers, I had the 
aversion for Catholicism peculiar to our village, which represented 
it as a frightful idolatry, and painted its priests in the blackest 
colours. This feeling was so strong in me, that at first I never looked 
into the inside of a church, never met a priest in a surplice, never 
heard the processional bell, without a shudder of terror and alarm, 
which soon left me in the towns, but has often come upon me again 
in country parishes, more like those where I had first felt it. It is 
true that this impression contrasted singularly with the recollections 
of the caresses which the priests of the environs of Geneva were fond 
of bestowing upon the children of the city. While the bell an 
nouncing supreme unction alarmed me, the bell for mass and 


64 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


vespers reminded me of breakfast, collation, fresh butter, fruit, and 
milk-food. M. de Pontverre’s good dinner still produced a great 
effect. Thus I had easily driven all such thoughts out of my mind. 
Seeing papism only in its connection with amusement and good 
living, I had readily accustomed myself to the idea of living in its 
midst; but the idea of solemnly going over to the Church of Rome 
had only presented itself to me for a moment, as possible in a distant 
future. At the present moment it was no longer possible to deceive 
myself; I saw with horror the kind of consent which I had given, 
and its inevitable consequences. The future neophytes around me 
were not calculated to sustain my courage by their example, and I 
could not conceal from myself that the holy work, which I intended 
to carry out, was in the main the action of a bandit; for, young as I 
was, I felt that, whatever religion might be the true one, I was going 
to sell my own, and that, even though I made a good choice, in the 
bottom of my heart I should lie to the Holy Spirit and deserve the 
contempt of men. The more I thought of it, the more indignant I 
became with myself; and I sighed over the destiny which had 
brought me to this pass, as if this destiny had not been my own 
work. There were moments when these reflections became so 
strong, that, if I had found the door open for a moment, I should 
certainly have run away; but this was impossible, and my resolution 
was not strong enough. Too many secret desires combated it not to 
overcome it. Besides, my fixed determination not to return to 
Geneva, shame, the difficulty of crossing the mountains again, the 
embarrassment of finding myself far from my country, without 
friends and without resources—all these feelings combined to make 
me regard my prickings of conscience as a too tardy repentance; I 
pretended to reproach myself for what I had done, in order to excuse 
what I was going to do. While aggravating the errors of the past, I 
_ regarded the future as their necessary result. Instead of saying to 
myself, “Nothing is done yet, and you can be innocent if you wish,” 
I said, “Sigh for the crime of which you have made yourself guilty, 
and which you have made it necessary for yourself to carry out.” 
In fact, what uncommon strength of mind would have been 
necessary, at my age, in order to recall everything that I had hitherto 
promised or given hopes of, to break the bonds which I had placed 


- ET 


ARGUMENTS WITH THE PRIESTS 65 


upon myself, to declare boldly that I desired at all risks to continue 
in the religion of my fathers! Such vigour was not natural to one 
of my age, and it is not veryeprobable that it would have succeeded. 
Things had gone too far for them not to feel ashamed if they did not 
succeed; and, the greater my resistance, the more they would have 
felt themselves bound, by some means or other, to overcome it. 

The sophism which ruined me, is that common to most men who 
complain of want of strength when it is already too late to make use 
of it. Virtue only becomes difficult by our own fault; if we could 
always be prudent, we should rarely need to be virtuous. But in, 
clinations, easily surmountable, hurry us along without resistance; 
we yield to trifling temptations, the danger of which we despise. 
Imperceptibly we fall into perilous situations, from which we could 
easily have protected ourselves, but from which we can no longer 
extricate ourselves without heroic efforts which appal us; and at 
last we fall into the abyss, reproaching God, “Why hast Thou made 
me so weak?” But, in spite of ourselves, He replies to our con- 
sciences, “I have made you too weak to save yourself from the abyss, 
because I made you strong enough not to fall into it.” 

I did not exactly resolve to become a Catholic; but, seeing the 
time still far off, I profited by the occasion to accustom myself 
gradually to the idea, and in the meantime I hoped for some unfore- 
seen circumstance which would get me out of the difficulty. In order 
to gain time, I resolved to make the best defence of which I was 
capable. But soon my vanity relieved me from thinking of my 
resolution; and, as soon as I observed that I sometimes embarrassed 
those who desired to instruct me, that was sufficient to make me 
endeavour to floor them altogether. I even exhibited ridiculous 
eagerness in this undertaking; for, while they were working upon 
me, I wanted to work upon them. I honestly believed that I had only 
to convince them, to make them turn Protestants. 

Consequently, they did not find in me nearly as much tractability 
as they had expected, either in regard to my knowledge or good 
will. Protestants are generally better instructed than Catholics. 
This is only natural; the doctrine of the one requires discussion, 
that of the other submission. The Catholic is obliged to embrace the 
decision that is put before him; the Protestant must learn to decide 


66 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


for himself. This was well known; but no great difficulties were 
expected for persons of experience from one of my age and position, 
Besides, I had not yet received my first Communion, nor received 
the instructions connected with it; that, too, was known. But what 
they did not know was that, to make up for this, I had been well 
taught at M. Lambercier’s, and that, in addition, I had by me a little 
storehouse, very inconvenient for these gentlemen, in the history of 
the Church and the Empire, which, while living with my father, I 
had learnt almost by heart, and since then almost forgotten, but 
which came back to me in proportion as the dispute grew warmer. 

A little, old, but somewhat venerable priest held the first meeting 
of all of us together. For my companions this meeting was rather 
a catechism than a discussion, and he had more to do with in- 
structing them than with removing their objections. In my own 
case it was different. When my turn came, I stopped him at every 
point, and spared him no single difficulty which I was able to 
throw in his way. This protracted the meeting, and made it very 
tedious for those who were present. My old priest spoke much, 
grew excited, wandered from his subject, and got himself out of 
the difficulty by declaring that he did not know French well. The 
next day, for fear that my indiscreet objections might give offence 
to my companions, I was put into another room with another priest, 
who was younger and a good speaker—that is to say, a coiner of fine 
phrases—and satisfied with himself, if ever a teacher was. I did not, 
however, allow myself to be too much cowed by his imposing man- 
ner; and feeling that, after all, I was able to hold my own, I pro- 
ceeded to answer him with tolerable confidence, and to press hitn 
on all sides to the best of my ability. He thought to overwhelm me 
with St. Augustine, St. Gregory, and the other fathers, but found, 
to his incredible surprise, that I handled all the fathers nearly as 
readily as he did; not that I had ever read them, as neither perhaps 
had he, but I remembered several passages out of my “Le Sueur”; 
and, as soon as he quoted one, without stopping to dispute it, I an- 
swered it by another from the same Father, which frequently caused 
him considerable embarrassment. However, in the end he gained the 
victory, for two reasons. In the first place, he was the stronger, and, 
feeling that I was, so to speak, at his mercy, I correctly judged, 


CONDUCT OF THE MOOR 67 


young as I was, that it would not do to press him—to drive him to 
extremities; for I saw clearly enough that the little old priest had 
conceived no great affection for myself or my learning. In the second 
place, the young priest was an educated man, while I was not. This 
caused him to employ in his manner of argument a method which 
I was unable to follow, and, as soon as he felt himself pushed by some 
unforeseen objection, he put it off until the next day, declaring that 
I was wandering from the point. Sometimes he even refused to 
accept my quotations, declaring that they were false; and, offering 
to go and fetch the book for me, defied me to find them. He felt 
that he did not risk much, and that, with all my borrowed learning, 
I was not sufficiently experienced in handling books, and did not 
know enough Latin to find a passage in a large volume, even though 
I might be certain that it was there. I even suspected him of making 
use of the same dishonesty of which he accused our ministers, and 
of sometimes inventing passages, in order to extricate himself from 
a difficulty which embarrassed him. 

While these petty disputes about trifles lasted, and the time was 
spent in arguing, mumbling prayers, and doing nothing, a disgust- 
ing little adventure happened to me, which very nearly turned out 
very badly for me. 

There is no soul so vile, no heart so barbarous, that it is not sus- 
ceptible of some kind of attachment. One of the two vagabonds 
who called themselves Moors conceived an affection for me. He was 
fond of accosting me, talked to me in his jargon, rendered me slight 
services, sometimes gave me part of his food, and frequently kissed 
me with an ardour which was very annoying to me. In spite of the 
natural alarm which I felt at his gingerbread face decorated with a 
long scar, and his inflamed countenance which appeared more 
furious than tender, I endured his kisses, saying to myself: “The 
poor fellow has conceived a lively friendship for me. I should be 
wrong to repulse him.” He gradually began to take greater liberties, 
and sometimes made such curious proposals to me, that I thought 
he was mad. One night, he wanted to sleep with me. I refused, 
saying that my bed was to small. He pressed me to go to his, but 
I again refused, for the wretch was so dirty and stunk so strongly 
of chewed tobacco, that he made me quite sick. 


68 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Early on the following morning, we were both alone in the 
assembly-room. He recommenced his caresses, but with such violent 
moveinents, that it became quite alarming. At last, he wanted to take 
the most disgusting liberties with me, and, taking hold of my hand, 
tried to make me take the same with him. I uttered a lowd cry, and, 
jumping back, freed myself from him; and, without exhibiting 
anger or indignation, for I had not the least idea what it was all 
about, I expressed my surprise and disgust so energetically, that he 
left me where I was; but, while he was finishing his efforts, I saw 
something white, like glue, shoot towards the fireplace and fall upon 
the ground, which turned my stomach. I rushed upon the balcony, 
more moved, more troubled, more frightened than I had ever been 
in my life, and prepared to find myself ill. 

I could not understand what had been the matter with the wretch. 
I believed that he was attacked by epilepsy, or some other madness 
even more terrible; and in truth, I know nothing more hideous for 
any cool-blooded person to see than such filthy and dirty behaviour, 
and a frightful countenance inflamed by brutal lust. I have never 
seen another man in a similar condition; but if we are like it when 
we are with women, their looks must certainly be bewitched, for 
them not to feel disgusted at us. 

I was in a great hurry to go and tell everyone what had just hap- 
pened to me. Our old intendant bade me hold my tongue; but I saw 
that my story had greatly affected her, and I heard her mutter: Can 
maledet! brutta bestia! § 

Not understanding why I ought to hold my tongue, I went my 
own way in spite of her prohibition, and I talked so much that, the 
next day, one of the governors came at an early hour to administer 
a sharp reproof to me, accusing me of compromising the honour 
of a holy house, and of making a great fuss about a trifle. 

He spun out his lecture by explaining to me many things of which 
I was ignorant, but which he did not believe he was teaching me, for 
he was convinced that I had defended myself because I was un- 
willing to consent, not because I did not know what the Moor 
wanted from me. He told me gravely that it was an action forbidden 
as highly immoral, the desire of which, however, was not an affront 


8 Cursed dog! brute beast! 


LECTURE ON THE MOOR’S CONDUCT 6y 


to the person who was the object of it, and that there was no need to 
be so annoyed at having been considered worthy of affection. He told 
me plainly that he himself, during his youth, had had the same 
honour paid to him, and that, having been surprised when he was 
not in a condition to offer any resistance, he had not found it particu- 
larly painful. He was so shameless as to make use of plain language; 
and, imagining that the reason of my resistance was the fear of pain, 
he assured me that I need have no fear, and that I ought not to be 
alarmed where there was no reason for it. 

I listened to this wretch with an astonishment which was increased 
by the fact that he did not speak for himself, but only appeared to 
be instructing me for my good. The subject appeared to him so 
simple, that he did not even attempt to ensure privacy; and our 
conversation was heard by a third party in the person of an ec. 
clesiastic who seemed no more frightened by it than himself. This 
air of naturalness so imposed upon me, that I was convinced that 
it was no doubt a custom recognised in the world, as to which I had 
not had the opportunity of being instructed sooner. This made me 
listen without anger, but not without disgust. The image of what 
had happened to me, but above all of what I had seen, remained so 
deeply impressed upon my memory that, when I thought of it, I 
still felt disgusted. Without knowing any more about it, my aversion 
for the thing itself extended to its apologist; and I could not restrain 
myself sufficiently to prevent him seeing the bad effect of his lessons, 
He cast a glance at me that was by no means affectionate and from 
that time spared no efforts to make my stay in the hospice disagree- 
able. He succeeded so well that, seeing that there was only one way 
of getting away, I hastened to take it with as much eagerness as | 
had up till then exhibited in order to keep away from it. 

This adventure assured me for the future against the attempts of 
the “Knights of the Cuff’; ° and the sight of people who were sup- 
posed to belong to their order, by recalling to my mind the appear- 
ance and gestures of my frightful Moor, always inspired me with 
such horror, that I had difficulty in concealing it. On the other 
hand, women, to my mind, gained much by comparison; it appeared 
to me that I owed them tender feelings and personal homage by 


9 Chevaliers de la manchette: Paederasts. 


70 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


way of reparation for the insults of my sex; and the ugliest strumpet 
became in my eyes an object of adoration, when I remembered the 
ı false African. 

As for him, I do not know what may have been said to him; it 
did not appear to me that anybody, with the exception of mistress 
Lorenza, looked upon him less favourably than before. However, 
he neither accosted nor spoke to me again. Eight days afterwards, 
he was baptised with great solemnity, dressed in white from head 
to foot, in token of the purity of his regenerated soul. The next day 
he left the hospice, and I have never seen him since. 

My turn came a month later; for it required all that time to 
procure for the directors of my conscience the honour of a difficult 
conversion, and I was obliged to examine and go through all the 
dogmas, in order that my new docility might be triumphantly 
paraded. 

At last, sufficiently instructed and sufficiently prepared to satisfy 
my masters, I was conducted in solemn procession to the metro- 
politan church of St. John, to make a public abjuration of faith, and 
to receive the accessories of baptism, although I was not really re- 
baptised; but, as the ceremonies are almost the same, it serves to 
delude the people with the idea that Protestants are not Christians. 
I was clothed in a grey coat adorned with white frogs,!° which was 
used on such occasions. Two men, before and behind me, carried 
copper basins, which they beat with a key, and into which each 
threw his alms in proportion to his piety or the interest which he 
took in the new convert. Briefly, nothing of the pomp of the Catholic 
Church was omitted, in order to render the ceremony at once more 
edifying to the people, and more humiliating for myself. Only the 
white robe was wanting, which would have been very useful to me, 
and which was not given to me as to the Moor, seeing that I had not 
the honour to be a Jew. 

This was not all. I was next obliged to go to the Inquisition to 
receive absolution from the crime of heresy, and to re-enter the 
bosom of the Church with the ceremony to which Henry IV. was 
subjected in the person of his ambassador. The behaviour and look 


10 y . 
Brandebourgs: espèce d'ornement de broderie ou de galon qui entoure Jes 
Soutonniéres de certains habits (Littré). 


TURNED OUT OF HOSPICE 71 


of the reverend father inquisitor were not calculated to remove the 
secret terror which had seized upon me when I entered the house. 
After several questions about my belief, my position, and my family, 
he abruptly asked me whether my mother was damned. Fright 
caused me to repress the first movement of my indignation. I con- 
tented myself with answering that I ventured to hope that she was 
not, and that God might have enlightened her at her last hour. The 
monk was silent, but made a grimace which by no means appeared 
to me a sign of approval. 

When all was over, at the moment when I expected to be pro- 
vided for in accordance with my hopes, I was put out of doors with 
a little more than twenty francs in small money—the result of the 
collection made for me. I was recommended to live as a good Chris- 
tian, to remain true to grace; they wished me good luck, shut the 
door upon me, and I saw no more of them. 

Thus, in an instant, all my great expectations disappeared, and 
the only result of the self-seeking step that I had just taken, was the 
consciousness of having been an apostate and a dupe at the same 
time. It may be easily imagined what a sudden revolution took place 
in my ideas, when I saw myself dashed down from my brilliant 
dreams of fortune into utter misery, and when, after having delib- 
erated in the morning upon the choice of the palace I should inhabit, 
I found myself in the evening obliged to go to bed in the street. It 
will be imagined that I began by abandoning myself to a feeling of 
despair, the more cruel in proportion as regret for my errors was 
aggravated by the reproach that all my misfortune was my own 
work. Nothing of the kind. For the first time in my life, I had just 
been shut up for more than two months. My first sensation was one 
of joy at the recovery of my liberty. After a long period of slavery, 
again master of myself and my actions, I beheld myself in the midst 
of a large city, abounding in resources, full of persons of distinction, 
by whom I could not fail to be welcomed in consequence of my good 
qualities and my talents as soon as I became known. Besides, I had 
plenty of time to wait, and the twenty francs, which I had in my 
pocket, appeared to me an inexhaustible treasure. I could spend 
them as I pleased, without being accountable to anybody. It was the 
first time that I had ever been so well off. Far from becoming dis: 


72 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


heartened or shedding tears, I only changed my hopes, and my 
amour-propre lost nothing by the exchange. I had never felt so con- 
fident and secure; I believed my fortune already made, and I con- 
sidered it a fine thing to have no one but myself to thank for it. 

The first thing I did was to satisfy my curiosity by going round 
the city, if only to enjoy the sweets of liberty. I went to see the soldiers 
mount guard; the military music pleased me exceedingly. I followed 
processions; I delighted in the church-music of the priests. I went to 
see the King’s palace; I approached it with awe; but, seeing others go 
in, I did the same without being stopped. Perhaps I owed this 
favour to the little parcel which I carried under my arm. Anyhow, I 
began to entertain a high opinion of myself when I found myself in 
this palace; I already began to consider myself a resident in it. At 
last, I grew tired of going backwards and forwards; I was hungry; 
it was hot; I went into a milk-shop; I bought some giuncat} and sour 
milk; and with two slices!” of the excellent Piedmontese bread, 
which I prefer to any other, for my five or six sous I had one of the 
best meals I have ever had in my life. 

I was obliged to look for a lodging. As I already knew enough 
Piedmontese to make myself understood it was easy to find one, and 
Į was prudent enough to make my choice more in accordance with 
my means than my taste. I was told of a soldier’s wife in the Rue du 
Pô who took in servants out of employment for a sou a night. She 
had a bed empty, and I took it. She was young and reeently mar- 
ried, although she already had five or six children. We all slept in 
the same room, mother, children, and lodgers, and continued to do 
so as long as I remained with her. In other respects she was a good 
woman, who swore like a carter, whose breast was always exposed 
and her hair untidy, but kind-hearted and obliging; she took a liking 
to me, and was even useful to me. 

I spent several days in abandoning myself solely to the delights of 
independence and curiosity. I wandered about inside and outside the 
city, prying everywhere, looking at everything which appeared to 
me new or curious; and this was the case with everything to a young 


™ Fresh cheese and cream brought to market on rushes. 
¥ Grilles: sorte de pain très friable en forme de baguette. 


-HIS LIFE IN TURIN 73 


man who had just left his shell, and had never seen a capital. I was 
above all very regular i in going to court, and was particular in my 
attendance every morning at the royal mass. I thought it a fine 
thing to be in the same chapel as the prince and his suite; but my 
passion for music, which was beginning to make itself felt, had more 
to do with my regular appearance than the pomp of the court, which, 
soon seen and always the same, soon loses the charm of novelty. The 
King of Sardinia at that time had the best choir in Europe. Somis, 
Desjardins, the Bezuzzi, were successively its brilliant ornaments. 
This was more than sufficient to attract a young man whom the 
sound of the most wretched instrument, if only correctly played, was 
enough to enchant. Besides, the admiration I felt for the magnifi- 
cence which dazzled my eyes was senseless and aroused no envy. 
The only thing which interested me in all the brilliancy of the court 
was to see whether there was not some young princess, worthy of 
my homage, with whom I might carry on a romance. 

I was nearly commencing one in a less brilliant circle, but one in 
which, if I had carried it out, I should have found pleasures a thou- 
sand times more delicious. 

Although I lived most economically, my purse was gradually be- 
coming exhausted. Besides, my economy was not so much the effect 
of prudence as of a simplicity of taste which, even at the present day, 
familiarity with the tables of the great has not changed. I did not 
know, and do not know even now, better cheer than a country meal. 
Anyone may feel sure of entertaining me handsomely with milk- 
food, eggs, vegetables, cheese, black bread, and tolerable wine; my 
excellent appetite will do the rest; while a maitre-d’hétel and foot- 
men about me with their troublesome officiousness can never satisfy 
me. At that time I made far better meals at a cost of six or seven 
sous, than I have made since for six or seven francs. I was temperate, 
because I had no temptation to be otherwise; and yet I am wrong to 
say I was temperate, for I had at the same time all possible sensual 
enjoyments. My pears, my giunca, my cheese, my slices of bread, and 
a few glasses of a full-bodied Montferrat wine, which could have 
been cut into slices, made me the happiest of gourmands. And yet, 
in spite of all that, the end of my twenty francs was visible. This I 
became more sensibly aware of every day; and, in spite of the 


74 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


thoughtlessness of my years, my uneasiness regarding the future 
soon became real alarm. Of all my castles in the air nothing remained. 
to me but the necessity of finding a means of livelihood, which was 
by no means easy to procure. I thought of my old trade, but I did not 
know enough of it to work for a master, and, besides, there were not 
many masters in Turin. While waiting for something better, I took 
to going from shop to shop to offer my services for engraving fig- 
ures or coats-of-arms on silver, hoping to tempt customers by my 
cheapness, since I left the amount of payment to them. This plan did 
not prove very successful. I was generally shown the door; and the 
work I got was so little, that I scarcely earned enough to pay for 
two or three meals. One day, however, as I was walking at an early 
hour through the Contrada nova, I saw through a shop window a 
young woman of so kindly and attractive an appearance, that, in 
spite of my shyness with women, I entered without hesitation and 
placed my humble talemts at her disposal. She did not repulse me, 
but made me sit down and tell her my little history, pitied me, bade 
me cheer up, since assuredly good Christians would not desert me, 
and, having sent to a neighbouring goldsmith for the tools which I 
told her I wanted, she went into the kitchen and fetched me some 
breakfast with her own hands. This beginning appeared to me to 
promise well; the result did not give the lie to it. She appeared satis- 
fied with my bit of work, and still more with my humble chatter, 
when I was a little more at my ease; for she was brilliant and hand- 
somely dressed, and, in spite of her gracious manner, her appearance 
had inspired me with awe. But her kindly reception, her compas- 
sionate voice, her gentle and caressing manners, soon put me at my 
ease. I saw that I was successful, and this increased my success. But, 
although she was an Italian and too pretty not to be somewhat of a 
coquette, she was at the same time so modest, and I was so shy, that 
it was difficult for it to lead to anything further. We were not al- 
lowed to finish the adventure. I remember with the greater rapture 
the brief moments which I spent by her side, and I can declare that 
in their first beginnings I tasted the sweetest and purest joys of love. 

She was an extremely piquant brunette, whose liveliness was ren- 
dered somewhat touching by the expression of good nature on her 
pretty face. Her name was Madame Basile. Her husband, who was 


MADAME BASILE 75 


older than herself atid somewhat jealous, left her, while he was 
travelling, under the care of a clerk, who appeared too disagreeable 
to be seductive, and yet was not without pretensions of his own, 
which he only showed by his bad temper. This he visited upon me, 
although I was very fond of hearing him play the flute, on which he 
was a tolerably good performer. This new Aegisthus grumbled 
whenever he saw me enter the place, and treated me with a contempt 
which his mistress returned in full. It even seemed as if it delighted 
her to caress me in his presence, in order to plague him; and this 
kind of revenge, although very much to my taste, would have been 
still more agreeable in a téte-a-téte. But she never pushed matters to 
that extent, or, at least, not in the same manner. Whether it was that 
she found me too young, or did not know how to make advances, or 
really intended to be discreet, she exhibited at that time a kind of 
reserve, which, while not repellent, intimidated me without my 
knowing the reason why. Although I did not feel for her the real 
and tender respect that I felt for Madame de Warens, I was more 
timid and less familiar with her. I was embarrassed and confused; 
I did not venture to look at her or to breathe by her side; and yet I 
dreaded to leave her worse than death. I devoured with a greedy eye 
everything I could look at without being observed: the flowers in 
her dress, the tips of her pretty feet, the glimpse of a firm white arm 
which I caught between her glove and her cuff, and of her bosom, 
which was sometimes visible between her tucker and her necker- 
chief. Each object strengthened the impression made by the rest. 
From looking at what I could see, and even further than that, my 
eyes became troubled, my breast felt oppressed; my respiration be- 
came every moment more choked, I could scarcely breathe, and all 
I could do was to heave a succession of noiseless sighs, which were 
very embarrassing in the complete stillness in which we often found 
ourselves. Luckily Madame Basile, busy with her work, did not 
notice it, as far as I could see. However, I sometimes saw the bosom 
of her dress heave as if in sympathy. This dangerous sight made me 
lose my head completely; but, when I was ready to give way to my 
transports, she quietly said something to me which immediately 
brought me to my senses again. 

I saw her several times alone in this manner, without a word, o1 


76 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


gesture, or even a too expressive look indicating the least under- 
standing between us. This state of things, very tormenting for my- 
self, was nevertheless extremely delightful, and in the simplicity of 
my heart I could scarcely understand why I felt so tormented. It 
appeared that these little séze-d-tétes were not unpleasant to her 
either; at any rate, she provided opportunity for them pretty fre- 
quently—certainly a very harmless endeavour on her part, for all 
the use which she made of them herself, or allowed me to make. 

One day, tired of the clerk’s silly conversation, she had gone. up- 
stairs to her room. I hastily finished my little task in the room behind 
the shop, and followed her. The door of her room was half open. I 
entered without being seen. She was working at her embroidery 
near a window, with her back turned towards the door. She could 
neither see me nor hear me come in, owing to the noise of the car- 
riages in the street. She was always well dressed; on that day her 
toilet was almost coquettish. Her attitude was graceful; her head, 
slightly bent, allowed the whiteness of her neck to be seen; her hair, 
elegantly fastened up, was ornamented with flowers. Over her whole 
form was spread a charm, which I had time to consider, and which 
made me beside myself. I threw myself on my knees on the thresh- 
old, stretching out my arms towards her with passionate movements, 
feeling certain that she could not hear me, and not thinking it pos- 
sible that she could see me; but over the mantelpiece was a looking- 
glass, which betrayed me. I do not know what effect my attack of 
madness produced upon her; she neither looked at me, nor said a 
word; but, half-turning her head, with a simple movement of her 
finger she pointed to the mat at her feet. To tremble, to utter a cry, 
to fling myself down on the spot she had indicated, was for me the 
work of a moment; but it will scarcely be believed that, in this posi- 
tion, I did not venture to attempt anything further, to say a single 
word, to lift my eyes to her, or even to touch her, in my uncomfort- 
able attitude, to support myself for an instant upon her knees. Al- 
though unable to speak or move, I was certainly not tranquil; every- 
thing about me betrayed my agitation, my joy, my gratitude, my 
ardent desires, which, without definite aim or object, were restrained 
by the fear of displeasing, in regard to which my youthful heart 
could not make itself easy. 


HIS PASSION FOR HER a7 


She appeared no less moved and no less shy than myself. Dis- 
turbed at seeing mé there, disconcerted at having drawn me thither, 
and beginning to feel the full consequences of a sign which she had 
no doubt made without due reflection, she neither drew me towards 
her nor repulsed me. She did not take her eyes from her work; she 
tried to behave as if she had not seen me at her feet; but all my 
stupidity could not prevent me from concluding that she shared my 
embarrassment, perhaps even my desires, and that she was restrained 
by the same feeling of shame as myself, although this did not assist 
me to overcome it. Being five or six years older than myself, she 
ought, as I considered, to have had all the boldness on her side; and 
I said to myself that, as she did nothing to awaken mine, she could 
not wish me to show any. Even now I think I was right, and cer- 
tainly she was too clever not to see that a novice, such as I was, 
needed to be not only encouraged, but also instructed, 

I do not know what would have been the end of this lively dumb 
show, nor how long I should have remained without moving in my 
ridiculous and yet delicious situation, if we had not been interrupted. 
At the moment of my most violent excitement, I heard the door of 
the kitchen, which was close to the room where we were, open, and 
Madame Basile, in lively alarm which showed itself in her words 
and gestures, said, “Get up! here comes Rosina.” Hastily rising, I 
seized the hand which she held out to me, and imprinted two burn- 
ing kisses upon it, at the second of which I felt this charming hand 
pressed lightly against my lips. Never in my life had I enjoyed so 
sweet a moment; but the opportunity which I had lost never came 
again, and our youthful loves stopped at that point. 

This is, perhaps, the very reason why the image of that amiable 
woman has remained imprinted on the bottom of my heart in such 
charming outlines. It has even grown in beauty in proportion as my 
knowledge of the world and women has been enlarged. If she had 
only had a little experience, she would have behaved differently in 
order to encourage a lad; but, if her heart was weak, it was upright, 
she yielded involuntarily to the inclination which carried her away; 
it was, according to all appearance, her first infidelity, and I should, 
perhaps, have found more difficulty in overcoming her shyness than 
my own. Without having gone so far, I found in her presence in- 


78 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


describable happiness. None of the feelings caused by the possession 
of women have ever equalled the two minutes which I spent at her 
feet without even venturing to touch her dress. No; there is no en- 
joyment equal to that which a virtuous woman, whom one loves, 
can afford. Everything is a favour with her. A sign with the finger, 
a hand pressed lightly against my mouth—these are the only favours 
that I ever received from Madame Basile, and the recollection of 
these trifling tokens of regard still enchants me when I think of 
them. 

For the two next days it was in vain that I looked out for the 
chance of another téte-d-téte; it was impossible for me to find the 
opportunity, and I did not observe any anxiety on her part to bring 
it about. Her manner, although not colder, was more reserved than 
usual; and I believe that she avoided my looks, for fear of being 
unable to control her own sufficiently. Her confounded clerk was 
more unbearable than ever; he even joked and bantered me, saying 
chat I should get on with the ladies. I trembled at the thought of 
having been guilty of some indiscretion; and, already considering 
that there was an understanding between Madame Basile and my- 
self, I wished to keep secret an inclination which, until then, had not 
greatly needed it. This made me more careful in seizing opportuni- 
ties to satisfy it; and, as I wished them to be safe, I no longer found 
any at all. 

This is another romantic folly of which I have never been able to 
eure myself, and which, combined with my natural shyness, has 
strikingly falsified the clerk’s predictions. I loved too sincerely, too 
completely, I venture te say, to be able to be happy easily. Never have 
passions been at once more lively and purer than mine; never has 
love been tenderer, truer, more disinterested. I would have sacrificed 
my happiness a thousand times for that of the person whom I loved; 
her reputation was dearer to me than my life, and I would never 
have wished to endanger her repose for a single moment for all the 
pleasures of enjoyment. This feeling has made me employ such care- 
fulness, such secrecy, and such precaution in my undertakings, that 
none of them have ever been successful. My want of success with 
women has always been caused by my excessive love for them. 

To return to the flute player Aegisthus: the curious thing was that 


2 


MADAME’S CONFESSOR . 79 


the traitor, as he became more unendurable, appeared to become 
more affable. From the frst day that his mistress had taken a liking 
to me, she had thought of making me useful in the shop. I was a 
fairly good arithmetician. She had proposed to him to teach me to - 
keep the books; but the boorish fellow received the proposal with a 
very ill grace, perhaps because he was afraid of being supplanted. 
Thus all my work, besides that with my graving-tool, consisted in 
copying a few accounts and memoranda, correcting a few books, and 
translating a few business letters from Italian into French. Suddenly 
it occurred to my friend to return to the proposal which had been 
made and rejected. He offered to teach me double entry, and said 
that he wished to make me competent to offer my services to M. 
Basile on his return. In his voice, in his manner, there was something 
false, spiteful, and ironical, which did not inspire me with confi- 
dence. Madame Basile, without waiting for me to answer, said to 
him coldly, that I was obliged to him for his offer; that she hoped 
that fortune would in the end reward my good qualities, and that it 
would be a great pity if, with my talents, I became nothing more 
than a clerk. 

She had on several occasions told me that she desired to introduce 
me to someone who might be of assistance to me. She was prudent 
enough to feel that it was time for us to separate. Our mute declara- 
tions had been made on a Thursday. On the following Sunday she 
gave a dinner, at which I was present, and amongst the guests was 
a monk of the Jacobin order, a man of good appearance, to whom 
she introduced me. He treated me very cordially, congratulated me 
on my conversion, and spoke to me about my history in a manner 
which proved to me that she had given him a full account of it; then, 
giving me a friendly slap on the cheek with the back of his hand, he 

‘told me to behave myself properly, to be of good courage, and to go 
and see him, that we might talk more at leisure. I judged, by the 
respect which everyone showed him, that he was a person of some 
importance; and, from the paternal tone which he adopted towards 
Madame Basile, that he was her confessor. I also remember that his 
respectful familiarity was united with marks of esteem and even 
respect for his penitent, which impressed me less at the time than 
they do now. If I had been more intelligent, I should have been 


80 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


affected at the thought of having been able to touch the feelings of a 
young woman so respected by her confessor. The table was not large 
enough for all of us; another small cne was called into requisition, 
at which I had the pleasure of sitting opposite the clerk. As far as 
attention and good cheer were concerned, I lost nothing by the ar- 
rangement; several plates were sent to the little table, which were 
certainly not meant for hifn. Up to this time all was going well; the 
ladies were very gay, the men very attentive; Madame Basile did the 
honours with charming grace. In the middle of dinner, a carriage 
stopped at the door; someone came upstairs. It was M. Basile. I see 
him now, just as when he came in, dressed in a scarlet coat with gilt 
buttons, a colour which, since that day, I have always regarded with 
aversion. He was a tall, handsome man of good appearance. He en- 
tered noisily with the air of a man surprising his guests, although 
all who were present were friends of his. His wife flung her arms 
round his neck, pressed his hands, and lavished caresses upon him, 
which he accepted without returning. He saluted the company, and 
sat down to eat. The guests had scarcely begun to speak of his jour- 
ney, when, turning his eyes towards the little table, he asked, in a 
severe tone, who the little boy was whom he saw there. Madame 
Basile told him everything quite simply, He asked whether I lived 
in the house, and being told no, he said coarsely, “Why not? since 
he is here in the daytime, he might as well stop during the night.” 
‘The monk took up the conversation; and, after speaking of Madame 
Basile in terms of praise that were earnest and true, said a few words 
in my favour, adding that, far from blaming his wife’s pious work 
of charity, he ought to be eager to take part in it himself, since noth- 
ing in it overstepped the bounds of discretion. M. Basile replied in 
a tone of annoyance, which he half concealed, out of respect for the 
monk’s presence, but which was enough to make me feel that he had 
been informed about me, and that the clerk had done me an ill turn. 

No sooner was the meal over, than the latter, sent by his master, 
came in triumph to tell me, by his orders, to leave the house at once 
and never set foot in it again. He seasoned his message with every- 
thing that could make it cruel and insulting. I went without saying 
a word, but with a heart deeply afflicted, not so much at the thought 
of leaving this amiable woman, as of abandoning her to her hus- 


END OF FIRST LOVE ADVENTURE Sr 


band’s brutality. He was no doubt right in wishing her not to be 
untrue to him; but, alzhough intelligent and well brought up, she 
was an Italian, that is to say, of a sensitive and revengeful disposi- 
tion; and it appears to me that he was wrong in treating her in the 
manner most calculated to bring upon himself the misfortune which 
he dreaded. 

Such was the result of my first love adventure. I did not omit to 
pass two or three times through the street, in the hope of at least 
seeing again her whom my heart unceasingly regretted; but, instead 
of her, I only saw the husband and the watchful clerk, who, as soon 
as he saw me, made a movement towards me with the yard meas- 
ure, which was more expressive than alluring. Seeing that I was so 
well watched, I lost heart and did not pass the shop again. I wished, 
at least, to see the patron whom Madame Basile had found for me. 
Unfortunately I did not know his name. I wandered several times 
round the convent in the hope of meeting him, but without success, 
At last other events banished the delightful recollections of Madame 
Basile, and in a short time I forgot her so completely that, simple 
and as great a novice as before, J did not even feel attracted by pretty 
women. 

However, her generosity had somewhat refurnished my ward: 
robe, although very modestly, and with the foresight of a prudeny 
woman who thought more of neatness than of adornment, and 
whose wish was to keep me from discomfort, not to deck me out, 
The clothes which I had brought from Geneva were still good 
enough to wear; she only added a hat and some linen. I had no cuffs; 
she would not give me any, although I was very anxious to have 
some. She was satisfied with putting me in a position to keep myself 
neat and clean, and that was a thing which there was no need ta 
recommend me to be careful about, as long as I was in her presence. 

A few days after my misfortune, my landlady who, as I have said, 
had taken a liking to me, told me that she had, perhaps, found me a 
place, and that a lady of position wanted to see me. At these words, 
I believed myself already in the midst of fashionable adventures; for 
my mind was always running upon that. This one, however, did not 
prove as brilliant as I had pictured to myself. I went to see the lady 
with the servant who had spoken of me to her. She questioned and 


82 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


examined me; I did not displease her, and immediately entered her 
service, not exactly as a favourite, but as a lackey. I was dressed in 
her livery; the only difference was that, while they wore shoulder 
knots, I had none; as there was no lace on her livery, it looked like 
an ordinary dress. Such was the unexpected end of all my grand 
hopes! 

The Comtesse de Vercellis, whose service I then entered, was a 
widow without children; her husband was a Piedmontese. I always 
took her to be a Savoyard, since I could not believe that a Piedmon- 
tese could speak French so well and with so pure an accent. She was 
middle-aged, of distinguished appearance, possessed a cultivated 
mind, and was.fond of French literature, of which she had an ex- 
tensive knowledge. She wrote much, and always in French. Her let- 
ters had the character and almost the grace of those of Madame de 
Sévigné, and some of them might have been mistaken for hers. My 
chief employment, one that I did not dislike, was to write them 
from her dictation; since a cancer in the stomach, from which she 
suffered greatly, made it impossible for her to write them herself. 

Madame de Vercellis was not only a woman of great talent, but 
possessed a strong and lofty soul. I was with her during her last ill- 
ness. I saw her suffer and die without showing signs of weakness, 
even for a moment, without making the least effort to control her- 
self, without doing anything unwomanly, without suspecting that 
her conduct was an example of philosophy, a word which was not 
as yet fashionable, and with which she was not even acquainted in 
the sense which it bears to-day. This force of character sometimes 
even became coldness. She always appeared to me as little without 
feeling for others as for herself; and, when she did a kindness to 
anyone who was unfortunate, she did it rather from a desire to do 
what was good in itself, than from genuine feelings of pity. During 
the three months which I spent with her, I experienced to some 
extent this want of feeling. It would have been natural that she 
should conceive a regard for a young man of some promise, whom 
she had continually in her sight, and that, feeling that her end was 
near, she should reflect that he would afterwards stand in need of 
assistance and support; however, whether it was that she did not 
consider me worthy of special attention, or that those who besieged 


THE COMTESSE DE VERCELLIS 83 


her did not allow her to think of anyone but themselves—she did 
nothing for me. fs: 

I remember very well, however, that she displayed some curiosity 
to know my story. She sometimes asked me questions; she liked me 
to show her the letters I wrote to Madame de Warens, and to give 
her an account of my feelings; but she certainly did not go the right 
way to become acquainted with them, as she never disclosed her 
own to me. My heart loved to unbosom itself, provided it felt that 
it was doing so to another heart. Cold and dry questions, without 
any sign of approval or blame at my answers, gave me no confi 
dence. When there was nothing to show me whether my chatter 
pleased or displeased, I was always in a state of alarm, and I en- 
deavoured, not so much to show what I thought as to say nothing 
which might do me harm. I have since observed that this dry man- 
ner of questioning people in order to find out their character, is a 
frequent trick with women who wish to be thought clever. They 
imagine that, by concealing their own feelings, they will be more 
likely to succeed in finding out your own; but they fail to see that, 
in so doing, they are depriving you of the courage to exhibit them. 
A man who is questioned, for that reason alone begins to put himself 
on his guard, and, if he believes that his questioner, without feeling 
any genuine interest in him, merely wants to make him talk, he 
either lies, holds his tongue, or redoubles his watchfulness, prefer- 
ring to be thought a fool than to be the dupe of curiosity. In short, 
when a man desires to read the hearts of others, it is always a bad 
plan to make a show of concealing his own. 

Madame de Vercellis never said a word to me expressive of affec- 
tion, pity, or goodwill. She asked me questions with coldness; I re- 
plied with reserve. My answers were so timid that she must have 
found them commonplace and tedious. At length she gave up aues- 
tioning me, and never spoke to me except to give me an order. She 
judged me less according to what I was than according to what she 
had made me; and, as she never saw anything in me but a lackey, 
she prevented me from appearing anything else. 

I believe that from that time I suffered from the malicious sport 
of secret intrigue which has ever. since thwarted me, and which has 
inspired me with a very natural aversion for the apparent order of 


84 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


things which produces it. The heir of Madame de Vercellis, who 
was childish, was her nephew, the Comte de la Roque, who assidu- 
ously paid court to her. Besides, her chief servants, who saw that her 
end was near, did not neglect their own interests; and there were so 
many devoted attendants round her, that it would have been dificult 
for her to give a thought to myself. At the head of the establishment 
was a certain M. Lorenzi, a clever man, whose still more clever wife 
had so insinuated herself into her mistress’s good graces, that she 
stood rather on the footing of a friend than of a paid servant. She 
had bestowed the post of lady’s-maid upon her own niece, Made- 
moiselle Pontal, a sly creature, who gave herself the airs of a maid 
of honour, and so successfully helped her aunt to get round her mis- 
tress, that she only saw through their eyes and only acted through 
their hands. I had not the good fortune to please these three per- 
sons; I obeyed them, but I did not serve them; I did not consider 
that, besides serving our common mistress, I was obliged to be a 
servant to her servants. Besides, I was the kind of person who 
caused them uneasiness. They saw clearly that I was not in my 
place; they were afraid that Madame saw it as well, and that what 
she might do to put me in my proper position, might diminish their 
share of her money; for people of this class, too greedy to be just, 
look upon every legacy left to others as stolen from their own prop- 
erty. They accordingly conspired to remove me from her sight. She 
was fond of writing letters; it was an amusement for her in her state 
of health; they inspired her with disgust for it, and dissuaded her 
from continuing it by the advice of her physician, while persuading 
her that it was too tiring for her. On the pretence that I did not 
understand my duty, two loutish sedan-chair carriers were employed 
in my place; in short, they managed so cleverly that, when she made 
her will, I was not allowed to enter her room for eight days. It is 
true that I subsequently went in as before, and I showed her even 
more attention than anyone else; for the sufferings the poor woman 
endured tore my heart; the firmness with which she bore them in- 
spired me with extreme reverence and affection for her, and I often 


shed tears of genuine sorrow in my room, unperceived by her or 
anyone else. 


- 


DEATH OF MADAME DE VERCELLIS 85 


. At length we lost her. I saw her die. Her life had been the life of 
a woman of talent and jptelligence; her death was that of a philoso- 
pher. I can say that she inspired me with a feeling of esteem for the 
Catholic religion, by the cheerfulness of soul with which she ful- 
filled its instructions, without carelessness and without affectation. 
She was naturally of a serious disposition. Towards the end of her 
illness, she assumed a sort of gaiety, which was too regular to be 
unreal, and which was only a counterpoise to her melancholy con- 
dition and was the gift of reason. She only kept her bed the two last 
days, and continued to converse quietly with everybody to the end. 
At last, speaking no more, and already in the agonies of death, she 
broke wind loudly. “Good!” she said, turning round, “a woman who 
can fart is not dead!” These were the last words she uttered. 

She left a year’s wages to her underservants. I received nothing. 
not having been entered on the list of her establishment. However, 
the Comte de la Roque ordered thirty ures to be given me, and left 
me the new suit which I was wearing, and which M. Lorenzi wanted 
to take from me. He even promised to try and find a place for me, 
and gave me leave to go and see him. I went there two or three times 
without being able to speak to him. Being easily rebuffed, I did not 
go again. It will soon be seen that I was wrong. Would that I had 
finished all that I had to say about my stay at Madame de Vercellis’s! 
But, although my condition apparently remained the same, I did 
not leave the house as I entered it. I carried away from it lasting 
recollections of crime and the insupportable weight of remorse, 
which, after forty years, still lies heavy on my conscience; while the 
bitterness of it, far from growing weaker, makes itself more strongly 
felt with my advancing years. Who would believe that a childish 
fault could have such cruel consequences? For these more than prob- 
able consequences my heart is inconsolable. I have, perhaps, caused 
the ruin of an amiable, honest, and estimable girl, who certainly was 
far more worthy than myself, and doomed her to disgrace and 
misery. 

It is almost unavoidable that the break up of an establishment 
should cause some confusion in the house, and that several things 
should get lost; however, the servants were so honest, and the 

s 


86 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Lorenzis so watchful, that nothing was missing when the inventory 
was taken. Only Mademoiselle Pontal had lost a piece of old red 
and silver-coloured ribbon. Many other things of greater value were 
at my disposal; this ribbon alone tempted me; I stole it, and, as I 
took no trouble to conceal it, it was soon found. They wanted to 
know how it had come into my possession. I became confused, stam- 
mered, blushed, and at last said that Marion had given it to me. 
Marion was a young girl from Maurienne, whom Madame de Ver- 
cellis had taken for her cook, when she left off giving dinners and 
discharged her own, as she had more need of good soup than of fine 
stews. Marion was not only pretty but had a fresh colour, only 
found on the mountains, and, above all, there was something about 
her so gentle and modest, that it was impossible for anyone to see 
her without loving her; in addition to that, she was a good and vir- 
tuous girl, and of unquestionable honesty. All were surprised when 
I mentioned her name. We were both equally trusted and it was 
considered important to find out which of us two was really the 
thief. She was sent for; a number of people were assembled, amongst 
them the Comte de la Roque. When she came, the ribbon was 
shown to her. I boldly accused her; she was astounded, and unable 
to utter a word; looked at me in a manner that would have disarmed 
the Devil himself, but against which my barbarous heart was proof. 
At last, she denied the theft firmly, but without anger, addressed 
herself to me, exhorted me to reflect, and not to disgrace an innocent 
girl who had never done me any harm; but I, with infernal impu- 
dence, persisted in my story, and declared to her face that she had 
given me the ribbon. The poor girl began to cry, and only said to 
me: “Ah! Rousseau, I thought you were a good man. You make me 
very unhappy, but I should not like to be in your place.” That was 
all. She proceeded to defend herself with equal simplicity and firm- 
ness, but without allowing herself to utter the slightest reproach 
against me. This moderation, contrasted with my decided tone, did 
her harm. It did not seem natural to suppose, on the one side, such 
devilish impudgnce, and, on the other, such angelic mildness. Al- 
though the matter did not appear to be absolutely settled, they were 
Prepossessed in my favour. In the confusion which prevailed, they 


REMORSE 87 


did not give themselves time to get to the bottom of the affair; and 
the Comte de la Roqueyin dismissing us both, contented himself 
with saying that the conscience of the guilty one would amply 
avenge the innocent. His prediction has been fulfilled; it fulfils itself 
every day. 

I do not know what became of the victim of my false accusation; 
but it is not likely that she afterwards found it easy to get a good 
situation. She carried away with her an imputation upon her honesty 

which was in every way cruel. The theft was only a trifling one, but 
still it was a theft, and, what is worse, made use of to lead a young 
man astray; lastly, lying and obstinacy left nothing to be hoped from 
one in whom so many vices were united. I do not even consider mis- 
ery and desertion as the greatest danger to which I exposed her. At 
her age, who knows to what extremes discouragement and the feel- 
ing of ill-used innocence may have carried her? Oh, if my remorse 
at having, perhaps, made her unhappy is unendurable, one may 
judge what I feel at the thought of having, perhaps, made her worse 
than myself! 

This cruel remembrance at times so sorely troubles and upsets me, 
that in my sleepless hours I seem to see the poor girl coming to re- 
proach me for my crime, as if it had been committed only yesterday. 
As long as I have lived quietly, it has tormented me less; but in the 
midst of a stormy life it robs me of the sweet consolation of perse- 
cuted innocence, it makes me feel what I think I have said in one of 
my books, that “Remorse goes to sleep when our fortunes are pros- 
perous, and makes itself felt more keenly in adversity.” However, I 
have never been able to bring myself to unburden my heart of this 
confession to a friend. The closest intimacy has never led me so far 
with anyone, not even with Madame de Warens. All that I have 
been able to do has been to confess that I had to reproach myself 
with an atrocious act, but I have never stated wherein it consisted. 
This burden has remained to this day upon my conscience without 
alleviation; and I can affirm that the desire of freeing myself from 
it in some degree, has greatly contributed to the resolution I have 
taken of writing my Confessions. 

I have behaved straightforwardly in the confession which I have 


88 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


just made, and it will assuredly be found that I have not attempted 
to palliate the blackness of my offence. But I should not fulfil the 
object of this book, if I did not at the same time set forth my inner 
feelings, and hesitated to excuse myself by what is strictly true. 
Wicked intent was never further from me than at that cruel mo- 
ment; and when I accused the unhappy girl, it is singular, but it is 
true, that my friendship for her was the cause of it. She was present 
to my thoughts; I threw the blame on the first object which pre- 
sented itself. I accused her of having done what I meant to do, and 
of having given me the ribbon, because my intention was to give it 
to her. When I afterwards saw her appear, my heart was torn; but 
the presence of so many people was stronger than repentance. I was 
not afraid of punishment, I was only afraid of disgrace; and that I 
feared more than death, more than crime, more than anything else 
in the world. I should have rejoiced if the earth had suddenly 
opened, swallowed me up and suffocated mes the unconquerable 
fear of shame overcame everything, and alone made me impudent. 
The greater my crime, the more the dread of confessing it made me 
fearless. I saw nothing but the horror of being recognised and pub- 
licly declared, in my own presence, a thief, liar, and slanderer. Com- 
plete embarrassment deprived me of every other feeling. If I had 
been allowed to recover myself I should have assuredly confessed 
everything. If M. de la Roque had taken me aside and said to me: 
“Do not ruin this poor girl; if you are guilty, confess it to me,” I 
should have immediately thrown myself at his feet, of that I am 
perfectly certain. But, when I needed encouragement, they only in- 
timidated me. And yet it is only fair to consider my age. I was little 
more than a child, or rather, I still was one. In youth real crimes are 
even more criminal than in riper years; but that which is only weak- 
ness is less so, and my offence was at bottom scarcely anything else. 
Thus the recollection of it afflicts me not so much by reason of the 
evil in itself as on account of its evil consequences. It has even done 
me the good of securing me for the rest of my life against every act 
tending to crime, by the terrible impression which I have retained 
of the only offence that I have ever committed; and I believe that my 
horror of a lie is due in great measure to my regret at having been 


EXPIATION 89 


capable myself of telling one so shameful. If it isxa crime that can be 
expiated, as I venture tobelieve, it must be expiated by all the un- 
happiness which has overwhelmed the last years of my life, by forty 
years of honourable and upright conduct in difficult circumstances; 
and poor Marion finds so many avengers in this world, that, how- 
ever great my offence against her may have been, I have little fear of 
dying without absolution. This is what I have to say on this matter: 
permit me never to speak of it again. 


BOOK III 


[1728-1731} 

'Havinc left Madame de Vercellis’s house in almost the same state as 
I had entered it, I went back to my old landlady, with whom I re- 
mained for five or six weeks, during which health, youth, and idle- 
ness again rendered my temperament troublesome. I was restless, 
absent-minded, a dreamer. I wept, I sighed, I longed for a happi- 
ness of which I had no idea, and of which I nevertheless felt the 
want. This state cannot be described; only few men can even imag- 
ine it, because most of them have anticipated this fulness of life, at 
once so tormenting and so delicious, which, in the intoxication of 
desire, gives a foretaste of enjoyment. My heated blood incessantly 
filled my brain with girls and women; but, ignorant of the relations 
of sex, I made use of them in my imagination in accordance with my 
distorted notions, without knowing what else to do with them; and 
these notions kept my feelings in a state of most uncomfortable 
activity, from which, fortunately, they did not teach me how to de- 
liver myself. I would have given my life to have found another 
Mademoiselle Goton for a quarter of an hour. But it was no longer 
the time when childish amusements took this direction as if natu- 
rally. Shame, the companion of a bad conscience, had made its ap- 
pearance with advancing years; it had increased my natural shyness 
to such an extent that it made it unconquerable; and never, neither 
then nor later, have I been able to bring myself to make an indecent 
proposal, unless she, to whom I made it, in some measure forced me 
to it by her advances, even though I knew that she was by no means 
scrupulous, and felt almost certain of being taken at my word. 

My agitation became so strong that, being unable to satisfy my 
desires, I excited them by the most extravagant behaviour. I haunted 
dark alleys and hidden retreats, where I might be able to expose 


90 


THE GIRLS AT THE WELL : gl 


myself to women in the condition in which I should have liked ta 
have been in their company. What they saw was not an obscen¢ 
object, I never even thought of such a thing; it was a ridiculous 
object. The foolish pleasure I took in displaying it before their eyes 
cannot be described. There was only one step further necessary for 
me to take, in order to gain actual experience of the treatment I de- ~ 
sired, and I have no doubt that someone would have been bold 
enough to afford me the amusement, while passing by, if I had had 
the boldness to wait. This folly of mine led to a disaster almost as 
comical, but less agreeable for myself. 

One day, I took up my position at the bottom of a court where 
there was a well, from which the girls of the house were in the habit 
of fetching water. At this spot there was a slight descent which led- 
to some cellars by several entrances. In the dark I examined these 
underground passages, and finding them long and dark, I concluded 
that there was no outlet, and that, if I happened to be seen and sur- 
prised, I should find a safe hiding-place in them. Thus emboldened, 
I exhibited to the girls who came to the well a sight more laughable 
than seductive. The more modest pretended to see nothing; others 
began to laugh; others felt insulted and made a noise. I ran into my 
retreat; someone followed me. I heard a man’s voice, which I had 
not expected, and which alarmed me. I plunged underground at the 
risk of losing myself; the noise, the voices, the man’s voice, still fol- 
lowed me. I had always reckoned upon the darkness; I saw a light. 
I shuddered, and plunged further into the darkness. A wall stopped 
me, and, being unable to go any further, I was obliged to await my 
fate. In a moment I was seized by a tall man with a big moustache, 
a big hat, and a big sword, who was escorted by four or five old 
women, each armed with a broom-handle, amongst whom I per- 
ceived the little wretch who had discovered me, and who, no doubt, 
wanted to see me face to face. 

The man with the sword, seizing me by the arm, asked me 
roughly what I was doing there. It may be imagined that I had no 
answer ready. However, I recovered myself; and, in desperation, at 
this critical moment I invented a romantic excuse which proved 
successful. I begged him in a suppliant voice to have pity upon my 
age and condition; I said that I was a young stranger of good birth, 


92 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


whose brain was affected; that I had run away from home, because 
they wanted to shut me up; that I was lost if he betrayed me; but 
that, if he would let me go, I might some day be able to reward him 
for his kindness. Contrary to all expectation, my words and de- 
meanour took effect; the terrible man was touched by them, and, 
after administering a short reproof, he let me go quietly without 
questioning me further. From the demeanour of the girl and the 
old women, when they saw me go, I judged that the man whom I 
feared so much had been of gteat service to me, and that I should 
not have got off so easily with them alone. I heard them murmur 
something or other to which I hardly paid attention; for, provided 
that the man and his sword did not interfere, I felt confident, active 
and vigorous as I was, of escaping from them and their cudgels. 

A few days afterwards, while walking down a street with a young 
Abbé, my neighbour, I nearly ran into the man with the sword. He 
recognised me, and, imitating me mockingly, said: “I am a prince, 
I am a prince, and I am a coward; but don’t let his highness come 
back again!” He said no more, and I sneaked away, not venturing 
to look up, and thanking him in my heart for his discretion. I 
judged that the confounded old women had made him ashamed of 
his credulity. Anyhow, Piedmontese as he was, he was a good man, 
and I never think of him without a feeling of gratitude; for the 
story was so funny that, merely from the desire of creating a laugh, 
anyone else in his place would have shamed me. This adventure, 
without having the consequences which I dreaded, nevertheless 
made me careful for a long time. 

My stay with Madame de Vercellis had gained me some acquaint- 
ances, whom I cultivated in the hope that they might prove useful 
to me. Amongst others, I sometimes went to visit a Savoyard Abbé, 
named M. Gaime, tutor to the children of the Comte de Mellaréde. 
He was still young and went little into society, but was full of good 
sense, honour and intelligence, and one of the most honourable men 
that I have known. He was not the least use to me for the object 
which took me to him; he had not sufficient interest to get me a situ- 
ation; but I gained from him still more precious advantages, which 
have been of use to me all my life, lessons of healthy morality and 
principles of sound reason. In my alternating tastes and ideas, I had 


2 


M. GAIME, THE “SAVOYARD VICAR” 93 


always been too high or too low—Achilles or Thersites: now a hero, 
now a good-for-nothing. M. Gaime undertook to put me in my 
place, and to show me to myself in my true colours, without sparing 
or discouraging me. He spoke to me with due recognition of my 
natural talents, but added that he saw obstacles arising from them 
which would prevent me from making the best use of them; so that, 
in his opinion, they would be less useful to me as steps to fortune 
than as a means to enable me to do without it. He put before me a 
true picture of human life, of which I had only false ideas; he 
showed me how, in the midst of contrary fortune, the wise man can 
always strive after happiness and sail against the wind in order to 
reach it; that there is no true happiness without prudence, and that 
prudence belongs to all conditions of life. He damped my admira- 
tion for external grandeur, by proving that those who ruled others 
were neither happier nor wiser than the ruled. He told me one 
thing, which I have often remembered since then—that, if every 
man could read the hearts of all other men, there would be found 
more people willing to descend than to rise in life. This reflection, 
the truth of which is striking, and in which there is no exaggeration, 
has been of great service to me during the course of my life, by help- 
ing to make me quietly content with my position. He gave me the 
first true ideas of what was honourable, which my inflated genius 
had only grasped in its exaggerated forms. He made me feel that the 
enthusiasm of lofty virtues was rarely shown in society; that, in try- 
ing to climb too high, one was in danger of falling; that a continued 
round of trifling duties, always well performed, required no less 
effort than heroic actions; that from them a man gained more in the 
matter of honour and happiness; and that it was infinitely better to 
enjoy the esteem of one’s fellow men at all times, than their admira- 
tion occasionally. 

In order to define the duties of man, it was necessary to go back 
to their principles. Besides, the step which I had just taken, and of 
which my present condition was the result, led us to speak of re- 
ligion. It will be already imagined that the honourable M. Gaime is, 
in great part at least, the original of the “Savoyard Vicar.” Only, as 
prudence constrained him to speak with more reserve, he expressed 
himself less openly upon certain points; but, for the rest, his maxims, 


94 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


his sentiments, his opinions were the same, and, his advice to re- 
turn home not excepted, everything was just as I have since pub- 
licly represented it. Therefore, without enlarging further upon the 
conversations, the substance of which is accessible to everyone, I will 
only say that his lessons, the wisdom of which was at first without 
effect, became in my heart a germ of virtue and religion which was 
never choked, and which only needed the care of a dearer hand in 
order to bear fruit. 

Although, at the time, my conversion was by no means thorough, 
I nevertheless felt moved. Far from feeling tired of his conversa- 
tions, I was attracted to them by their clearness and simplicity, and, 
above all, by a certain warmth of heart, by which I felt they were 
pervaded. I have a loving disposition, and have always attached my- 
self to people less in proportion to the good they have done me than 
the good they have wished to do me; and in regard to the latter, my 
judgment rarely deceives me. I was also genuinely attached to M. 
Gaime; I was, so to speak, his second pupil, and for the moment this 
had for me the inestimable advantage of turning me aside from the 
inclination to vice, towards which my want of occupation drew me. 

One day, when I least expected it, I was sent for by the Comte 
de la Roque. The frequent visits I had made without being able to 
speak to him had tired me, and I gave up going to his house; I 
thought that he had forgotten me, or that he had retained a bad im- 
pression of me. I was mistaken. He had more than once witnessed 
the pleasure with which I fulfilled my duties to his aunt. He had 
even spoken of it to her, and spoke of it again to me, when I had 
forgotten it myself. He received me kindly, told me that, instead of 
putting me off with idle promises, he had tried to find a place for 
me; that he had been successful; that he was going to put me in the 
way of becoming something, that it was for me to do the rest; that 
the house to which he had procured me admission was influential 
and respected; that I needed no other patrons to help me on; and 
that, although treated at first as a simple servant, as I had lately 
been, I might rest assured that they would be quite ready not to 
leave me in that position if my disposition and behaviour gave them 
reason to think that I was fit for something better. The end of the 
conversation cruelly belied the brilliant hopes with which the com- 


HOUSEHOLD OF COMTE DE GOUVON 95 


mencement had inspired me. “What! always a lackey!” I said to 
myself, with a feeling gf bitter annoyance which confidence soon 
effaced. I felt too little adapted for such a position to fear that I 
should be left in it. 

He took me to the Comte de Gouvon, chief equerry to the Queen, 
and head of the illustrious house of Solar. The dignified air of this 
venerable old man made the kindness of his reception more touch- 
ing. He questioned me with interest, and I answered him with sin- 
cerity. He told the Comte de la Roque that I had pleasant features, 
which gave promise of intelligence; that it appeared to him that in 
fact I was not wanting in it, but that that was not everything, and 
that it was necessary to see what I was in other respects. Then, turn- 
ing to me, he said: “My child, in almost everything the beginning is 
difficult; in your case, however, it will not be so to any great extent. 
Be prudent, and endeavour to please everyone here; for the present, 
that is all you have to do; for the rest, be of good courage; you will 
be taken care of.” Immediately afterwards, he went over to the Mar- 
quise de Breil, his step-daughter, to whom he presented me, and 
then to the Abbé de Gouvon, his son. This beginning seemed to 
promise well. I was already experienced enough to know that lackeys 
were not received with so much ceremony. In fact, I was not treated 
like one. I took my meals at the steward’s table, and wore no livery; 
and when the Comte de Favria, an empty-headed young fool, 
wanted me to get up behind his carriage, his grandfather forbade 
my riding behind anyone’s carriage, or attending upon anyone out- 
side the house. However, I waited at table, and, in the house, per- 
formed almost the duties of a lackey; but I performed them to a cer- 
tain extent voluntarily, without being especially attached to anyone. 
With the exception of writing a few letters from dictation, and 
carving a few figures for the Comte de Favria, I was master of my 
time for almost the whole of the day. This test, which I did not per- 
ceive, was in truth very dangerous; it was not even very kind; for 
this long idleness might have led me to vices which I should not 
otherwise have contracted. 

But, happily, this did not occur. M. Gaime’s lessons had made an 
impression upon my heart, and I conceived such a liking for them 
that I sometimes stole out to go and listen to them again. I believe 


96 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


that those who saw me leave the house secretly had not the least sus- 
picion where I was going. Nothing could have been more sensible 
than the advice which he gave me concerning my behaviour. I com- 
menced admirably; I displayed assiduity, attention, and eagerness 
which charmed everybody. The Abbé prudently advised me to mod- 
erate my youthful zeal, for fear that it might gradually relax and 
that this might be noticed. “As you begin,” said he, “so will you be 
expected to behave as a rule; try to manage to do even more as time 
goes on, but beware of ever doing less.” 

As no one had taken much trouble to find out my poor talents, 
and as I was only credited with those which Nature had bestowed 
upon me, it did not appear to me, in spite of what M. Gouvon had 
told me, that anyone thought of making any use of me. Other things 
came in the way, and I was almost forgotten. The Marquis de Breil, 
the Comte de Gouvon’s son, was at the time ambassador at Vienna. 
Events happened at court which made themselves felt in the family, 
and for some weeks everyone was in a state of excitement which left 
little time to think of me. However, up to that time I had relaxed 
little of my zeal. One thing did me both good and harm; good, by 
keeping me away from any outside distractions; harm, by making 
me a little less attentive to my duties. 

Mademoiselle de Breil was a young lady of nearly my own age, 
well formed, tolerably good-looking, fresh-complexioned, with very 
dark hair, and, although a brunette, she had the expression of gentle- 
ness which is peculiar to fair women, and which my heart has never 
been able to resist. Her court dress, so becoming to young people, 
showed her beautiful figure to advantage, left her breast and shoul- 
ders free, and made her complexion still more dazzling by reason 
of the mourning which was worn at the time. It will be said that 
a servant has no business to notice such things; I was wrong, no 
doubt, but I noticed them all the same, and I was not the only one 
who did so. The maitre d'hôtel and the valets de chambre some- 
times spoke of them at table with a coarseness which made me suffer 
cruelly. My head was not, however, so turned that I fell in love 
without more ado. I did not forget myself; I kept myself in my 
place, and even my desires were not allowed too much freedom. I 
liked to see Mademoiselle de Breil, to hear her say a few words 


INCIDENT AT DINNER 97 


which showed her intelligence, good sense and modesty; my ambi- 
tion, limited to the pleagure of serving her, never went beyond my 
rights. At table I was always on the look out to assert them. If her 
footman left her chair for a moment, I was behind it immediately; 
otherwise I stood opposite to her; I looked in her eyes to see what 
she was going to ask for, and watched for the moment to change her 
plate. What would I not have done if she would only have deigned 
to give me some order, to look at me, to address a single word to me! 
but no! I had the mortification of being nothing to her; she did not 
even notice that I was there. However, on one occasion, when her 
brother, who sometimes spoke to me at table, addressed a somewhat 
uncivil remark to me, I gave him an answer, so neat and so well 
expressed, that she noticed it and turned her eyes upon me. This 
glance, rapid as it was, nevertheless enchanted me. The next day, 
the opportunity of winning a second glance presented itself, and I 
took advantage of it. A big dinner was given on that occasion, at 
which for the first time I saw the maitre d'hôtel, to my great aston- 
ishment, waiting with his hat on his head and a sword at his side. 
By chance the conversation turned upon the motto of the house of 
Solar, which was embroidered under the coat-of-arms, Tel fiert qui 
ne tue pas. As the Piedmontese are not, as a rule, masters of the 
French language, someone detected in this motto a mistake in 
spelling, and declared that there should be no ¢ in the word fiert. 

The old Comte de Gouvon was just going to answer, but, happen- 
ing to look at me, saw that I was smiling without venturing to say 
anything, and ordered me to speak. I thereupon said that I did not 
believe that the z was unnecessary; that fiert was an old French word, 
not derived from ferus, proud, threatening, but from ferit, he strikes, 
he wounds; so that the meaning of the motto appeared to me to be, 
not, Many a man threatens, but, Many a man strikes and does not 
kill. 

All the company looked first at me and then at themselves with- 
out saying a word. I had never seen such astonishment in my life. 
But what flattered me more was to see from Mademoiselle de Breil’s 
face that she was evidently much pleased. This disdainful young 
lady condescended to cast a second glance at me, which, at least, was 
equal to the first; then, turning her eyes towards her grandfather, 


98 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


she appeared to be waiting with a sort of impatience for the com- 
pliment which was my due, and which he, in fact, paid me so fully 
and completely, and with the appearance of such satisfaction, that 
the whole table hastened to join in the chorus. The moment was 
brief, but in every respect delicious. It was one of those moments, 
only too rare, which replace things in their natural order, and avenge 
depreciated merit for the insults of fortune. A few minutes after- 
wards, Mademoiselle de Breil, lifting her eyes to me again, asked 
me, in a timid and affable voice, to give her something to drink. I 
need not say that I did not keep her waiting; but, as I came near to 
. her, I trembled so violently that, having filled the glass too full, I 
spilt some of the water over her plate, and even over herself. Her 
brother asked me thoughtlessly why I was trembling so? This ques- 
tion did not serve to reassure me, and Mademoiselle de Breil blushed 
up to the whites of her eyes. 

Here ended the romance, in which it will be observed, as in the 
case of Madame Basile and during all the rest of my life, that I am 
not happy in the conclusion of my amours. In vain I paid special 
attention to Madame de Breil’s ante-room; I did not obtain another 
mark of attention from her daughter. She went in and out without 
looking at me, and, as for myself, I hardly ventured to cast eyes 
upon her. I was even so stupid and awkward that, one day, when 
she dropped her glove while passing, instead of darting upon this 
glove which I should have liked to cover with kisses, I did not dare 
to leave my place; and I allowed it to be picked up by a great lout of 
a valet, whom I would gladly have throttled. To complete my 
nervousness, I perceived that I had not the good fortune to please 
Madame de Breil. She not only gave me no orders, but never 
accepted my services; and on two occasions, finding me in her ante- 
room, she asked me coldly if I had not something to de. I was 
obliged to renounce this dear ante-room; at first I regretted it, but 
distractions intervened, and soon I thought no more of it. 

The kindness of her stepfather, who at last perceived that I was 
there, consoled me for the coldness of Madame de Breil. During 
the evening after the dinner of which I have spoken, he held a con- 
versation with me for half-an-hour, with which he appeared satisfied, 


and I was delighted. This good old man, although less gifted than 


s 


TUTORED BY ABBÉ DE GOUVON 99 


Madame de Vercellis, had more heart, and I got on better with him. 
He told me to attach myself to the Abbé de Gouvon, who had con- 
ceived a regard for me; that this regard, if I made good use of it, 
might be useful to me, and assist me in acquiring what I still lacked, 
in order to promote what they had in view for me. Next morning, I, 
hastened to the Abbé. He did not receive me as a servant, but made 
me sit down by the side of the fire, and, questioning me with the 
greatest gentleness, soon discovered that my education, which had 
been commenced in so many things, was complete in none. Finding, 
especially, that I knew very little Latin, he undertook to. teach me 
- more. It was arranged that I should go to him every morning, and 
I commenced the following day. Thus, by one of those curious coin- 
cidences, which will often be found in the course of my life, I was 
at once above and below my station—I was pupil and valet in the 
same house; and, while still a servant, I had a tutor of such noble 
birth that he ought to have been the tutor of none but kings’ sons. 
The Abbé de Gouvon was a younger son, destined by his family 
for a bishopric; and for this reason his studies had been pushed on 
more than usual in the case of children of rank. He had been sent to 
the University of Sienna, where he remained several years, and 
‘from which he had brought back a tolerably strong dose of crus- 
cantism,! so that he was almost the same at Turin as the Abbé de 
Dangeau” had formerly been at Paris. Distaste for theology had 
driven him to Jelles-lettres—a very common thing in Italy in the 
case of those who are training for the rank of a prelate. He had read 
the poets attentively, and wrote tolerable Latin and Italian verses. In 
a word, he had sufficient taste to form my own, and to introduce 
some order into the confused mass with which my head was stuffed, 
But, whether it was that my chatter had given him a false idea of 
my knowledge, or that he could not endure the tedium of the ele- 
ments of Latin, he put me far too high to begin with; and, no sooner 


1 Cruscantism is here synonymous with purism. The word cruscante, in Italian, 
denotes a man who affects to use only words authorised by the Accademia della 


Crusca of Florence. 
2 The Abbé de Dangeau was a member of the Académie française in the middle 
of the previous century, and was the author of grammatical treatises on the 


French language. 


100 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


had he made me translate a few fables of Phaedrus, than he plunged 
me into Virgil, of which I scarcely understood anything. It was my 
fate, as will be afterwards seen, often to begin Latin afresh and 
never to learn it. However. I worked zealously enough, and the 
Abbé lavished his attention upon me with a kindness of which I 
cannot think, even now, without ernotion. I spent a good part of the 
morning with him, both for my own instruction and for his service— 
not personal service, for that he never allowed me to perform, but to 
write from his dictation and to do copying; and my duties as secre- 
tary were more useful to me than my studies as pupil. In this manner 
I not only learnt Italian in its purity, but I imbibed a taste for litera- 
ture, and acquired some knowledge of good books which had been 
impossible at La Tribu’s, and which proved very serviceable to me 
afterwards when I began to work by myself. 

This was the period of my life when, without romantic projects, 
I might most reasonably have hoped for success. The Abbé, who 
was well satisfied with me, told everybody; and his father had con- 
ceived so special a regard for me that the Comte de Favria told me 
that he had spoken of me to the King. Even Madame de Breil had 
laid aside her contemptuous demeanour towards me. In short, I 
became a sort of favourite in the house, to the great jealousy of the 
other servants, who, seeing me honoured by receiving instruction 
from their master’s son, well understood that I was not long in- 
tended to remain one of themselves. 

As far as I was able to judge of the views entertained for me 
from a few words hastily dropped, upon which I only reflected 
later, it seems to me that the house of Solar, eager for ambassadorial, 
and possibly, in the future, ministerial offices, would have been very 
glad to educate in advance a trustworthy and talented person, who 
being entirely dependent upon it, might have been received into its 
confidence and have served it faithfully. This project of the Comte 
de Gouvon was noble, judicious, generous, and truly worthy of a 
great nobleman, beneficent and far-seeing; but, not to mention that, 
at the time, I did not see its entire range, it was too sensible for me 
to understand, and required too long a period of submission. My 
foolish ambition only looked for good fortune in the midst of adven- 
tures; and, as no woman had anything to do with it, this means of 


* 


M. BACLE IOI 


succeeding seemed to me slow, wearisome, and dull; whereas I ought 
to have considered it safe and more honourable, for the very reason 
that no women were mixed up in it, seeing that the kind of merit 
which they take under their protection was assuredly not so honour- 
able as that which I was supposed to possess. 

Everything was going on admirably. I had gained, almost taken 
by storm, the respect of all; the time of probation was over, and in 
the house I was looked upon generally as a young man of great 
promise who was not in his proper place, but whom everyone ex- 
pected to see promoted to it. But my place was not that which was 
generally assigned to me, and I was destined to reach it by a very 
different road. I now come to one of those characteristic traits which 
are peculiar ta me, and which I need only put before the reader 
without further discussion. 

Although there were several new converts like myself at Turin, 
I was not fond of them and had never wished to see any of them. 
But I had made the acquaintance of some Genevese who did not 
belong to them, amongst others, a M. Mussard, surnamed Tord- 
gueule, a miniature-painter and a sort of connection of mine. He 
found out that I was staying with the Comte de Gouvon and came 
to see me with another Genevese, named Bacle, whose companion I 
had been during my apprenticeship. This Bacle was a very amusing 
fellow, very lively, and full of witty sallies which his age rendered 
agreeable. Behold me, then, suddenly infatuated with M. Bacle to 
such a degree that I was unable to leave him! He intended soon to 
set out on his return to Geneva. What a loss for me! I realised its 
full extent. In order, at least, to make the best use of the time that 
remained to me, I never left his side, or: rather, he never left me, for 
I did not at first lose my head so entirely as to spend the day with 
him outside the hotel without leave; but soon, seeing that he oc- 
cupied my time entirely, they forbade him the house, and I became 
so enraged that, forgetting everything except my friend Bacle, I 
never went near the Abbé or the Count, and was never seen in the 
house. I paid no heed to reprimands. I was threatened with dismissal, 
and this proved my ruin; it showed me that it was possible not to let 
Bacle go unaccompanied. From this moment I saw no other pleasure, 
no other destiny, no other happiness, than that of making a similar 


102 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


journey, and I saw nothing but the unspeakable bliss of the journey, 
at the end of which, as a further happiness, I perceived Madame de 
Warens, but in the remote distance; for I never had the least idea 
of returning to Geneva. Mountains, meadows, woods, brooks, vil- 
lages, passed in never-ending succession before me with fresh 
charms; this happy journey appeared to absorb my whole life. I re- 
called with delight how charming this same journey had seemed to 
me on my way to Turin. What would it be like when, in addition 
to all the charm of independence, I should enjoy the further delight 
of the companionship of a friend of my own age and tastes, and of 
cheerful temper, without restraint, without duties, without check, 
without being obliged to go or remain anywhere unless it pleased us! 
I thought that a man must be a fool to sacrifice such good fortune to 
ambitious plans, slow, difficult, and uncertain of fulfilment, which, 
even supposing them to be some day realised, in spite of all their 
brilliancy, were not worth a quarter of an hour of real pleasure and 
youthful freedom. 

Full of this wise idea, I behaved in such a manner that I succeeded 
in getting myself dismissed, although, in truth, not without con- 
siderable difficulty. One evening, on my return to the house, the 
maitre d'hôtel gave me my dismissal from the Count. This was 
exactly what I wanted; for, well aware, in spite of myself, of the 
extravagance of my conduct, in order to excuse myself, I added to it 
injustice and ingratitude, thinking that, in this manner, I should 
be able to lay the blame upon others, and justify myself, as if I had 
been obliged to take measures for which I had been solely responsi- - 
ble. The Comte de Favria sent a message that I was to go and speak 
to him before I left on the following morning; and, as they saw that 
I had completely lost my head and was quite capable of doing noth- 
ing of the kind, the maitre d'hôtel informed me that, after I had 
done so, he would give me a sum of money which was intended for 
me, and which I certainly did not deserve; for, as it had not been 
intended that I should remain in the position of a valet, no wages 
had been fixed for me. 

The Comte de Favria, young and thoughtless as he was, on this 
occasion spoke to me most sensibly—I might almost say, most ten- 
derly—so earnestly and in such a flattering and touching manner 


= 
DISMISSED FROM THE HOUSEHOLD 103 


did he put before me his uncle’s sympathy and his grandfather’s 
intentions in regard tome. At last, after having represented to me, 
as strongly as he was able, all the advantages I was sacrificing in 
order to rush to my own destruction, he offered to make peace for 
me, on the sole condition that I would give up the little wretch who 
had led me astray. It was so evident that he did not say all this on his 
own responsibility, that, in spite of my foolish blindness, I was 
sensible of all the kindness of my old master and felt touched by it; 
but my beloved journey was too deeply impressed upon my imagina- 
tion for anything to be able to outweigh its attractions. I was quite 
out of my mind; I grew callous and hardened, stood on my dignity 
and answered haughtily that, as I had received my dismissal, I had 
accepted it; that there was no time now to recall it; and that, what- 
ever might happen to me during my life, I was determined not to 
allow myself to be dismissed twice from the same house. Then the 
young man, justly irritated, called me the names I deserved, took 
me by the shoulders and put me out of his room, and shut the door 
behind me. I went out in triumph, as if I had just gained a brilliant 
victory; and, for fear of being obliged to endure a second struggle, 
I was base enough to depart without thanking the Abbé for his 
kindness. 

To form an idea of the lengths to which my madness carried me 
at this moment, one ought to know to what a degree my heart is 
liable to become heated about the smallest trifles, and how violently 
it plunges into the idea of the object which attracts it, however idle 
and worthless this object may be. The oddest, the most childish, the 
most foolish plans flatter and support my favourite idea, in order to 
convince me of the reasonableness of devoting myself to it. Would 
it be believed that anyone, almost nineteen years of age, could place 
his hopes of support for the rest of his life on an empty bottle? Then 
listen. 

The Abbé de Gouvon, some weeks before, had made me a present 
of a pretty little heron-fountain,® with which I was delighted. As 
we were constantly playing with this artificial fountain, while talk- 
ing about our journey, the wise Bacle and myself thought that the 


3 Fontaine de héron: the proper name is fontaine de Hièron, called after its in- 


ventor, Hiero of Alexandria. 


104 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


one might prove very serviceable in lengthening the other. What 
could there be more curious in the world than a heron-fountain? 
This axiom was the foundation upon which we built the edifice of 
our future fortune. We need only assemble the peasants of each 
village round our fountain, and food and all kinds of good cheer 
would be showered upon us in so much greater abundance, as we 
were both convinced that provisions cost nothing to those who 
procure them, and that, if they do not stuff passers-by with them, 
it is pure ill-will on their part. Everywhere we expected weddings 
and festivities, reckoning that, without further expenditure than the 
breath of our lungs and the water of our fountain, it would pay our 
way through Piedmont, Savoy, France—in fact, all over the world. 
We made endless plans for our journey, and first took our way 
northwards, more for the pleasure of crossing the Alps than with 
the idea that we should be obliged to stop anywhere at last. 

[1731-1732.]—-Such was the plan with which I set out, abandon- 
ing without regret my protector, my tutor, my studies, my hopes and 
the expectation of a fortune almost assured, to begin the life of a 
regular vagabond. I said good-bye to the capital, to the court, to 
ambition, vanity, love, pretty women, and all the exciting adven- 
tures, the hope of which had brought me there the year before. I set 
out with my fountain and my friend Bacle, with a light purse but 
a heart filled with joy, thinking of nothing but the enjoyment of 
this reving happiness to which I had suddenly limited my brilliant 
projects. 

I made this extravagant journey quite as agreeably as I had ex- 
pected, but not exactly in the same way; for, although our fountain 
amused the landladies and their servants for a few moments at the 
inns, we had to pay just the same when we went out. But this 
troubled us little, and we only thought of seriously utilising this 
resource when our money failed us. An accident spared us the 
trouble, the fountain broke when we were near Bramant; and, in- 
deed, it was time, for we felt, without venturing to admit it, that we 
were beginning to get tired of it. This misfortune made us more 
cheerful than before, and we laughed greatly at our folly in for- 
getting that our clothes and boots would wear out, and in believing 
that we should be able to get new ones by making our fountain 


RETURN TO ANNECY 105 


play. We continued our journey as cheerfully as we had commenced 
it, but making our way g little more directly towards the goal which 
the gradual exhaustion of our resources made it necessary for us te 
reach. 

At Chambéri I became thoughtful, not on account of the folly 
which I had just committed—no man ever knew how te console 
himself so rapidly or so completely in regard to the past -but in 
regard to the reception which awaited me from Madame de Warens; 
for I looked upon her house quite as my own home. I had written to 
inform her of my entry into the Comte de Gouvon’s house; she knew 
on what footing I stood there, and, while congratulating me, she 
had given me some excellent advice as to the manner in which I 
ought to requite the kindness shown to me. She looked: upon my 
fortune as assured, unless I destroyed it by my own fault. What 
would she say when she saw me arrive? The possibility of her shut- 
ting the door upon me never occurred to me; but I was afraid of the 
sorrow which I was about to cause her; I was afraid of her re- 
proaches, harder for me to bear than the greatest misery. I resolved 
to endure all in silence, and to do all I could to calm her. In the 
world I saw no one but her; to live in disgrace with her was an 
impossibility! What troubled me most was my travelling com- 
panion, with whom I had no desire to burden her, and whom I was 
afraid I should find it no easy matter to get rid of. I prepared him 
for the separation by treating him somewhat coldly on the last day, 
The rascal understood me; he was more a madman than a fool. ] 
thought he would take my fickleness to heart; I was wrong; my 
friend Bacle took nothing to heart. Hardly had we set foot in 
Annecy, when he said to me: “Here you are at home,” embraced 
me, said good-bye, turned round on his heel, and disappeared. I have 
never heard of him since. Our acquaintance and friendship lasted 
about six months in all; their consequences will remain as long as 
I live. 

How my heart beat as I drew near to her house! My legs trembled 
beneath me; my eyes seemed covered with a veil; I saw nothing, I 
heard nothing, I should not have recognised anybody; I was obliged 
to stop several times to recover my breath and compose myself. Was 
it the fear of not obtaining the assistance I needed that troubled me 


106 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


so? does the fear of starvation cause such alarm to a person of my 
age? No! that I can declare with as much truth as pride; never, at 
any moment of my life, has self-interest or want been able to open 
or shut my heart. In the course of a life, uneven and memorable for 
its vicissitudes, often without shelter and bread, I have always looked 
with the same eye upon wealth and poverty. In time of need I could 
have begged or stolen like anybody else, but never distressed myself 
in consequence of being reduced to do so. Few men have sighed so 
much as I, few have shed so many tears in their life; but never has 
poverty or the fear of being reduced to it made me utter a sigh or 
shed a tear. My soul, proof against fortune, has never known true 
blessings or misfortunes other than those which do not depend upon 
her; and, when I am in want of nothing that is needful, that is 
just the time when I feel myself the unhappiest of mortals. 

No sooner had I shown myself to Madame de Warens, than her 
manner reassured me. I trembled at the first sound of her voice. I 
threw myself at her feet, and, in transports of liveliest joy, I fastened 
my lips upon her hand. I do not know whether she had heard any 
news of me, but her face showed little surprise and no displeasure. 
“Poor little one,” she said, in a caressing voice, “here you are again 
then? I knew you were too young for the journey. I am glad, at any 
rate, that it has not turned out so badly as I had feared.” Then she 
made me tell my story, which was not a long one, and which I faith- 
fully related, suppressing a few details, but otherwise neither spar- 
ing nor excusing myself. 

It was a question where I was to sleep. She consulted her maid. I 
hardly ventured to breathe during the discussion; but when I heard 
that I was to sleep in the house I could scarcely contain myself, and 
I saw my little bundle carried into the room appointed for me with 
much the same feelings as St. Preux saw his chaise taken into 
Madame de Wolmar’s* coach-house. To increase my delight, I 
learned that this favour was not to be a passing one, and, at the 
moment when I was believed to be thinking of something quite 
different, I heard her say: “Let them say what they like; since Provi- 
dence sends him back to me, I am resolved not to abandon him.” 

Thus I was at last settled in her house. This settlement, however, 


“Two of the characters in the “New Héloise.” 


s 


LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP 107 


was not as yet that from which J date the happy days of my life, but 
it served to pave the way for it. Although this sensibility of the 
heart, which makes us truly enjoy ourselves, is the work of Nature, 
and, perhaps, a product of the organisation, it requires certain 
situations to develop it. Without such developing causes, a man 
born with powerful susceptibilities would feel nothing, and would, 
perhaps, die without ever having known his real self. Up to that 
time, it had been so, or nearly so, with me: and I should, perhaps, 
have always remained such, if I had never known Madame de 
Warens, or if, having known her, I had not lived with her long 
enough to contract the sweet habit of affectionate feelings with 
which she inspired me. I venture to say that he who only feels love 
does not feel what is sweetest in life. I know another feeling, less 
impetuous, perhaps, but a thousand times more delightful, which 
is sometimes combined with love, but is frequently separated from 
it. This feeling is not simple friendship either; it is more voluptuous, 
more tender. I do not believe that it can be felt for a person of the 
same sex; at any rate, I was a friend, if ever a man was, and I never 
felt it in the presence of any of my friends. This is somewhat ob- 
scure, but it will become clear in the sequel; feelings can only be 
satisfactorily described by their effects. 

Madame de Warens lived in an old house, large enough to con- 
tain a pretty spare room, which she made her drawing-room; in this 
I was lodged. It led into the passage of which I have already spoken, 
where our first interview took place; on the other side of the brook 
and the gardens the country could be seen. This view was not a 
matter of indifference to the youthful occupant. Since I had lived at 
Bossey, it was the first time that I had seen anything green before 
my windows. Always surrounded by walls, I had nothing before 
my eyes except the roofs of houses or the dull grey of the streets. 
How vividly I felt the charm of novelty, which strengthened my 
inclination to tender emotions! I looked upon this enchanting land- 
scape as another of my dear patroness’s kindnesses; it seemed te 
me that she had put everything there on purpose for me; I placed 
myself in it by her side full of peaceful contentment; I saw her 
everywhere, in the midst of the flowers and verdure; her charms and 
those of spring melted together insensibly before my eyes. My heart, 


108 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


until then restricted, expanded in this unconfined space, and my 
sighs found freer vent amongst the fruit-gardens. 

I did not find with Madame de Warens the magnificence which 
I had seen at Turin, but I found cleanliness, neatness, and a patri- 
archal abundance, with which pomp and pride are never combined. 
She had little plate, no porcelain, no game in the larder, no foreign 
wines in the cellar; but both kitchen and cellar were sufficiently well 
furnished for anybody, and in Delft-ware cups she provided excel- 
lent coffee. All who came to visit her were invited to dine with her 
or in her house; no workman, messenger, or passer-by left without 
eating or drinking. Her servants consisted of a rather pretty maid 
from Fribourg, named Merceret; a valet from her own country, 
named Claude Anet, of whom more will be said later; a cook, and 
two hired sedan-chair carriers for the rare occasions when she went 

` to pay a visit. That was a great deal for a yearly pension of two 
thousand livres; nevertheless, her little income, well managed, might 
have been sufficient in a country where the soil is very good and 
money very scarce. Unfortunately, economy was never her favourite 
virtue; she got into debt and paid what she could; the money went 
in all directions, and things went on as best they could. 

The manner in which her establishment was arranged was just 
such as I should have chosen myself; it may be imagined that I was 
only too pleased to take advantage of it. What was less pleasant to 
me was to be obliged to remain a long time at table. She could 
scarcely endure the first smell of the soup and other dishes; the smell 
almost made her faint, and this feeling of aversion lasted some 
time. By degrees she recovered herself, talked, and ate nothing. It 
was at least half-an-hour before she tried to eat a morsel. I could 
have eaten three dinners in the time, and I had always finished my 
meal long before she had begun. For the sake of keeping her com- 
pany, I used to begin again; in this manner I ate for two, and never 
felt any the worse for it. In a word, I abandoned myself the more 
freely to the sweet sensation of comfort, which I felt when with 
her, as this comfort which I enjoyed was free from all uneasiness as 
to the means of preserving it. Not being yet admitted with com- 
plete confidence into the state of her affairs, I imagined that the 
present state of things would always continue. I found the same 


. 


“MAMMA” AND “LITTLE ONE” 104. 


comfort again in her house in after times; but, being better in- 
formed as to her real pgsition, and seeing that she drew upon her 
income in advance, I never enjoyed it with the same content. Look- 
ing ahead always spoils my enjoyment. It is not the least use to me 
to foresee the future; I have never known how to avoid it. 

From the first day, the most complete intimacy was established 
between us, which has continued during the rest of her life. “Little 
one” was my name; “Mamma” was hers; and we always remained 
“Little one” and “Mamma,” even when advancing years had almost 
obliterated the difference between us. I find that these two names 
give a wonderfully good idea of the tone of our intercourse, of the 
simplicity of our manners, and, above all, of the mutual relation of 
our hearts. For me she was the tenderest of mothers, who never 
sought her own pleasure, but always what was best for me; and if 
sensuality entered at all into her attachment for me, it did not alter 
its character, but only rendered it more enchanting, and intoxicated 
me with the delight of having a young and pretty mamma whom 
it was delightful to me to caress—I say caress in the strictest sense of 
the word, for it never occurred to her to be sparing of kisses and 
the tenderest caresses of a mother, and it certainly never entered 
my mind to abuse them. It will be objected that, in the end, we had 
relations of a different character; I admit it, but I must wait a little 
—I cannot say all at once. 

The moment of our first meeting was the only really passionate 
moment which she has ever made ine feel; yet this moment was the 
work of surprise. My looks never ventured to peep indiscreetly be- 
neath her neckerchief, although an ill-concealed embonpoint might 
very well have attracted them. I felt no transports or desires in her 
presence. I was in a state of charming repose and enjoyment, with- 
out knowing in what the enjoyment consisted. I could have spent 
all my life in this manner, and eternity as well, without a moment's 
weariness. She is the only person with whom I have never felt that 
dearth of conversation which makes the obligation of keeping it up 
a martyrdom. Our #éte-d-tétes were not so much conversations as 
an inexhaustible gossip, which never came to an end unless it was 
interrupted. There was no need to invite me to talk; it was far more 
necessary to impose silence upon me. From constantly thinking over 


IIO THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


her plans, she often fell into a reverie. Well, then I let her alone; I 
held my tongue, I looked at her, and was the happiest of men. I had 
still a singular fancy. Without claiming the favour of a téte-a-téte, I 
incessantly sought one; and enjoyed it with a passion which de- 
generated into madness when troublesome visitors disturbed it. As 
soon as anyone came—whether man or woman, it did not matter 
which—I left the room grumbling, being unable to remain with her 
in the presence of a third party. I counted the minutes in her ante- 
room, cursing these eternal visitors a thousand times, and unable 
to imagine how it was that they had so much, because I myself had 
still more, to say. 

I only felt the full strength of my attachment when I no longer 
saw her. When I saw her, I was only content; but, during her ab- 
sence, my restlessness became painful. The need of living with her 
caused me outbreaks of tenderness which often ended in tears. I 
shall never forget how, on the day of a great festival, while she was 
at vespers, I went for a walk outside the town, my heart full of her 
image and a burning desire to spend my life with her. I had sense 
enough to see that at present this was impossible, and that the hap- 
piness which I enjoyed so deeply could only be short. This gave to 
my reflections a tinge of melancholy, about which, however, there 
was nothing gloomy, and which was tempered by flattering hopes. 
The sound of the bells, which always singularly affects me, the 
song of the birds, the beauty of the daylight, the enchanting land- 
scape, the scattered country dwellings in which my fancy placed 
our common home—all these produced upon me an impressicn so 
vivid, tender, melancholy and touching, that I saw myself trans- 
ported, as it were, in ecstasy, into that happy time and place, wherein 
my heart, possessing all the happiness it could desire, tasted it with 
inexpressible rapture, without even a thought of sensual pleasure. I 
never remember to have plunged into the future with greater force 
and illusion than on that occasion; and what has struck me most in 
the recollection of this dream after it had been realised, is that I have 
found things again exactly as I had imagined them. If ever the 
dream of a man awake resembled a prophetic vision, it was assuredly 
that dream of mine. I was only deceived in the imaginary duration; 
for the days, the years, and our whole life were spent in serene and 


ATTACHMENT TO MADAME DE WARENS IIT 


undisturbed tranquillity, whereas in reality it lasted only for a 
moment. Alas! my most fasting happiness belongs to a dream, the 
fulfilment of which was almost immediately followed by the 
awakening. 

I should never have done, if I were to enter into the details of all 
the follies which the remembrance of this dear mamma caused me 
to commit when I was no longer in her presence. How often have 
I kissed my bed, since she had slept in it; my curtains, all the furni- 
ture of my room, since they belonged to her, and her beautiful hand 
had touched them; even the floor, on which I prostrated myself, 
since she had walked upon it! Sometimes, even in her presence, I 
was guilty of extravagances, which only the most violent love seemed 
capable of inspiring. At table one day, just when she had put a piece 
of food into her mouth, I exclaimed that I saw a hair in it; she put 
back the morsel on her plate, and I eagerly seized and swallowed it. 
In a word, between myself and the most passionate lover there was 
only one, but that an essential, point of distinction, which makes 
my condition almost unintelligible and inconceivable. 

I had returned from Italy not quite the same as I had entered it, 
but as, perhaps, no one of my age had ever returned from it. I had 
brought back, not my mental and moral, but my bodily virginity. 
I had felt the progress of years; my restless temperament had at last 
made itself felt, and its first outbreak, quite involuntary, had caused 
me alarm about my health in a manner which shows better than 
anything else the innocence in which I had lived up to that time. 
Soon reassured, I learned that dangerous means of assisting it, 
which cheats Nature and saves up for young men of my tempera- 
ment many forms of excess at the expense of their health, strength, 
and, sometimes, of their life. This vice, which shame and timidity 
find so convenient, possesses, besides a great attraction for lively 
imaginations—that of being able to dispose of the whole sex as they 
desire, and to make the beauty which tempts them minister to their 
pleasures, without being obliged to obtain its consent. Seduced by 
this fatal advantage, I did my best to destroy the good constitution 
which Nature had restored to me, and which I had allowed time to 
strengthen itself. Add to this habit the circumstances of my position, 
living as I was with a beautiful woman, caressing her image in the 


II2 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


bottom of my heart, seeing her continually throughout the day, 
surrounded in the evening by objects which reminded me of her, 
sleeping in the bed in which I knew she had slept! What causes for 
excitement! Many a reader, who reflects upon them, no doubt al- 
ready considers me as half-dead! Quite the contrary; that which 
ought to have destroyed me was just the thing that saved me, at 
least for 2 time. Intoxicated with the charm of living with her, with 
the ardent desire of spending my life with her, I always saw in her, 
whether she were absent or present, a tender mother, a beloved 
sister, a delightful friend, and nothing more. I saw her always thus, 
always the same, and I never saw anyone but her. Her image, ever 
present to iny heart, left room for no other; she was for me the only 
woman in the world; and the extreme sweetness of the feelings with 
which she inspired me did not allow my senses time to awake for 
others, and protected me against her and all her sex. In a word, I was 
chaste, because I loved her. Considering these results, which I can 
only imperfectly describe, let him who can say what was the nature 
of my attachment for her. For myself, all that I can say about it is 
that, if it already seems to be very extraordinary, in the sequel it 
will appear far more so. 

I spent my time in the pleasantest manner possible, although 
occupied with things which were least attractive to me. There were 
plans to draw up, fair copies of accounts to make, recipes to tran- 
scribe, herbs to pick out, drugs to pound, stills to werk. In the midst 
of all this, chance travellers, beggars, and visitors of all classes kept 
coming in crowds; we were obliged to entertain at one and the same 
time a soldier, an apothecary, a canon, a fine lady, and a lay brother. 
I cursed, I grumbled, I swore, I wished the whole accursed gang at 
the devil. Madame de Warens, who took it all good-humouredly, 
laughed at my rage till she cried; and what made her laugh still 
more was to see me the more furious, as I was unable to prevent even 
myself from laughing. These brief interruptions, during which I 
had the pleasure of grumbling, were delightful, and, if another un- 
welcome visitor arrived during the dispute, she knew how to ex- 
tract amusement from it by maliciously prolonging his visit, casting 
glances at me for which I should have liked to beat her. She could 
hardly keep from bursting out laughing, when she saw me, re- 


= 


LIFE AT ANNECY 113 


strained and kept in check by politeness, glaring at her like one 
possessed, while in the kottom of my heart, and even in spite of my- 
self, I found it all very amusing. 

All this, without being pleasant in itself, nevertheless amused me, 
because it formed part of a kind of existence which was delightful 
to me. Of all that was going on around me, of all that I was obliged 
to do, nothing suited my taste, but everything suited my heart. I 
believe that I should have come to like medicine, had not my natural 
distaste for it caused those comical scenes which delighted us so . 
much; this is, perhaps, the first time that this art has produced a 
similar effect. I pretended to be able to recognise a medical work by 
its smell, and the amusing thing is that I was rarely mistaken. She 
made me taste the most horrible drugs. It was no use to run away 
or try to defend myself; in spite of my resistance and wry faces, in 
spite of myself and my teeth, when I saw her pretty fingers, all 
besmeared, near my mouth, I was obliged at last to open it and suck 
them. When all her little household was assembled in the same 
room, to hear us running about and shrieking with laughter, any- 
one would have thought we were performing some farce, instead 
of compounding opiates and elixirs. 

My time, however, was not entirely occupied with these fooleries, 
In the room which I occupied I had found a few books: the “Spec- 
tator,” “Puffendorf,” “St. Evremond,” the “Henriade.” Although 
I no longer had my old mania for reading, I read a little when I had 
nothing else to do. The “Spectator,” especially, pleased me and 
proved beneficial to me. The Abbé de Gouvon had taught me to 
read less greedily and with more reflection; and, accordingly, my 
reading did me more good. I accustomed myself to think about the 
language and style, and the elegance of the constructions; I practised 
myself in distinguishing pure French from my provincial idioms. 
For instance, I learned to correct an orthographical error, of which 
I, in common with all us Genevese, was guilty, by the two following 
lines of the “Henriade”: 


“Soit qu’un ancien respect pour le sang de leurs maitres 
Parlât encore pour lui dans le cceur de ces traitres.” 


I was struck by this word parldt, which taught me that the third 


I14 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


person subjunctive must end in #, whereas formerly I wrote and 
pronounced parla, as if it had been the perfect indicative. ; 

Sometimes I talked with mamma about my reading, sometimes 
I read to her, which afforded me great pleasure. I tried to read well, 
and this, also, was useful to me. I have mentioned that she had a 
cultivated mind, and just at that time it was in its prime. Several 
men of letters had shown themselves eager to win her favour and 
had taught her to distinguish the productions of genius. Her taste, 
if I may say so, smacked of Protestantism; she talked only of Bayle, 
and thought highly of St. Evremond, who had died some time ago 
in France. But this did not hinder her from an acquaintance with 
good literature, and she discussed it intelligently. She had been 
brought up in select society and had come to Savoy while still young; 
in the charming society of the nobility of this country she had lost 
the affected manners of the Vaud country, where women consider 
attempts at wit to be good style, and can only speak in epigrams. 

Although she had only a passing acquaintance with the Court, 
she had cast a rapid glance at it, which had been sufficient to give 
her a knowledge of it. She always retained her friends there, and, 
in spite of secret jealousies, in spite of the disapproval excited by 
her conduct and her debts, she never lost her pension. She possessed 
knowledge of the world and that capacity of reflection which makes 
this knowledge useful. Worldly matters formed the chief topic of 
her conversations, and, considering my romantic ideas, this was 
exactly the kind of instruction of which I stood most in need. We 
vead La Bruyére together; he pleased her better than La Rochefou- 
cauld, a gloomy and comfortless author, especially for the young, 
who do not care to see men as they are. When she moralised, she 
sometimes lost herself in lengthy discourses; but, by kissing her 
mouth or hands from time to time, I managed to endure it, and her 
prolixity ceased to weary me. 

This life was too delightful to be able to last. I felt this, and my 
distress at the thought of seeing it come to an end was the only 
thing that disturbed my enjoyment of it. In the midst of her playful- 
ness, mamma studied, observed, and questioned me, and sketched 
out a number of plans for my advancement, which I could well 


M. D’AUBONNE 115 


have dispensed with. Happily, it was not enough to know my 
inclinations, my tastes, my abilities; it was necessary to find or to 
create opportunities for employing them profitably, and this was 
not the work of a day. The prejudices which the poor woman had 
conceived in favour of my talents, served to defer the moment of - 
putting them to the proof, by making her more particular in regard 
to the choice of means. In short, everything went on in accordance 
with my wishes, thanks to her good opinion of me; but, sooner or 
later, this life was bound to come to an end, and, from that moment, 
good-bye to all hope of tranquillity. One of her relations, a M. 
d’Aubonne, came to pay her a visit. He was a man of considerable 
endowments, an intriguer, and a born schemer like herself, but too 
clever to allow his plans to ruin him—a sort of adventurer. He had 
just proposed to the Cardinal de Fleury a very intricate plan of a 
lottery, which had not met with approval. He was now going to lay 
it before the Court of Turin, where it was adopted and carried out. 
He remained some time at Annecy where he fell in love with the 
wife of the Intendant, a very amiable person much to my taste, and 
the only one whom I cared to see at mamma’s house. M. d’Aubonne 
saw me; his relative spoke of me to him; he undertook to examine 
me, to see what I was fit for, and, if he found anything in me, to 
endeavour to get me a place. 

Madame de Warens sent me to him on two or three successive 
mornings, on the pretence of executing some commission for her, 
and without giving me any intimation of the truth. He succeeded 
admirably in making me talk, became quite intimate with me, put 
me at my ease as far as possible, spoke to me about matters of no 
importance and all kinds of subjects—all without appearing to 
watch me, without the least formality, as if he found pleasure in 
my society and desired to converse with me without restraint. I was 
enchanted with him. The result of his observations was that, in 
spite of my attractive appearance and animated features, I was, if 
not quite silly, a lad of little intelligence, without any ideas, almost 
without knowledge—in a word, of very limited capacities in every 
respect; and that the highest position to which I had any right to 
aspire was that of some day becoming a village curé. Such was the 


£16 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


account of me which he gave to Madame de Warens. This was the 
second or the third time that I was thus judged; it was not the last, 
and M. Masseron’s opinion has often been confirmed. 

The reason of the judgments passed upon me is too closely con- 
nected with my character not to require some explanation; for to 
speak honestly, it will be readily understood that I cannot subscribe 
to them unreservedly, and that, with all possible impartiality, in 
spite of all that MM. Masseron, d’Aubonne, and many others may 
have said, I cannot take them at their word. 

Two things, almost incompatible, are united in me in a manner 
which I am unable to understand: a very ardent temperament, 
lively and tumultuous passions, and, at the same time, slowly 
developed and confused ideas, which never present themselves until 
it is too late. One might say that my heart and my mind do not 
belong to the same person. Feeling takes possession of my soul more 
rapidly than a flash of lightning; but, instead of illuminating, in- 
flames and dazzles me. I feel everything and see nothing. I am 
carried away by my passions, but stupid; in order to think, I must 
be cool. The astonishing thing is that, notwithstanding, I exhibit 
tolerably sound judgment, penetration, even finesse, if I am not 
hurried; with sufficient leisure I can compose excellent impromptus; 
but I have never said or done anything worthy of notice on the spur 
of the moment. I could carry on a very clever conversation through 
the post, as the Spaniards are said to carry on a game of chess. When 
I read of that Duke of Savoy, who turned round on his journey, in 
order to cry, “At your throat, Parisian huckster,” I said, “There 
you have myself!” 

This sluggishness of thought, combined with such liveliness of 
feeling, not only enters into my conversation, but I feel it even when 
alone and at work. My ideas arrange themselves in my head with 
almost incredible difficulty; they circulate in it with uncertain 
sound, and ferment till they excite and heat me, and make my heart 
beat fast; and, in the midst of this excitement, I see nothing clearly 
and am unable to write a single word—I am obliged to wait. Im- 
perceptibly this great agitation subsides, the confusion clears up, 
everything takes its proper place, but slowly, and only after a period 
of long and confused agitation, Have you ever been to the opera in 


HIS DIFFICULTY IN WRITING T7 


Italy? During the changes of scene, there prevails upon the stage of 
those vast theatres an unpleasant disorder which continues for some 
time: all the decorations are mixed up, things are pulled about in 
different directions in a manner most painful to see, which produces 
the impression that everything must be upset. Gradually, however, 
complete order is restored, nothing is wanting, and one is quite’ 
astounded to see an enchanting spectacle succeed this long con- 
tinued disorder. This mode of procedure is almost the same as that 
which takes place in my brain when I attempt to write. If I had 
known how to wait first and then to restore in all their beauty the 
things represented therein, few writers would have surpassed me. 

Hence comes the extreme difficulty which I find in writing. My 
manuscripts, scratched, smeared, muddled and almost illegible, 
bear witness to the trouble they have cost me. There is not one of 
them which I have not been obliged to copy four or five times before 
I could give it to the printer. I have never been able to produce any- 
thing, pen in hand, in front of my table and paper; it is during a 
walk, in the midst of rocks and forests, at night in my bed while 
lying awake, that I write in my brain; one may judge how slowly, 
especially in the case of a man utterly without verbal memory and 
who has never been able to learn six lines by heart in his life. Many 
of my periods have been turned and turned again five or six nights 
in my head before they were fit to be set down on paper. This, also, 
is the reason why I succeed better in works which require labour 
‘than in those which require to be written with a certain lightness of 
style, such as letters—a style of which I have never been able to 
properly catch the tone, so that such occupation is a perfect torture 
to me. I cannot write a letter on the most trifling subject, which does 
not cost me hours of fatigue; or, if I try to write down immediately 
what occurs to me, I know neither how to. begin nor how to end; 
my letter is a long and confused mass of verbosity, and, when it is 
read, my meaning is difficult to make out. 

Not only is it painful for me to put my ideas into shape: I also 
‘find a difficulty in grasping them. I have studied mankind, and 
believe that I any a fairly shrewd observer; nevertheless, I cannot see 
clearly anything of all ‘that I perceive; I only see-clearly what I re- 

“imember, and only show intelligence in my recollections. Of all 


118 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


that is said, of all that is done, of all that goes on in my presence, I 
feel nothing, I see through nothing. The outward sign is the only 
thing that strikes me. But, later, all comes back to me: I recall place, 
time, manner, look, gesture, and circumstance: nothing escapes me. 
Then, from what people have said or done, I discover what they 
have thought; and I am rarely mistaken. 

If, when alone with myself, I am so little master of my intellectual 
capacity, it may be imagined what I must be in conversation, when, 
in order to speak to the purpose, it is necessary to think of a thousand 
things at the same time and at once. The mere idea of all the usages 
of society—which it is so necessary to observe, and of which I am 
certain to forget one or other—is enough to frighten me. I do not 
even understand how anyone can dare to speak at all in society, 
where, at every word, it is essential to pass in review all those who 
are present; it is essential to be acquainted with all their characters 
and histories, in order to make sure of saying nothing which can 
give offence. In this respect, those who live in the world have a great 
advantage; since they know better than others what ought not to be 
spoken about, they are more confident of what they say; and yet, 
even they frequently let fall awkward and ill-timed remarks. How 
must it fare with one who drops into their midst as it were from the 
clouds! It is almost impossible for him to speak for a minute with 
impunity. In 2 téte-d-téte, there is another inconvenience which I 
find even worse: the necessity of talking perpetually. When one is 
spoken to, one is obliged to answer, and, when silence ensues, to 
take up the conversation again. This unbearable constraint would 
alone have disgusted me with society. I find no compulsion more 
terrible than the obligation of speaking continuously and on the 
spur of the moment. I do not know whether this has anything to 
do with my mortal aversion to constraint of any kind; but to be 
absolutely obliged to speak is enough to make me infallibly talk 
nonsense. 

A still more fatal defect of mine is that, instead of being able to 
hold my tongue when I have nothing to say, that is just the time 
when, in order to discharge my debt sooner, I am mad to speak. I 
hasten to stammer out a few words destitute of ideas, and am only 
too happy when they have no meaning at all. When attempting to 


HIS AWKWARDNESS IN SOCIETY IIQ 


overcome or conceal my stupidity, I rarely fail to show it. Out of 
numerous instances that F could cite, I will select one which does 
not belong to my youthful days, but to a period of my life when, 
having lived several years in society, I should have caught its easy 
tone, if the thing had been possible. One evening, I was sitting be- 
tween two great ladies and a gentleman, whose name I may men- 
tion—it was the Duc de Gontaut. There was no one else in the room, 
and I was doing my utmost to supply a few words—heaven knows 
what!—during a conversation between four persons, three of whom 
certainly had no need of my supplementary efforts. The mistress of 
the house ordered an opiate to be brought to her, which she took 
twice a day to ease her stomach. The other lady, seeing the wry face 
she made, said, laughingly: “Is it M. Tronchin’s opiate?” “I don’t 
think so,” the first replied in the same tone. “I think it is little bet- 
ter,” politely added the witty Rousseau. Everyone was amazed; not 
a word was uttered, not a smile was seen, and immediately after- 
wards the conversation took a different turn. In the presence of 
anyone else this awkward remark might have been only amusing, 
but, addressed to a woman who was too amiable not to have made 
herself somewhat talked about, and whom I most certainly had no | 
desire to offend, it was terrible; and I believe that the two who 
heard it, both the lady and the gentleman, could scarcely refrain 
from bursting out into a laugh. Such are the flashes of genius which 
escape me when I attempt to speak without having anything to say. 
I shall not easily forget that particular instance, for not only is it 
in itself worthy of record, but I cannot help thinking that it has 
produced results which recall it to my mind only too often. 

I think this is enough to make it intelligible how, although not 
a fool, I have often been taken for one, even by people who were 
in a position to judge correctly; what aggravates my misfortune is 
the fact that my eyes and features give promise of something better, 
and the failure of this hope makes my stupidity more startling to 
others. This detailed explanation, to which a special circumstance 
has led me, is not without its use in reference to what follows. It con- 
tains the solution of many extraordinary things which I have done, 
and which are attributed to an unsociable disposition which I by no 
means possess. I should be as fond of society as anyone else, if I was 


120 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


not sure of appearing in it, not only to my own disadvantage, but 
quite a different person from what I really am. My resolution to 
write and live in seclusion, is exactly that which suits me. If I had 
been present, my powers would never have been known, or even 
suspected; this actually happened in the case of Madame Dupin, 
although she was a woman of intelligence, and although I lived for 
several years in her house. Since that time, she has often told me so 
herself. However, this rule is liable to certain exceptions, to which 
I will subsequently return. 

The extent of my capacities having thus been settled, and the 
position for which I was adapted marked out for the second time, 
the only question remaining was how to fit me for fulfilling my 
vocation. The difficulty was that I had not studied sufficiently, and 
did not even know enough Latin to be a priest. Madame de Warens 
thought of having me taught for some time at the seminary. She 
spoke of it to the Superior, a Lazarist, named M. Gros, a good 
little man, lean and grey-haired, who had almost lost the sight of 
one eye, and who was the most intelligent and the least pedantic 
Lazarist that I have ever known—although, to tell the truth, that 
is not saying much. 

He came sometimes to see mamma, who welcomed him, petted 
him, teased him, and sometimes made him lace her stays, a service 
which he was only too glad to perform. While he was thus engaged, 
she ran from one side of the room tothe other, doing first one 
thing and then another. Dragged along by her staylace, the Superior 
followed, grumbling and crying out every minute: “Madame, do 
please keep still!” It was an extremely attractive picture! 

M. Gros entered heartily into mamma’s plan. He was satisfied 
vith a very modest fee for my board, and undertook to teach me. 
‘Nothing else was required except the consent of the bishop, who 
iiot alone granted it, but offered to pay the fee. He also gave me 
permission to wear my lay dress until the degree of success which 
might be hoped for could be estimated by a trial. 

What a change! I was obliged to submit. I went to the seminary 
as I should have gone to execution. A seminary is a melancholy 
abode, especially for one who has just left the house of an amiable 


5 A monk of the order of St. Lazare. 


MUSIC AND LATIN I2I 


woman. I took with me only a single book, which I had begged 
mamma to lend me, ang which was a great consolation to me. No 
one would guess what kind of book it was; it was a book of music. 
Amongst the accomplishments which she had cultivated, music had 
not been forgotten. She had a good voice, sang fairly well, and 
played the piano a little; she had been good enough to give me some 
lessons in singing, in which she was obliged to begin at the very 
beginning, for I hardly knew the music of our psalms. Eight or ten 
lessons, constantly interrupted, and given me by a woman, were not 
enough to teach me a quarter of the notes, much less to enable me to 
sing the scales. However, I had such a passion for the art that I 
determined to try to practise by myself. The volume which I took 
with me was not even one of the easiest; it was the cantatas of 
Clérambault. The doggedness of my application may be imagined, 
when I mention that, without any knowledge of transposition or 
quantity, I succeeded in deciphering and singing without a mistake 
the first air and recitative of the cantata Alpheus and Arethusa; al- 
though, certainly, this air is so correctly set, that it is only necessary 
to recite the verses in proper time in order to catch the air. 

At the seminary there was a confounded Lazarist, who took 
charge of me, and disgusted me with the Latin which he wanted 
to teach me. He had sleek, greasy, black hair, a gingerbread face, 
a voice like a buffalo, the look of a night-owl and a beard like boar’s 
bristles; his smile was sardonic, his limbs moved like those of a 
jointed doll. I have forgotten his hateful name, but his frightful and 
mawkish face has remained in my memory, and I can scarcely think 
of it without a shudder. I fancy I still meet him in the corridors, 
politely holding out his dirty square cap, as an invitation to enter 
his room, which was more dreadful to me than a prison cell. Imag- 
ine the impression such a teacher produced by contrast upon the 
pupil of a court Abbé. 

If I had remained two months at the mercy of this monster, I am 
- convinced that I should have lost my reason. But good M. Gros, whe 
perceived that I was depressed, that I ate nothing and grew thin, 
guessed the reason of my grief; it was not hard to do so! He rescued 
me from the claws of my wild beast, and, by a still more marked 
contrast, handed me over to the gentlest of men, a young Abbé 


122 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


from Le Faucigny,® named Gatier, who was going through his col- 
lege course, and who, from a desire to oblige M. Gros, and also, I 
believe, from feelings of humanity, was so good as to rob his own 
studies of the time he devoted to the direction of mine. I have never 
seen a more touching expression than M. Gatier’s. He was fair, and 
his beard inclined to be red; he had the ordinary appearance of 
those who came from his province, who all conceal considerable in- 
telligence under a heavy exterior; but what truly distinguished him 
was a tender, affectionate and loving heart. There was in his large 
blue eyes a mixture of gentleness, tenderness and sadness, which 
made it impossible for anyone to see him without being attracted by 
him. From the looks and manner of this poor young man, one would 
have said that he foresaw his destiny, and that he felt he was born 
to be unhappy. 

His character did not belie his looks; full of patience, and ever 
ready to oblige, he seemed rather to study with than to teach me. 
That alone was more than enough to make me love him; his prede- 
cessor had made that exceedingly easy. However, in spite of all the 
time that he devoted to me, in spite of the hearty goodwill with 
which we both devoted ourselves to our studies, and although he 
went quite the right way to work, I made little progress, although 
I worked hard. It is singular that, although endowed with consid- 
erable powers of apprehension, I have never been able to learn any- 
thing with tutors, with the exception of my father and M. Lam- 
bercier. The little additional knowledge I possess I owe to my own 
unaided efforts, as will be presently seen. My spirit, impatient of any 
kind of constraint, cannot submit to the laws of the moment; even 
the fear of not learning prevents my attention; for fear of making 
those who are talking to me impatient, I pretend to understand 
them; they accordingly go on, and I understand nothing. My mind 
must fix its own time for work; it cannot submit to that which is 
fixed by another. 

The time of ordination came, and M. Gatier returned to his prov- 
ince in deacon’s orders. He took with him my regrets, my attach- 
ment, my gratitude. I offered prayers on his behalf, which were no 
more granted than those which I offered for myself. Some years 


° A small province of the Duchy of Savoy. 


- 


DEPARTURE OF M. D’AUBONNE 123 


afterwards, I learned that, while vicaire of a parish, he seduced a 
girl, the only one whom,#n spite of a very tender heart, he had ever 
loved. The girl had a child by him, which caused a terrible scandal 
in a parish which was very strictly managed. The priests, being 
under good regulations, are not allowed to have children—except by . 
married women. For his offence against this rule of propriety, he 
was imprisoned, disgraced, and deprived of his benefice. I do not 
know whether he afterwards regained his position, but the thought 
of his misfortune, deeply graven on my heart, returned to me when 
I wrote “Emile”; and, uniting M. Gatier with M. Gaime, [ made of 
these two worthy priests the original of the “Savoyard Vicar.” I 
flatter myself that the imitation has not disgraced its originals. 

While I was at the seminary, M. d’Aubonne was obliged to leave 
Annecy. The Intendant took it into his head to be displeased that 
he made love to his wife. This was playing the part of the dog in the 
manger; for, although Madame Corvezi was extremely amiable, he 
lived on very bad terms with her; ultra-montane tendencies ren- 
dered her useless to him, and he treated her so brutally that a separa- 
tion was talked of. M. Corvezi was an ugly-looking fellow, black as 
a mole, knavish as an owl, and who, by continued abuse of his office, 
ended in getting dismissed himself. It is said that the natives of 
Provence revenge themselves upon their enemies by songs; M. 
d’Aubonne revenged himself upon his by a comedy; he sent the 
piece to Madame de Warens, who showed it to me. It pleased me, 
and put into my head the idea of writing one myself, in order to see 
whether I was really such a fool as the author had declared me to 
be; but I did not carry out this idea until I went to Chambéri, where 
I wrote L’Amant de lui-même. Consequently, when I state in the 
preface to this piece that I wrote it when I was eighteen years old, I 
have deviated from the truth in the matter a few years. 

It was nearly about this time that an event occurred, of little im- 
portance in itself, but which affected me, and made a stir in the 
world when I had already forgotten it. One day in every week I had 
permission to go out; it is not necessary to say what use I made of it. 
One Sunday when I was with mamma, a fire broke out in a build- 
ing belonging to the Grey Friars, which adjoined the house she 
occupied. This building, in which was their oven, was crammed 


124 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


full of dry faggots. In a very short time the whole was in flames. 
The house was in great danger, already enveloped by the flames 
which the wind drove in that direction. Everyone made ready to 
remove the furniture as quickly as possible, and to carry it into the 
garden, which was opposite the windows of my old room, beyond 
the brook of which I have already spoken. I was so confused, that I 
threw out of the window promiscuously everything that came into 
my hands, even a large stone mortar, which at any other time I 
should scarcely have been able to lift; in like manner I should have 
thrown out a large looking-glass, had not someone stopped me. The 
good bishop, who had come to pay mamma a visit, did not remain 
idle. He took her into the garden, where he began to pray with her, 
and all those who were there, so that, when I came up some time 
later, I found all on their knees and followed theiz example. During 
the holy man’s prayer, the wind changed, but so suddenly and just 
at the right moment, that the flames, which enveloped the house 
and were already making their way through the windows, were 
blown to the other side of the court, and the house suffered no dam- 
age. Two years later, after the death of M. de Bernex, his former 
brethren, the Antonines, began to collect evidence which might 
serve towards his beatification. At the earnest request of Father 
Boudet, I added to this evidence an attestation of the fact which I 
have just related, in which I was right; but, in giving out the fact for 
a miracle, I was wrong. I had seen the bishop at prayers, and during 
his prayers I had seen the wind change, and just at the critical mo- 
ment; this I was able to state and certify; but that one of these two 
things was the cause of the other, this I ought not to have certified, 
because I could not possibly know. However, as far as I can recollect 
my ideas, I was at that time a sincere Catholic, and therefore a good 
believer. The love of the marvellous, so natural to the human heart, 
my veneration for this virtuous prelate, the feeling of secret pride at 
having, perhaps, contributed to the miracle myself, helped to lead 
me astray; and it is quite certain that, if this miracle had been the 
result of fervent prayer, I might with good reason have claimed a 
share in it. More than thirty years afterwards, when I published my 

Lettres de la Montagne,” M. Fréron somehow or other unearthed 
this testimony and made use of it in his papers. I must confess that 


BEGINS ro LEARN MUSIC 125 


it was a fortunate discovery, and it seemed to me very amusing that 
it was made at so opportyne a moment. 

I was destined to be the rejected of all professions. Although M. 
Gatier had given the least unfavourable account of my progress that 
he possibly could, it was easily seen that it was out of proportion to 
my efforts, and that was no encouragement to make me study fur- 
ther. Accordingly, the bishop and the Superior refused to have any 
more to do with me, and gave me back to Madame de Warens as a 
person not even good enough for a priest; in other respects, a good 
enough lad, they said, and free from vice: which was the reason 
why, in spite of so many discouraging prejudices against me, she did 
not desert me. 

I brought back to her in triumph her volume of music, of which 
I had made such good use. My air of Alpheus and Arethusa was 
nearly all that I had learnt at the seminary. My marked taste for 
this art gave her the idea of making me a musician; the opportunity 
was favourable; she had music at her house at least once a week, 
and the choir-master of the cathedral, who directed these little con- 
certs, was a frequent visitor. He was a Parisian, named Le Maitre, a 
‘good composer, very lively, very gay, still young, tolerably good- 
looking, not very intelligent, but, on the whole, a good fellow. 
Mamma introduced me to him. I took a fancy to him, apd he was 
not displeased with me; the fee was discussed and settled. In short, 
‘I went to his house, where I passed the winter the more agreeably, 
‘as it was only twenty yards distant from mamma’s; we were with 
her in a moment, and very often supped there together. 

It will be readily imagined that life in the choir-master’s house, 
where singing and gaiety prevailed, together with musicians and 
choir-boys, pleased me far better than life in the seminary with the 
fathers of St. Lazare. However, this life, although more unre- 
strained, was not less orderly and regular. I was born to love inde- 
pendence, without abusing it. For six whole months, I never went 

‘out once, except to visit mamma or to attend church, nor did I ever 
feel tempted to do so. This period is one of those during which I 
have enjoyed the greatest calm, and which I recall with the greatest 
pleasure. Of the various situations in which I have found myself, 
some have been distinguished by such a feeling of comfort; that, in 


126 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


’ 


recalling them, I am as affected by them as if I were still similarly 
situated. I not only recall times, places, persons, but all the surround- 
ing objects, the temperature of the air, its smell, its colour, a certain 
local impression only felt there, the lively remembrance of which 
stirs my old transports anew. For instance, all that was repeated in 
the choir-master’s house, all that was sung in the choir, everything 
that took place there, the beautiful and majestic dress of the canons, 
the chasubles of the priests, the mitres of the chanters, the faces of 
the musicians, an old lame carpenter, who played the counterbass, 
a fair little Abbé who played the violin, the ragged cassock which, 
after laying down his sword, M. le Maitre put on over his lay-coat, 
and the beautiful fine surplice with which he covered its rags when 
he went to the choir; the pride with which, holding my little flageo- 
let, I took my place in the orchestra in the gallery, to assist in the end 
of a recitative which M. le Maitre had composed on purpose for me; 
the good dinner waiting for us afterwards, the good appetite we 
took to it—all these objects together, recurring most vividly a hun- 
dred times to my memory, have enchanted me as much or even 
more than the reality had ever done. I have always preserved a ten- 
der affection for a certain air of the Conditor alme siderum which 
goes in iambics, because, one Advent Sunday, I heard from my bed 
this hymn being sung before daybreak on the steps of the cathedral, 
according to a custom of that church. Mademoiselle de Merceret, 
mamma’s chambermaid, knew a little music. I shall never forget a 
little motet, called Afferte, which M. le Maitre made me sing with 
her, and which her mistress listened to with great pleasure. In short, 
everything, down to the good servant Perrine, who was so good a 
girl, and whom the choir-boys teased to madness, frequently comes 
back to me from those innocent and happy times, to enchant and 
sadden me. 

I lived at Annecy for nearly a year without the least reproach; 
everybody was satisfied with me. Since my departure from Turin 
I had committed no follies, nor was I guilty of any as long as I was 
under mamma’s eyes. She guided me, and always guided me well; 
my attachment to her had become my only passion, and, a proof 
that it was not a foolish passion, my heart formed my reason. It is 
true that a single sentiment, absorbing, so to speak, all my faculties, 


VENTURE DE VILLENEUVE 127 


put it out of my power to learn anything, even music, although I did 

my utmost. But it was ngt my fault; the most perfect goodwill was 

there, and steady application. But I was distracted, a dreamer; I 

sighed. What could I do? Nothing that depended upon me was 

wanting to ensure my progress; but, in order for me to commit fresh 

follies, I only needed a subject to put them into my head. This sub- 
ject presented itself; chance arranged matters, and, as will be seen 

in the sequel, my stupid head knew how to profit by it. 

One evening during the month of February, in very cold weather, 
while we were all seated round the fire, we heard a knock at the 
street door. Perrine took her lantern, went down and opened it; 
and returned with a young man, who came upstairs, introduced 
himself with an easy air, paid M. le Maitre a short and well-turned 
compliment, and told us that he was a French musician, obliged by 
the low state of his finances to offer his services to churches, in order 
to pay his way. When he heard the words “French musician,” Le 
Maitre’s good heart leaped for joy; he was passionately fond of his 
country and his profession. He received the young wayfarer, offered 
him a night’s lodging, of which he seemed sorely in want, and 
which he accepted without much ceremony. I examined him while 
he was warming himself and chattering, while waiting for supper. 
He was short of stature, but broad-shouldered. There was some- 
thing misshapen about his figure, without any special deformity; he 
was, so to speak, a hunchback with straight shoulders, and I fancy 
that he limped a little. His black coat was worn out by constant use 
rather than old, and was falling to pieces; his shirt, made of very 
fine linen, was very dirty; he wore beautiful fringed ruffles and 
gaiters, in either of which he could have put both his legs; and, by 
way of protection against the snow, he had a little hat only fit to 
carry under his arm. In this whimsical attire, however, there was 
something noble, to which his general demeanour did not give the 
lie. His expression was pleasant and intelligent: he spoke readily and 
well, although his language was rather too free. Everything about 
him showed him to be a young libertine of good education, who did 
not go begging like a beggar, but like a madcap. He told us that his 
name was Venture de Villeneuve, that he came from Paris, that he 
had lost his way, and, forgetting for the moment his rőle of musi- 


128 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


cian, he added that he was going to Grenoble to see one of his rela- 
tions whe was a member of the parliament. 

During supper the conversation turned upon music, and he spoke 
well upon the subject. He was acquainted with all the great virtuosi, 
all the famous works, all the actors and actresses, pretty women, and 
great noblemen. He appeared familiar with everything that was 
alluded to; but, directly a subject was broached, he upset the discus- 
sion with some broad joke, which made us laugh and forget what 
had been said. It was Saturday; on the following day there was music 
in the cathedral. M. le Maitre proposed to him to take part in the 
singing; “With pleasure,” he replied. Being asked what part he 
took, he answered, “Alto,” and went on to speak of something else. 
Before church, his part was given him to look through; but he never 
even glanced at it. This piece of swagger surprised Le Maitre. “You 
will see,” he whispered to me, “that he doesn’t know a note.” “I am 
very much afraid so,” I replied. I followed them full of uneasiness. 
‘When the singing began, my heart beat violently, for I was greatly 
interested in him. 

I soon found I had no reason for uneasiness. He sang his two parts 
with the greatest correctness and the best taste imaginable, and, what 
was more, in a charming voice. I have rarely experienced a more 
agreeable surprise. After mass, he was highly complimented by the 
canons and musicians, whom he thanked in his usual jesting man- 
ner, but with perfect grace. M. le Maitre embraced him heartily; I 
did the same; he saw that I was very glad, and this seemed to afford 
him pleasure. 

The reader will assuredly agree with me that, after having be- 
come infatuated with Bacle, who, when all is said and done, was 
nothing but a boor, it was only to be expected that I should been- 
chanted by Venture, a man of education, talent, imtelligence, and 
worldly experience, who might be called an agreeable rake. This 
was just what happened to me, and which, I think, would have 
happened to any other young man in my position, the more easily in 
proportion as he possessed better judgment in recognising merit, and 
greater inclination to allow himself to be fascinated by it; for un- 
doubtedly. Venture possessed merit, and a merit very rare at his age 
—that of not being too eager to display his accomplishments. It is 


CHARACTER OF VENTURE 129 


true that he boasted about many things which he did not under- 
stand at all; but of those things which he knew well, and these were 
by no means few, he said nothing—he waited for the opportunity of 
showing his knowledge, and when it came, he took advantage of it 
without exhibiting too much eagerness, which produced a great | 
effect. As he stopped at each subject, without speaking of the rest, 
one could never tell when his knowledge was exhausted. Witty, 
droll, inexhaustible, seductive in conversation, always smiling and 
never laughing, he would say the rudest things in the most refined 
tone without ever giving offence. Even the most modest women 
were astonished at what they endured from him. It was useless for 
them to feel that they ought to be angry—they could not. He wanted, 
nothing but loose women, and I do not believe that he was made to 
succeed with the sex, but he was certainly made to enliven im- 
mensely the society of those who enjoyed that good fortune. In a 
country where such agreeable accomplishments were duly esteemed 
and loved, he could not long remain limited to the sphere of a 
musician. 

My liking for M. Venture, more reasonable in its cause, was also 
less extravagant in its effects than my friendship for M. Bacle, al- 
though it was warmer and more lasting. I loved to see him, to listen 
to him; everything he did appeared to me charming, everything he 
said was an oracle to me; but my infatuation did not go so far that I 
could not have endured separation from him. I had in my neighbour- 
hood a good safeguard against such extravagance. Besides, I felt that 
his principles, although they might be very good for him, were of no 
value to me; I wanted a different kind of pleasure, of which he had 
no idea, and of which J did not even venture to speak to him, as I 
felt sure that he would only have laughed at me. However, I would 
gladly have united this new attachment with that which already had 
possession of me. I spoke of him to mamma with transport; Le 
Maitre spoke of him to her in terms of the highest praise. She con- 
sented that he should be introduced to her; but the meeting was alto- 
gether unsuccessful. He found her affected; she found him dissolute, 
and, being alarmed to think that I had formed so undesirable an 
acquaintance, she not only forbade me to bring him again, but 
painted in such lively colours the risks I ran with this young man, 


130 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


that I became a little more reserved in my intercourse with him, and, 
luckily for my morals and my understanding, we were soon 
"separated. : 

M. le Maitre had the taste of all the followers of his profession: he 
was fond of wine. At table, however, he was temperate; when work- 
ing in his study, he was obliged to drink. His maidservant knew 
him so well that, as soon as he arranged his paper in order to com- 
pose, and took up his violoncello, his jug and glass arrived the mo- 
ment after, and the jug was replenished from time to time. Without 
ever being completely drunk he was always fuddled; this was really 
a pity, for he was essentially a good fellow, and so playful that 
mamma always called him the “Kitten.” Unfortunately, he was fond 
of his talent, worked hard and drank proportionately. This told 
upon his health, and, in the end, upon his temper; he was sometimes 
suspicious and ready to take offence. Incapable of rudeness, incapa- 
ble of failing in respect to anyone, he never used bad language, even 
to one of his choir-boys; but neither was anyone allowed to fail in 
respect to him, as was only fair. The misfortune was that he had too 
little intelligence to distinguish manners and characters, and often 
took offence at nothing. 

The ancient Chapter of Geneva, into which formerly so many 
princes and bishops esteemed it an honour to be admitted, has lost 
in exile some of its ancient splendour, but has retained its pride. In 
order to be admitted, it is still necessary to be a gentleman or doctor 
of Sorbonne; and if there is an excusable pride, next after that which 
is derived from personal merit, it is that which is derived from birth. 
Besides, all the priests, who have laymen in their service, as a rule 
treat them with considerable arrogance. It was thus that the canons 
often treated Le Maitre. The precentor especially, the Abbé de Vi- 
donne, who in other respects was extremely polite but too proud of 
his noble birth, did not always treat him with the respect which his 
talents deserved, and Le Maitre could not endure this disdain. This 
year, during Passion week, they had a more serious dispute than 
usual at a regulation dinner given by the bishop to the canons, to 
which Le Maitre was always invited. The precentor showed him 
some slight, and said something harsh to him, which he was unable 
to stomach. He immediately resolved to run away the next night, 


SETS OUT FOR LYONS 131 


and’ nothing could dissuade him from this; although Madame de 
Warens, to whom he went to say good-bye, did her utmost to ap- 
pease him. He could not forego the pleasure of avenging himself 
upon his tyrants, by leaving them in the Jurch during the Easter fes- 
tival, which was just the time when his services were most needed. 
But what troubled him most was his music, which he wanted to 
take with him—no easy task, for it filled a tolerably heavy box 
which could not be carried under the arm. 

Mamma did what I should have done in her place, and should do 
again. After many fruitless attempts to keep him back, seeing that 
he had made up his mind to depart, whatever happened, she devoted 
herself to assisting him as far as she possibly could. I venture to say 
that it was her duty to do so. Le Maitre had, so to say, devoted him- 
self entirely to her service. In reference to his art, as well as other 
attentions, he was entirely at her command; and the heartiness with 
which he carried out what she desired attached a double value to his 
readiness to oblige. Consequently, she only repaid a friend, on a 
critical occasion, for all that he had done for her on many separate 
occasions during three or four years, although she had a heart which, 
in order to repay such obligations, had no need to be reminded that 
they were obligations. She sent for me and ordered me to follow Le 
Maitre at least as far as Lyons, and not to leave him as long as he 
needed my assistance. She has since confessed to me that the desire 
of separating me from Venture had been one of her chief considera- 
tions in this arrangement. She consulted Claude Anet, her faithful 
servant, about the removal of the box. He was of opinion that it 
would infallibly lead to discovery if we hired a beast of burden in 
Annecy; that, as soon as it was dark, we ought to carry the box our- 
selves a certain distance, and then hire an ass in some village to con- 
vey it as far as Seyssel, where, being on French territory, we should 
no longer run any risk. We followed his advice; we set out the same 
night at seven o'clock, and mamma, on pretence of paying my ex- 
penses, reinforced the light-filled purse of the poor “Kitten” by a 
sum of money which was very useful to him. Claude Anet, the gar- 
dener, and myself carried the box as best we could as far as the first: 
village, where an ass relieved us; and the same night we reached 


Seyssel. 


X32 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


I believe that I have already observed that there are times when I 
so little resemble myself, that one would take me for another man of 
quite an opposite character. The following is a case in point. M. 
Reydelet, curé of Seyssel, was canon of St. Peter’s, consequently ac- 
quainted with Le Maitre, and one of the persons from whom it was 
most important that he should conceal himself. My advice, on the 
contrary, was that we should present ourselves to him, and, on some 
pretext or other, ask him for a night's lodging as if we were at Seys- 
sel with the sanction of the Chapter. Le Maitre liked the idea, which 
made his revenge ironical and amusing. We accordingly proceeded 
boldly to M. Reydelet’s house, and were kindly received. Le Maitre 
told him that he was going to Bellay, at the request of the bishop, to 
conduct the choir at the Easter festival, and that he expected to pass 
through Seyssel again in a few days; while I, to back up these lies, 
poured out a hundred others so unconcernedly, that M. Reydelet, 
finding me a nice-looking lad, took a fancy to me, and spoke to me 
in a most friendly manner. We were well entertained and well 
lodged. M. Reydelet did not know how to make enough of us; and 
we parted the best friends in the world, promising to stop longer on 
our return. We could scarcely wait till we were alone before we 
burst out laughing, and I declare that I do the same now, whenever 
I think of it; for I cannot imagine a piece of waggery better planned 
or more happily executed. It would have kept us in good spirits 
throughout the journey, had not Le Maitre, who drank incessantly, 
and went from one tavern to another, been attacked two or three 
times by fits to which he was very liable, which strongly resembled 
epilepsy. These attacks alarmed me, and made me think how I could 
best get out of it. 

We went on to Bellay to spend Easter, as we had told M. Reydelet; 
and, although we were not expected there, we were received by the 
choir-master, and joyfully welcomed by all. Le Maitre had a reputa- 
tion, and deserved it. The choir-master made a point of producing 
his best works, and endeavoured to obtain the approval of so experi- 
enced a critic; for Le Maitre, besides being a connoisseur, was always 
fair, free from jealousy, and no flatterer. He was so superior to all 
these provincial choir-masters, and they were so well aware of it, 


2 


DESERTS M. LE MAITRE 133 


that they looked upon him rather as their chief than as a brother 
professional. e 

After having spent four or five days very agreeably at Bellay, we 
set out again and continued our journey without any further adven- 
tures than those which I have just mentioned. When we arrived at | 
Lyons, we put up at Notre Dame de Pitié; and, while we were wait- 
ing for the box (which, thanks to another lie, we had persuaded our 
kind patron, M. Reydelet, to put on board a vessel on the Rhéne), 
Le Maitre went to see his acquaintances, amongst others Father 
Caton, a Grey friar, of whom I shall have something to say later, 
and the Abbé Dortan, Comte de Lyon. Both received him kindly, 
but afterwards betrayed him, as will presently be seen; his good luck 
had become exhausted at M. Reydelet’s. 

Two days after our arrival at Lyons, as we were going through a 
little street not far from our inn, Le Maitre was overtaken by one of 
his attacks, which was so violent that I was seized with affright. | 
cried out and shouted for help, gave the name of his inn, and begged 
someone to take him there; then while the crowd gathered round 
eager to assist a man who had fallen senseless and foaming at the 
mouth in the middle of the street, he was abandoned by the only 
friend on whom he had a right to depend. I seized the moment when 
nobody was thinking of me; I turned the corner of the street and 
disappeared. Thank Heaven, I have finished this third painful con- 
fession! If I had many more of a similar kind to make, I should 
abandon the task I have commenced. 

Of all the incidents I have related up to the present time some 
traces have remained in all the places where I have lived; those 
which I shall relate in the next book are almost entirely unknown, 
They are the greatest extravagances of my life, and it is fortunate 
that they have not led to worse results. But my head, raised to the 
pitch of a foreign instrument, was out of its proper key; it recovered 
it of itself, and I abandoned my follies, or at least only committed 
such as were more.in agreement with my natural disposition. This 
period of my youth is the one of which I have the most confused 
idea. During this time scarcely anything occurred of sufficient inter- 
est to my heart for me to preserve a lively recollection of it; and it is 


134 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


almost unavoidable that, amidst so many wanderings backwards and 
forwards, so many successive changes, I should transpose times or 
places. I am writing entirely from memory, without notes, without 
materials to assist my recollection. There are events in my life which 
are as fresh in my mind as if they had just happened; but there are 
also gaps and voids, which I can only fill up by the aid of a narrative 
which is as confused as the recollection of it which has remained to 
me. It is, therefore, possible that I have sometimes made mistakes, 
and I may do so again, in unimportant matters, up to the time when 
I possess surer information regarding myself; but, in all that is really 
of essential importance, I feel sure of being an accurate and faithful 
chronicler, as I shall always endeavour to be in everything—of that 
the reader may rest assured. 

As soon as I had left Le Maitre, I made up my mind, and set out 
again for Annecy. The reason and secrecy of our departure had 
greatly interested me in the safety of our retreat; and this interest, 
which entirely absorbed my attention, had for some days diverted 
me from the thought of return; but as soon as a feeling of security 
left me free from anxiety, the ruling passion recovered its ascend- 
ency. Nothing flattered or tempted me; my only desire was to return 
to mamma. The warmth and tenderness of my attachment to her 
had uprooted from my heart all imaginary projects, all the follies of 
ambition. I saw no other happiness than that of living with her, and 
I never went a step without feeling that I was removing further from 
this happiness. I accordingly returned to her as soon as it was pos- 
sible. My return was so speedy, and my mind so distracted, that, al- 
though I recall to mind all my other journeys with the liveliest pleas- 
ure, I have not the slightest recollection of this; I remember nothing 
about it, except my departure from Lyons and my arrival at Annecy. 
I leave it to the reader to imagine whether this latter period is ever 
likely to fade from my memory. On my arrival, I no longer found 
Madame de Warens; she had set out for Paris. 

I have never learnt the real secret of this journey. She would have 
told me, I am convinced, if I had pressed her to do so; but no one 
was ever less curious than myself about his friends’ secrets; my heart, 
occupied only with the present, is entirely filled with it, and, ex- 
cept for past pleasures, which henceforth form my only enjoyment, 


MADAME’S JOURNEY TO PARIS ` 135 


there is no empty corner in it for anything that is past. From the little 
that she told me, I fangjed that, owing to the revolution at Turin, 
caused by the abdication of the King of Sardinia, she was afraid of 
being forgotten, and was anxious, with the assistance of the intrigues 
of M. d’Aubonne, to endeavour to obtain the same advantages at the 
French court, which, as she often told me, she would herself have 
preferred, because, in the midst of so many important affairs, one is 
not kept under such disagreeable surveillance. If this is true, it is sur- 
prising that, on her return, she was not regarded with greater dis- 
favour, and that she has always drawn her pension uninterruptedly. 
Many believe that she was charged with some secret commission, 
either by the bishop, who had business at the French court and was 
obliged to undertake a journey thither himself, or by some even more 
powerful personage, who knew how to insure her a happy return. 
It is certain that, if this be the case, the ambassadress was not ill- - 
chosen, and that, still young and beautiful, she possessed all the nec- 
essary qualifications for carrying out a negotiation successfully. 


BOOK IV 


[1731-1732] 


I arrtvep at Annecy, where I no longer found her. Imagine my sur- 
prise and grief! Then, for the first time, my regret at having aban- 
doned Le Maitre in so cowardly a manner made itself felt. It became 
keener still, when I heard of the misfortunes that had befallen him. 
His box of music, which contained all his worldly goods, the precious 
box, which had cost such trouble to save, had been seized on its ar- 
rival at Lyons, in consequence of a letter, in which the Chapter had 
informed Comte Dortan of its secret removal. Le Maitre in vain 
claimed his property, his means of livelihood, the work of his whole 
life. The ownership of the box was at least open to dispute; but the 
question was not raised. The matter was decided on the spot by the 
law of the stronger, and poor Le Maitre thus lost the fruit of his 
talents, the work of his youth and the resource of his old age. 

Nothing was wanting to the blow which fell upon me to make it 
overwhelming. But I was at an age when great sorrow takes little 
hold, and I soon found means of consolation. I expected soon to hear 
news of Madame de Warens, although I did not know her address 
and she was ignorant of my return; and, as for my desertion of Le 
Maitre, all things considered, I did not find it so blameworthy. I had 
been of service to him in his flight; that was the only service I could 
render him. If I had remained with him in France, I could not have 
cured him of his illness, I could not have saved his box, I should 
only have doubled his expenditure without being able to help him. 
This was the light in which I then regarded the matter: I regard it 
differently now. A mean action does not torture us when we have 
just committed it, but long afterwards, when we recall it to mind; 
for the remembrance of it never dies. 

In order to get news of mamma, the only thing I could do was to 


136 


THE ABSENCE OF MADAME DE WARENS 137 


wait; for where could I look for her in Paris, and what means had 
I to make the journey? Annecy was the safest place to gain tidings 
of her whereabouts, sooner or later. I therefore remained where I 
was, but behaved very badly. I never called on the bishop, who had 
already assisted me, and might have assisted me further; my patron- , 
ess was no longer near me, and I was afraid of being reprimanded 
by him for running away. Still less did I go to the seminary; M. Gros 
was no longer there. I visited none of my acquaintances; however, I 
should have liked to go and see the Intendant’s wife, but was afraid 
to do so. I did worse than this; I found M. Venture again, of whom, 
in spite of my enthusiasm for him, I had not even thought since my 
departure. I found him resplendent, féted throughout Annecy; the 
ladies fought for him. This success completely turned my head. I 
saw no one but Venture, who almost made me forget Madame de 
Warens. In order to profit by his lessons more easily, I proposed to 
him to share his lodgings; he agreed. He lodged at a shoemaker’s, a 
pleasant and amusing fellow, who in his patois never called his wife 
anything except salopiere (slut), a name which she fully deserved. 
He often had quarrels with her, which Venture did his best to pro- 
long, while pretending that he wanted to put a stop to them. Coldly, 
and in his Provengal dialect, he used words and expressions to them 
which produced the greatest effect; the scenes that took place were 
enough to make one burst with laughter. In this manner the morn- 
ings passed before we were aware of it; at two or three o'clock we 
took a modest lunch; Venture went to visit his friends, with whong 
he took dinner, while I went for a solitary walk, meditating upon 
his great advantages, admiring and envious of his rare talents, and 
cursing my unlucky star for not summoning me to an equally happy 
lot. How little I knew about it! my own life would have been a hun- 
dred times more delightful, if I had been less foolish, and had known 
better how to enjoy it! 

Madame de Warens had only taken Anet with her; she had left 
Merceret behind, her maid of whom I have already spoken, and 
whom I found still occupying her mistress’s room. Mademoiselle 
Merceret was a little older than myself, not pretty, but sufficiently 
agreeable; a good Fribourgeoise, free from vice, in whom I discov- 
ered no other failing except that at times she was somewhat insubor- 


138 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


dinate to her mistress. I went to see her pretty often; she was an old 
acquaintance, and the sight of her reminded me of another still 
dearer, for whose sake I loved her. She had several friends, amongst 
them a certain Mademoiselle Giraud, a Genevese, who, for my sins, 
took it into her head to take a fancy to me. She continually pressed 
Merceret to take me to see her, which I allowed her to do, because I 
was fond of her, and there were other young persons there whose 
company was very agreeable. As for Mademoiselle Giraud, who 
made up to me in every possible way, nothing could add to the aver- 
sion I felt towards her. When she put her withered black snout, 
filthy with snuff, near my face I could hardly keep from spitting on 
it. But I bore it patiently; besides, I enjoyed myself very much with 
all the girls, all of whom, either to pay court to Mademoiselle Giraud, 
or for my own sake, vied with one another in making much of me. 
In all this I saw nothing but friendship. Since then, I have some- 
times thought that it only rested with myself to see something more; 
but it never occurred to me, I never even gave it a thought. 

Besides, sempstresses, chambermaids, and shop girls had not much 
temptation for me; I wanted young ladies. Everyone has his fancies; 
this has always been mine, and my ideas on this point are not those 
of Horace. However, it is certainly not the vanity of rank and posi- 
tion that attracts me; it is a well preserved complexion, beautiful 
hands, a charming toilet, a general air of elegance and neatness, bet- 
ter taste in dress and expression, a finer and better made gown, a 
nattier pair of shoes, ribbons, lace, better arranged hair—this is what 
attracts me. I should always prefer a girl, even of less personal attrac- 
tions, if better dressed. I myself confess this preference is ridiculous; 
but my heart, in spite of myself, makes me entertain it. 

Well! once again these advantages offered themselves, and it only 
rested with myself to profit by them. How I love, from time to time, 
to come suddenly upon the delightful moments of my youth! They 
were so sweet to me; they have been so brief, so rare, and I have en- 
joyed them so cheaply! Ah! the mere remembrance of them brings 
back to my heart an unmixed pleasure which I sorely need to reani- 
mate my courage and to sustain the weariness of my remaining 
years. 


One morning, the dawn appeared so beautiful that I threw on my 


MADEMOISELLE DE GRAFFENRIED 139 


clothes and hurried out into the country to see the sun rise. I enjoyed 
this sight in all its charm; it was the week after the festival of St, 
John. The earth, decked in its greatest splendour, was covered with 
verdure and flowers; the nightingales, nearly at the end of their 
song, seemed to delight in singing the louder; all the birds, uniting 
in their farewell to Spring, were singing in honour of the birth of 
a beautiful summer day, one of those beautiful days which one ne 
longer sees at my age and which are unknown in the melancholy . 
land? in which I am now living. 

Without perceiving it, I had wandered some distance from the 
town; the heat increased, and I walked along under the shady trees 
of a little valley by the side of a brook. I heard behind me the sound 
of horses’ hoofs and the voices of girls, who seemed in a difficulty, 
but, nevertheless, were laughing heartily at it. I turned round, and 
heard myself called by name; when I drew near, I found two young 
ladies of my acquaintance, Mademoiselle de Graffenried and Made- 
moiselle Galley, who, being poor horsewomen, did not know how to 
make their horses cross the brook. Mademoiselle de Graffenried was 
an amiable young Bernese, who, having been driven from her home 
in consequence of some youthful folly, had followed the example of 
Madame de Warens, at whose house I had sometimes seen her; but, 
as she had no pension, she had been only too glad to attach herself 
to Mademoiselle Galley, who, having conceived a friendship for her, 
had persuaded her mother to let her stay with her as her companion 
until she could find some employment. Mademoiselle Galley was a 
year younger than her companion, and better-looking; there was 
something about her more delicate and more refined; at the same 
time, she had a very neat and well-developed figure, the greatest 
charm a girl can possess. They loved each other tenderly, and their 
good nature could not fail to keep up this intimacy, unless some 
lover came to disturb it. They told me that they were on their way to 
Toune, an old château belonging to Madame Galley; they begged 
me to assist them to get their horses across, which they could nof. 
manage by themselves. I wanted to whip the horses, but they were 
afraid that I might be kicked and they themselves thrown off. I 
accordingly had recourse to another expedient. I took Mademoiselle 


1 Rousseau was at this time at Wootton, in Staffordshire. 


140 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Galley’s horse by the bridle, and then, pulling it after me, crossed 
the brook with the water up to my knees; the other horse followed 
without any hesitation. After this, I wanted to take leave of the 
young ladies and go my way like a fool. They whispered a few words 
to each other, and Mademoiselle de Graffenried, turning to me, 
said, “No, no; you shan’t escape us like that. You have got wet in 
serving us, and we owe it as a duty to our conscience to see that you 
get dry. You must come with us, if you please; we make you our 
prisoner.” My heart beat; I looked at Mademoiselle Galley. “Yes, 
yes,” added she, laughing at my look of affright; “prisoner of war. 
Get up behind her; we will give a good account of you.” “But, made- 
moiselle,” I objected, “I have not the honour of your mother’s ac- 
quaintance; what will she say when she sees me?” “Her mother is 
not at Toune,” replied Mademoiselle de Graffenried; “we are alone; 
we return this evening, and you can return with us.” 

The effect of electricity is not more rapid than was the effect of 
these words upon me. Trembling with joy, I sprang upon Made- 
moiselle de Graffenried’s horse; and, when I was obliged to put my 
arm round her waist to support myself, my heart beat so violently 
that she noticed it. She told me that hers was beating too, since she 
was afraid of falling. In the situation in which I was, this was almost 
an invitation to me to verify the truth for myself; but I had not the 
courage; and, during the whole of the ride, my two arms surrounded 
her like a belt, which certainly held her tight, but never shifted its 
place for a moment. Many women who read this would like to box 
my ears—and they would not be wrong. 

The pleasant excursion and the chatter of the young ladies made 
me so talkative that we were never silent for a moment until eve- 
ning—in fact, as long as we were together. They had put me so com- 
pletely at my ease, that my tongue was as eloquent as my eyes, al- 
though not in the same manner. For a few moments only, when I 
found myself alone with one or the other, the conversation became 
a little constrained; but the absent one soon returned, and did not 
allow us time to investigate the reason of our embarrassment. 

When we reached Toune, after I had first dried myself, we break- 
fasted. Next, it was necessary to proceed to the important business 
of dinner. The young ladies from time to time left off their cooking 


DINNER AT TOUNE I41 


to kiss the farmer’s children, and their poor scullion looked on and 
smothered his vexation. Provisions had been sent from the town, and 
all that was requisite for a good dinner, especially in the matter of 
delicacies; but, unfortunately, the wine had been forgotten. This 
was no wonder, since the young ladies did not drink it; but I was 
sorry for it, since I had counted upon its assistance to give me cour- 
age. They also were annoyed, possibly for the same reason, although 
I do not think so. Their lively and charming gaiety was innocence 
personified; besides, what could the two of them have done with 
me? They sent all round the neighbourhood to try and get some 
wine, but without success, so abstemious and poor are the peasants 
of this canton. They expressed their regret to me; I said that they 
need not be so concerned about it, that they did not require wine in 
order to intoxicate me. This was the only compliment I ventured to 
pay them during the day; but I believe that the roguish creatures 
saw clearly enough that the compliment was sincere. 

We dined in the farmer’s kitchen, the two friends seated on 
benches on either side of the long table, and their guest between 
them on a three-legged stool. What a dinner! what an enchanting 
remembrance! Why should a man, when he can enjoy pleasures so, 
pure and real at so little cost, try to find new ones? No supper at any 
of the petites maisons of Paris could be compared to this meal, not 
only for gaiety and cheerfulness, but, I declare, for sensual enjoy- 
ment. 

After dinner we practised a little economy. Instead of drinking 
the coffee which remained over from breakfast, we kept it for our 
tea with the cream and cakes which they had brought with them; 
and, to keep up our appetites, we went into the orchard to finish our 
dessert with cherries. I climbed up the tree, and threw down bunches 
of fruit, while they threw the stones back at me through the 
branches. Once Mademoiselle Galley, holding out her apron and 
throwing back her head, presented herself as a mark so prettily, and 
I took such accurate aim, that I threw a bunch right into her bosom. 
How we laughed! I said to myself, If my lips were only cherries, 
how readily would I throw them into the same place! 

The day passed in this manner in the most unrestrained enjoy- 
ment, which, however, never overstepped the limits of the strictest 


142 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


decency. No double-entendre, no risky jest was uttered; and this de- 
cency was by no means forced, it was perfectly natural, and we 
acted and spoke as our hearts prompted. In short, my modesty— 
others will call it stupidity—was so great, that the greatest liberty of 
which I was guilty was once to kiss Mademoiselle Galley’s hand. It 
is true that the circumstances gave special value to this favour. We 
were alone, I was breathing with difficulty, her eyes were cast down; 
my mouth, instead of giving utterance to words, fastened upon her 
hand, which she gently withdrew after I had kissed it, looking at me 
in a manner that showed no irritation. I do not know what I might 
have said to her; her friend came into the room, and appeared to 
me distinctly ugly at that moment. 

At last, they remembered that they ought not to wait till night 
before returning to the town. We only just had time to get back 
while it was daylight, and we hastened to set out in the same order 
as we came. If I had dared, I would have changed the order; for 
Mademoiselle Gailey’s looks had created a profound impression 
upon my heart; but I did not venture to say anything, and it was not 
for her to make the proposal. On the way, we said to ourselves that 
it was a great pity that the day was over; but, far from complaining 
that it had been too short, we agreed that we had possessed the secret 
of lengthening it by the aid of all the amusements with which we 
had known how to occupy it. 

I left them almost at the spot where they had found me. With 
what regret we separated! with what delight we planned to meet 
again! Twelve hours spent together were for us as good as centuries 
of intimacy. The sweet remembrance of that day cost the young 
girls nothing; the tender union between us three was worth far live- 
lier pleasures, which would not have suffered it to exist; we loved 
one another openly and without shame, and were ready to love one 
another always in the same manner. Innocence of character has its 
enjoyment, which is certainly equal to any other, since it knows no 
relaxation and never ceases. As for me, I know that the memory of 
so beautiful a day touches and charms me more, and goes straighter 
to my heart, than the recollection of any pleasures that I have ever 
enjoyed, I did not exactly know what I wanted with these two 
charming persons, but both of them interested me exceedingly. I do 


= 


REFLECTIONS ON HIS ADVENTURE . 143 


not say that, if I had had control of the arrangements, my heart 
would have been equally shared between them. I had a slight feel- 
ing of preference; I should have been quite happy to have Mademoi- 
selle de Graffenried as a mistress; but, if it had depended entirely 
upon myself, I think I should have preferred her for an intimate 
friend. Be that as it may, it seemed to me, when I left them, that I 
could no longer live without them both. Who would have said that 
I was never to see them in my life again, and that our love of a day 
was to end there? 

My readers will not fail to laugh at my love adventures, and to 
remark that, after lengthy preliminaries, even those which made 
greatest progress, end in a kiss of the hand. Oh, my readers, do not 
be mistaken! I have, perhaps, had greater enjoyment in my amours 
which have ended in a simple kiss of the hand, than you will ever 
have in yours, which, at least, have begun with that! 

Venture, who had gone to bed very late the night before, came 
home soon after me. This time I did not feel as pleased as usual to 
see him, and I was careful not to tell him how I had spent the day. 
The young ladies had spoken of him somewhat contemptuously, 
and had seemed ill-pleased to know that I was in such bad hands; 
this did him harm in my estimation, and, besides, everything which 
drew my attention from them could not fail to be disagreeable. How- 
ever, he soon brought me back to myself and to him, by speaking of 
my position. It was too critical to be able to continue. Although I 
spent very little, my purse was almost empty, and I was without re- 
sources. No news of mamma arrived; I did not know what to do, 
and I felt a cruel pang at seeing the friend of Mademoiselle Galley 
reduced to beggary. 

Venture told me that he had spoken about me to the Juge-Mage? 
and that he would take me to dine with him on the following day; 
that he was a man who might be able to assist me through his 
friends, and a pleasant acquaintance to make, being a man of intel- 
ligence and education, and an agreeable companion who possessed 
talent himself and respected it in others; then, mingling together in 
his usual fashion the most serious matters with the most trifling 


2 The lieutenant of the seneschal, an important officer of the crown, who ad- 
ministered justice in the King’s name. 


144 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


frivolities, he showed me a pretty little couplet just arrived from 
Paris, set to an air out of one of Mouret’s operas, which was being 
played at the time. This couplet had pleased M. Simon (the Juge- 
Mage) so much, that he wanted to compose another to the same 
tune to answer it; he had also told Venture to compose one, and the 
latter had been seized with the mad idea of making me compose a 
third, in order, as he said, that the couplets might be seen arriving on 
the next day like the sedan-chairs in the Roman comique.* 

Being unable to sleep, I composed my couplet to the best of my 
abilities. Considering that they were the first verses that I had ever 
made, they were tolerable, even better, or, at any rate, more tasteful, 
than they would have been the day before, as the subject turned 
upon a tender situation, for which my heart was already sympa- 
thetic. I showed my couplet, in the morning, to Venture, who, 
thinking it pretty, put it in his pocket without telling me whether 
he had composed his own. We went to dine with M. Simon, who 
received us cordially. The conversation was animated, indeed, it 
could not have been anything else, when carried on by two intelli- 
gent and well-read men. As for me, I played my usual part; I lis- 
tened and held my tongue. Neither of them said a word about the 
couplet; I said nothing either, and, as far as I know, mine was never 
mentioned, 

M. Simon appeared satisfied with my behaviour; this was nearly 
all that he learned about me at this interview. He had already seen 
me several times at mamma’s house, without paying particular at- 
tention to me. It is from this dinner that I date my acquaintance 
with him, which proved useless as far as the object I had in view 
was concerned, but from which I afterwards gained other advan- 
tages, which cause me to remember him with pleasure. 

I must not omit to say something about his personal appearance, 
of which, considering his magisterial capacity and the bel esprit on 
which he prided himself, it would otherwise be impossible for any- 
one to form an idea. His height was certainly not three fect. His 
legs, straight, thin, and tolerably long, would have made him look 
taller, if they had been vertical; but they formed an obtuse angle 
like those of a wide-opened pair of compasses. His body was not 


? By Scarron. 


M. SIMON 145 


only short, but thin and in every way indescribably small. When 
naked, he must have loőked like a grasshopper. His head, of ordi- 
nary size, with a well-formed face, noble features, and nice eyes, 
looked like a false head set upon a stump. He might have spared 
himself much expense in the matter of clothing, for his large wig- 
alone covered him completely from head to foot. 

He had two entirely different voices, which, when he spoke, con- 
tinually mingled together, and contrasted in a manner which at first 
was very amusing, but scon became disagreeable. One was grave 
and sonorous; if I may say so, it was the voice of his head. The other 
—clear, sharp, and piercing—was the voice of his body. When he 
was very careful, spoke very deliberately, and husbanded his breath, 
he could always speak with his deep voice; but as soon as he became 
ever so little animated and spoke in a livelier tone, his accent resem- 
bled the whistling of a key, and he had the greatest difficulty in re- 
covering his bass. 

With the appearance which I have described, and which is not 
in the least exaggerated, M. Simon was polite, a great courtier, and 
careful in his dress even to foppishness. As he desired to make the 
most of his advantages, he liked to give audience in bed; for no one, 
who saw a fine head on the pillow, was likely to imagine that that 
was all. This sometimes caused scenes, which I am sure all Annecy 
still remembers. 

One morning, when he was waiting for some litigants in, or 
rather upon, this bed, in a beautiful fine white nightcap, ornamented 
with two large knots of rose-coloured ribbon, a countryman arrived 
and knocked at the door. The maidservant had gone out. M. Simon, 
hearing the knock repeated, cried out, “Come in,” and the word, 
spoken a little too vigorously, came out of his mouth with his shrill 
utterance. The man entered, looked to see where the woman’s voice 
came from, and, seeing in the bed a woman’s mob-cap and a top- 
knot, was going to retire with profound apologies. M. Simon became 
angry, and cried out in a still shriller voice. The countryman, con- 
firmed in his idea and considering himself insulted, overwhelmed 
him with abuse, told him that he was apparently nothing but a 
prostitute, and that the Juge-Mage set anything but a good example 
in his house. M. Simon, full of fury, and having no other weapon 


146 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


but his chamberpot, was going to throw it at the poor man’s head, 
when his housekeeper came in. 

This little dwarf, although so cruelly treated by nature in regard 
to his person, had received compensation for this in his mental tal- 
ents, which were naturally agreeable, and which he had carefully 
developed. Although he was said to be a tolerably good lawyer, he 
had no liking for his profession. He had thrown himself into polite 
literature, and had succeeded. He had, above all, acquired that bril- 
liant superficiality, that gift of varied conversation which gives so- 
ciety its charm, even in the company of women. He knew by heart 
all the little characteristics of the Anas* and the like; he possessed 
the art of making the most of them, relating them to advantage and 
with an air of mystery, as if that which had taken place sixty years 
ago had been an anecdote of yesterday. He understood music, and 
sang agreeably with his man’s voice—in short, he possessed many 
pretty accomplishments for a magistrate. By dint of long paying 
court to the ladies of Annecy, he had become the fashion amongst 
them: he was always in attendance upon them like a little monkey.® 
He even pretended to have great success with women, which amused 
them exceedingly. A certain Madame d’Epagny said that the great- 
est favour for him was to be allowed to kiss a woman’s knee. 

As he had a knowledge of good literature and was very fond of 
talking about it, his conversation was not only amusing, but also in- 
structive. Afterwards, when I had acquired a taste for study, I culti- 
vated his acquaintance, and derived great advantage from it. I some- 
times went from Chambéri, where I was at that time, to see him. 
He commended and encouraged my zeal, and gave me some good 
advice about my reading, by which I often benefited. Unfortunately, 
in this weakly body dwelt a very sensitive soul. Some years later, he 
had some trouble or other which so grieved him that he died of it. 
It was a pity; he was certainly a good little man, whom one began 
by laughing at and ended by loving. Although his life has had little 
to do with mine, yet as I have received some useful lessons from him, 


A 3 2 : 
Collections of memorable sayings of certain persons, and anecdotes con- 
nected with them, as Johnsoniana, Walpoliana. These titles originated in France. 


5 s . 
l Sapajou: an American monkey; used figuratively in the sense of “an ugly 
little man.” 


WRITES TO MLLE. DE GRAFFENRIED 147 


I thought I might, out of gratitude, dedicate a niche in my memory 
to him. e 

As soon as I was at liberty, I ran to the street where Mademoiselle 
Galley lived, flattering myself with the hope of seeing someone go- 
ing in or out, or opening a window. Nothing, not even a cat, was 
to be seen; and all the time I was there the house remained as firmly 
closed as if it had never been inhabited. The street was narrow and 
deserted; the presence of a man attracted attention; from time to 
time someone passed, or went in or out of the neighbourhood. I was 
much troubled about my person; it seemed to me that they guessed 
why I was there; and this idea tormented me, for I have always pre- 
ferred the honour and repose of those who were dear to me to my 
own pleasures. 

At last, tired of playing the Spanish lover and having no guitar, I 
determined to write to Mademoiselle de Graffenried. I would rather 
have written to her friend, but I did not dare to do so; besides, it was 
more becoming to begin with the one to whom I owed the acquaint- 
ance of the other, and with whom I was more intimate. When my 
letter was finished, I took it to Mademoiselle Giraud, as had been 
agreed with the young ladies when we parted. It was they who sug- 
gested this expedient. Mademoiselle Giraud was a quilter, and, as 
she sometimes worked at Madame Galley’s, she had access to her 
house. The messenger, certainly, did not appear to me well chosen: 
but I was afraid that, if I made any difficulty about her, they would 
propose no other. Besides, I did not dare to hint that she wanted to 
establish a claim of her own upon me. I felt mortified that she should 
venture to think that she was, in my eyes, of the same sex as those 
young ladies. In short, I preferred this means of delivering my let- 
ter to none at all, and took my chance. 

At the first word Giraud guessed my secret; it was not difficult. 
Even if a letter to be delivered to a young lady had not spoken for 
itself, my silly and embarrassed air alone would have betrayed me. 
It may be imagined that this commission did not afford her great 
pleasure; however, she undertook it, and executed it faithfully. The 
next morning I ran to her house, where I found my answer. How 
I hastened to get outside, to read and kiss it to my heart’s content— 
that there is no need to tell; but there is all the more reason to men- 


148 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


tion the manner in which Mademoiselle Giraud behaved, in which 
she showed greater delicacy and reserve than I should have expected 
from her. Sensible enough to perceive that, with her thirty-seven 
years, her leveret’s eyes, her snuff-bedaubed nose, her shrill voice 
and her black skin, she stood a bad chance against two young per- 
sons, full of grace and in all the splendour of beauty, she resolved 
neither to betray nor to assist them, and preferred to lose me rather 
than help them to win me. 

[1732.]—Merceret, not having received any tidings of her mis- 
tress, had for some time thought of returning to Fribourg; Mademot- 
selle Giraud made her decide to do so. She did more; she gave her to 
understand that it would be right that someone should take her 
back to her father, and proposed myself. Little Merceret, who by 
no means disliked me either, thought this idea a very good one. The 
same day they spoke to me of it as a settled affair, and, as I found 
nothing disagreeable in this manner of disposing of myself, I con- 
sented, considering the journey as a matter of a week at most. 
Giraud, who thought otherwise, arranged everything. I was obliged 
to confess the state of my finances. Provision was made for me; Mer- 
ceret undertook to defray my expenses, and, to make up for the loss 
she thus incurred, it was agreed, at my entreaty, that her few belong- 
ings should be sent on in advance, and that we should make the 
journey slowly on foot. This was done. 

I ami sorry to be obliged to describe so many girls in love with me; 
but, as I have very little reason to be vain of the advantages I have 
gained from these amours, I think I may tell the truth without 
scruple. Merceret, younger and not so cunning as Giraud, never 
made such lively advances; but she imitated the tone of my voice 
and accent, repeated my words, showed me the attention which I 
ought to have shown to her, and, being naturally very timid, always 
took care that we slept in the same room; an intimacy which rarely 
stops at such a point in the case of a young man of twenty and a 
young woman of twenty-five who are travelling together. 

On this occasion, however, such was the case. My simplicity was 
such that, although Merceret was not disagreeable to me, not only 
did the slightest attempt at gallantry never occur to my mind, dur- 
ing the whole journey, but I never even had the remotest idea of 


2 


VISITS HIS FATHER 149 


anything of the kind; and, even if the.idea had occurred to me, I 
should have been too footish to know how to take advantage of it. 
I could not imagine how a young man and a young woman could 
ever sleep together; I believed that it required ages to prepare for 
this terrible arrangement. If poor Merceret, when she offered to | 
defray my expenses, reckoned upon some equivalent, she was de- 
ceived; we reached Fribourg exactly as we had left Annecy. 

When we passed through Geneva, I did not go to see anyone; but 
I almost had a serious attack of illness on the bridges. I have never 
seen the walls of this happy city, never entered its gates, without 
feeling a certain heart-sinking, the result of excessive emotion. 
While the noble image of liberty elevated my soul, thoughts of 
equality, union, and gentleness of manners moved me even to tears, 
and inspired me with a lively regret at having lost all these blessings. 
How mistaken I was, and yet how naturally! J thought I saw all this: 
in my native land, because I carried it in my heart. 

We were obliged to pass Nyon. Pass without seeing my good 
father! Had I been able to bring myself to do this, I should after- 
` wards have died of grief. I left Merceret at the inn, and went at 
all risks to see him. Ah! how wrong I was to be afraid of him! When 
I approached him, his heart opened itself to those feelings of a father 
with which it was filled. How he wept while we embraced! He at 
first thought that I had returned to him. I told him my story and 
my resolution. He feebly opposed it. He pointed out to me the 
dangers to which I was exposing inyself, and told me that the brief- 

est follies were the best. For the rest, he did not feel the slightest 
temptation to detain me by force, and in that I am of opinion that 
he was right; but it is none the less certain that he did not do all 
that he might have done to bring me back, whether it was that he 
himself was of opinion that I ought not to retrace the step that I had 
already taken, or, perhaps, did not quite know what he could do 
with me at my age. I have since learned that he had formed a very 
unjust and entirely false, although very natural, opinion of my 
travelling companion. My step-mother, a good woman but rather 
mawkish, pretended to want to keep me to supper. I did not stay, 
but told them that I intended to stop longer with them on my return, 
and left in their charge my little bundle which I had sent by the boat 


150 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


and did not know what to do with. I set out early the next morning, 
pleased that I had had the courage to do my duty and had seen my 
father. 

We arrived without accident at Fribourg. Towards the end of 
the journey, my companion’s advances became less pronounced. 
After our arrival, she showed me nothing but coldness, and her 
father, who was not rolling in money, did not give me a very favour- 
able reception; and I went to an inn to sleep. The following day I 
went to see them; they invited me to dinner; I accepted. Then we 
separated with dry eyes. In the evening I returned to my beershop, 
and left the place two days after my arrival, without exactly know- 
ing which way I intended to go. 

Here again was an incident in my life when Providence offered 
me exactly what I wanted, in order to spend my days in happiness. 
Merceret was a very good girl, certainly not brilliant or handsome, 
but neither was she ugly; she possessed little animation, and, but 
for occasional exhibitions of temper, which passed off with tears and 
never led to any stormy results, was very sensible. She was really 
attached to me; I might have married her without any difficulty, 
and followed her father’s trade; my taste for music would have made 
me fond of it. I should have settled at Fribourg—a little town, not 
pretty, certainly, but inhabited by very good-natured people. 1 
should, no doubt, have lost much pleasure, but I should have lived 
in peace to my last hour; and J, better than anyone else, ought to 
know that there was no reason for a moment’s hesitation about such 
a bargain. 

I returned, not to Nyon, but to Lausanne. I wanted to sate myself 
with the sight of this beautiful lake, which is there seen in its great- 
est extent. Few of the secret motives which have determined me to 
act have been more rational. Things seen at a distance are rarely 
powerful enough to make me act. The uncertainty of the future has 
always made me lock upon plans, which need considerable time to 
carry them out, as decoys for fools. I indulge in hopes like others, 
provided it costs me nothing to support them; but if they require 
continued attention, I have done with it. The least trifling pleasure 
which is within my reach tempts me more than the joys of Paradise. 
However, I make an exception of the pleasure which is followed by 


THE INN AT MOUDON 151 


pain; this has no temptation for me, because I love only pure enjoy- 
ments, and these a man ever has when he knows that he is pre- 
paring for himself repentance and regret. 

It was very necessary for me to reach some place, the nearer the 
better; for, having lost my way, I found myself in the evening at | 
Moudon, where I spent the little money I had left, except ten kreut- 
zers, which went the next day for dinner; and, in the evening, when 
I reached a little village near Lausanne, I entered an inn without a 
sou to pay for my bed, and not knowing what to do. Being very 
hungry, I put a good face upon the matter, and called for supper, 
as if I had been quite able to pay for it. I went to bed without think- 
ing of anything, and slept soundly; and, after I had breakfasted in 
the morning and reckoned with my host, I wanted to leave him my 
waistcoat as security for the seven batz, which was the amount of my 
bill. This good fellow refused it; he said that, thanks to heaven, he 
had never stripped anyone; that he did not mean to begin for the 
sake of seven batz; that I could keep my waistcoat and pay him when 
I could. I was touched by his kindness, but less than I ought to have 
been, and less than I have been since, when I have thought of it 
again. I soon sent him his money, with thanks, by a messenger whom 
I could trust; but fifteen years afterwards, returning from Italy by 
way of Lausanne, I sincerely regretted to find that I had forgotten 
the name of the landlord and of the inn. I should certainly have gone 
to see him; it would have been a real pleasure to me to remind him 
of his act of charity, and to prove to him that it had not been ill- 
applied. The simple and unpretentious kindness of this worthy man 
appears to me more deserving of gratitude than services, doubtless 
more important, but rendered with greater ostentation. 

When approaching Lausanne, I mused upon the straits in which 
I found myself, and thought how I might extricate myself without 
betraying my distress to my step-mother; and, in this pilgrimage on 
foot, I compared myself to my friend Venture on his arrival at 
Annecy. I was so heated with this idea that, without reflecting that 
I possessed neither his charm of manner nor his accomplishments, 
I took it into my head to play the little Venture at Lausanne, to give 
lessons in music, which I did not understand, and to say that I came 
from Paris, where I had never been. As there was no choir-school, 


152 . THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


in which I could have offered to assist, and as, besides, I was not 
such a fool as to venture amongst those who were acquainted with 
the art, I commenced to carry out my fine project by making in- 
quiries for a small inn where I could live well and cheaply. I was 
recommended to a certain M. Perrotet, who took boarders. This 
Perrotet proved to be the best fellow in the world, and gave me a 
most hearty reception. I told him my petty lies, as I had prepared 
them. He promised to speak about me, and to try to get me some 
pupils, and said that he would not ask me for any money until I 
had earned some. His charge for board was five “white crowns,” 
little enough, everything considered, for the accommodation, but 
a great deal for me. He advised me only to put myself on half-board 
at first; this meant some good soup, and nothing else, for dinner, 
but a good supper later. I agreed. Poor Perrotet let me have all this 
without payment, and with the best heart in the world, and spared 
no pains to be of use to me. 

Why is it that, having found so many good people in my youth, 
I find so few in my later years? Is their race extinct? No; but the 
class in which I am obliged to look for them now, is no longer the 
same as that in which I found them. Among the people, where 
great passions only speak at intervals, the sentiments of nature 
make themselves more frequently heard; in the higher ranks they 
are absolutely stifled, and, under the mask of sentiment, it is only 
interest or vanity that speaks. 

I wrote from Lausanne to my father, who forwarded my bundle, 
and gave me some excellent advice—of which I ought to have made 
better use. I have already noted moments of incomprehensible de- 
lirium, during which I was no longer myself. Here, again, is one of 
the most striking instances. In order to understand to what an ex- 
tent I had lost my head, to what an extent I had, so to speak, Ven- 
turised myself, it is only necessary to consider how many extrava- 
gances I committed at one and the same time. Behold me a teacher 
of singing, without knowing how to decipher an air; for even had 
I profited by the six months spent with Le Maitre, they would never 
have been sufficient; besides, I had been taught by a master, and 
that was enough to make me learn indifferently. A Parisian from 
Geneva, and a Catholic in a Protestant country, I considered I ought 


HIS COMPOSITION: PERFORMED 153 


to change my name as well as my religion and my country. I always 
adhered as closely as possile to my great model. He had called him- 
self Venture de Villeneuve; out of the name Rousseau I made the 
anagram Vaussore, and called myself Vaussore de Villeneuve. 
Venture knew how to compose, although he had said nothing about 
it; I, without any knowledge of this, boasted of my skill before all 
the world; and, without being able to score the most trifling vaude- 
ville, I gave myself out as a composer. This was not all; having been 
presented to M. de Treytorens, a professor of law, who was very 
fond of music and gave concerts at his house, I must needs give him 
a sample of my talents, and began to compose a piece for his concert 
with as much effrontery as if I knew how to set about it. I had the 
perseverance to work for a fortnight at this beautiful composition, 
to make a fair copy of it, to write out the parts, and distribute them 
with as much assurance as if it had been a masterpiece of harmony. 
Lastly, a thing which will hardly be believed although it is perfectly 
true, to crown this lofty production in a befitting manner, I added 
at the end a pretty minuet, which was sung in every street, and 
which, perhaps, everybody still recollects, the words of which were 
as follows: 


Quelle caprice! 
Quelle injustice! 
Quoi! ta Clarice 
Trahirait tes feux! etc. 


Venture had taught me this air, with a bass accompaniment an4 
other disgusting words, which had helped me to remember it. } 
accordingly added at the end of my composition this minuet and 
his bass, suppressing the words, and gave the whole out as my own, 
as fearlessly as if I had been talking to the inhabitants of the moon. 

The company assembled to perform my piece. I explained to each 
how the time was to be taken, the manner of execution, and the 
signs of repetition of the parts. I was extremely busy. They spent 
five or six minutes in trying their voices and instruments, which 
seemed five or six centuries. At last all was ready; I gave five or six 
beats of “Attention!” with a beautiful roll of paper upon my con- 
ductor’s desk. Silence having been obtained, I solemnly began to 


154 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


beat time, the performance commenced. . . . No, since the days 
of French opera, never has such a caterwauling been heard! What- 
ever they might have thought of my pretended talent, the effect 
was worse than anything that seemed to be expected. The musicians 
were ready to choke with laughter; the audience opened their eyes 
wide, and would gladly have stopped their ears, but did not know 
how. The musicians, who played the part of my executioners, wish- 
ing to amuse themselves, scraped horribly enough to split the drum 
of a deaf man’s® ear. I had the hardihood to keep on without stop- 
ping, my forehead covered with large drops of sweat, but prevented 
by shame from running away and leaving them all in the lurch. By 
way of consolation, I heard those who were present whispering to 
themselves, or rather to me, “Intolerable! What mad music! What a 
witches’ Sabbath!” Poor Jean Jacques! in this cruel moment, little 
did you think that one day, in the presence of the King of France 
and all his Court, your music would excite murmurs of applause and 
astonishment, and that, in all the boxes round you, charming women 
would whisper to themselves, “What enchanting music! What 
charming notes! All these airs go straight to the heart!” 

But what put everyone in good humour was the minuet. No 
sooner had a few notes been played, than I heard on all sides bursts 
of laughter. Everybody congratulated me on my refined taste; they 
assured me that this minuet would make a name for me, and that 
my composition deserved to be sung everywhere. I need not describe 
my anguish, nor confess that I well deserved it. 

Next day, one of the musicians, named Lutold, came to see me, 
and was honest enough not to congratulate me on my success. The 
deep feeling of folly, shame and regret, despair at the position to 
which I was reduced, the impossibility of keeping my heart shut in 
my distress, made me open it to him. I let my tears flow freely; and, 
not content with confessing my ignorance, I told him everything, 
begging him to keep it a secret; he promised to do so, and kept 
his word in the manner that may be imagined. The same evening 
the whole of Lausanne knew who I was; and, what was remarkable, 
no one showed that he knew it, not even the good Perrotet, who in 


6 &lt; . : : 
Un quinze-vingt: properly an inmate of the hospital at Paris, established for 
300 blind men. 


MEMORIES OF MADAME DE WARENS 155, 


spite of everything, was not deterred from giving me board and 
lodging. 

I lived, but my life was gens melancholy. The results of my first 
appearance did not make Lausanne a very agreeable place for me 
to stay in. Pupils did not come in crowds; I did not even get a single 
girl to teach, and no one belonging to the town. I had in all two or 
three fat “Deutschers,” whose stupidity was only equalled by my 
ignorance, who wearied me to death, and, in my hands, did not 
turn out very accomplished strummers. I was sent for to one house 
only, where a little serpent of a girl amused herself with showing 
me a quantity of music of which I could not read a note, and which 
she was spiteful enough afterwards to sing in the music-master’s 
face, to show him how it ought to be executed. I was so little able 
to read an air at sight, that at the brilliant concert of which I have 
spoken, I was utterly unable to follow the performance even for a 
moment to find out whether the musicians were playing what I had 
before my eyes—the music which I had composed myself. 

In the midst of these great humiliations I found sweet consolation 
in the news I received from time to time from my two charming 
friends. I have always found great power of consolation in their sex; 
and nothing soothes my dejection in times of affliction more than the 
feeling that an amiable person sympathizes with me. The corres- 
pondence, however, came to an end soon afterwards, and was never 
renewed; but it was my fault. When I changed my place of abode, 
I forgot to give them my address; and, being’compelled by necessity 
to think of nothing but myself, I soon forgot them altogether. 

I have not spoken of poor mamma for some time; but it would 
be a mistake to think that I also forgot her. I never ceased to think 
of her and to long to find her again, not only to satisfy the needs of 
existence, but still more those of my heart. My devotion to her, 
lively and tender as it was, did not prevent me from loving others, 
but not in the same way. All alike owed my tenderness to their 
charms; but, whereas in the case of others these were the only cause 
of it, and it would have disappeared with them, mamma might have 
grown old and ugly, and I should have loved her as fondly as ever. 
My heart had completely transferred to her person the homage 
which it at frst rendered to her beauty; and, whatever change she 


156 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


might have suffered, my feelings towards her could never have 
changed, provided that she had still remained herself. I knew very 
well that I owed her my gratitude; but in reality I did not think of 
that. Whatever she might have done for me or not, it would always 
have been the same. I loved her neither from a feeling of duty or 
self-interest, nor from motives of convenience; I loved her because I 
was born to love her. When I fell in love with any other woman, I 
admit that it distracted my attention, and I thought of her less fre- 
quently; but I thought of her with the same feelings of pleasure, and, 
whether in love or not, I never occupied my thoughts with her 
without feeling that there could never be any real happiness for me 
in life as long as I was separated from her. 

Although I had not heard of her for so long, I never believed that 
I had lost her altogether, or thought it possible that she could have 
forgotten me. I said to myself: Sooner or later she will learn that I 
am a lonely wanderer, and will give me some sign of life; I shall 
find her again, of that I am certain. Meanwhile, it was a delight to 
me to live in her native country, to walk through the streets through 
which she had walked, past the houses in which she had lived—all 
by guess, for it was one of my foolish oddities that I could not bring 
myself to make inquiries about her, or even to mention her name, 
unless it was absolutely necessary. It seemed to me that I could not 
speak of her without betraying the feelings with which she inspired 
me, without my mouth revealing the secret of my heart, without in 
some way compromising her. I even believe that with this was 
mingled a certain feeling of alarm that someone might say some- 
thing bad about her. The step she had taken had been freely com- 
mented upon, and her conduct discussed. For fear that they might 
not speak of her as I should have liked, I preferred to hear nothing 
at all said about her. 

As my pupils did not take up much of my time, and her birth- 
place was only twelve miles from Lausanne, I spent three or four 
days in walking there, during which a feeling of most tender emo- 
tion never left me. The view of the Lake of Geneva and its delightful 
shores always possessed a special charm in my eyes which I cannot 
explain, and which consists not only in the beauty of the view, but 
in something still more attractive, which moves and touches me. 


= 


VEVAY 157 


¥ 


Whenever I approach the Canton of Vaud, I am conscious of an 
impression in which the remembrance of Madame de Warens, who 
was born there, of my father who lived there, of Mademoiselle de 
Vulson who enjoyed the first fruits of my youthful love, of several 
pleasure trips which I made there when a child and, I believe, some 
other exciting cause, more mysterious and more powerful than all — 
this, is combined. When the burning desire of this happy and peace- 
ful life, which flees from me and for which I was born, inflames my 
imagination, it is always the Canton of Vaud, near the lake, in the 
midst of enchanting scenery, to which it draws me. I feel that I must 
have an orchard on the shore of this lake and no other, that I must 
have a loyal friend, a loving wife, a cow, and a little boat. I shall 
never enjoy perfect happiness on earth until I have all that. I laugh 
at the simplicity with which I have several times visited this country 
merely in search of this imaginary happiness. I was always sur- 
prised to find its inhabitants, especially the women, of quite a dif- 
ferent character from that which I expected. How contradictory it 
appeared to me! The country and its inhabitants have never seemed 
to me made for each other. 

During this journey to Vévay, walking along the beautiful shore, 
I abandoned myself to the sweetest melancholy. My heart eagerly 
flung itself into a thousand innocent raptures; I was filled with 
emotion, I sighed and wept like a child. How often have I stopped 
to weep to my heart’s content, and, sitting on a large stone, amused 
myself with looking at my tears falling into the water! 

At Vévay I lodged at La Clef, and, during the two days that I re- 
mained there without seeing anyone, I conceived an affection for 
this town which has followed me on all my journeys, and which, 
finally, made me fix the abode of the heroes of my romance there. 
I would say to all persons of taste and feeling: Go to Vévay, explore 
the country, contemplate the scenery, row on the lake, and then say 
if Nature has not made this beautiful country for a Julie, a Claire and 
a St. Preux; but do not expect to find them there! 

I return to my history. 

As I was a Catholic and professed to be one, I followed openly 
and without hesitation the faith which I had embraced. On Sun- 
days, when it was fine, I went to mass at Assens, two leagues from 


158 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Lausanne. I usually went in the company of other Catholics, particu- 
larly a Parisian embroiderer whose name I have forgotten. He was 
not a Parisian like myself, but a true Parisian from Paris, an arch- 
Parisian of the bon Dieu, good-natured as a child of Champagne. 
His love for his country was so great that he would not allow himself 
to have any doubts about my being a Parisian as well, for fear of 
losing the opportunity of talking about it. M. de Crouzas, the 
lieutenant-governor, had a gardener—who was also a Parisian, but 
not so good-natured—who considered the honour of his country 
compromised if anyone dared to claim it for his own when he had 
no right to do so. He questioned me with the air of a man who felt 
sure of catching me in a mistake, and then smiled maliciously. He 
once asked me what there was remarkable in the Marché-neuf. As 
may be imagined, I answered at random. Having lived twenty years 
in Paris, I ought by this time to know the city; and yet, if anyone 
were to ask me a similar question to-day, I should be equally at 
a loss for an answer, and my embarrassment might lead anyone 
to conclude that I have never been there. To such an extent is a 
person liable, even when he meets with the truth, to put his trust 
in misleading arguments. {| 

I cannot say exactly how long I remained at Lausanne; I did not 
carry away from it very lively recollections. I only know that, finding 
myself unable to gain a livelihood, I went from there to Neufchâtel, 
where I spent the winter. I was more successful in the latter town; 
I got some pupils, and earned enough to settle with my good friend 
Perrotet, who had faithfully sent on my little bundle, although I still 
owed him a considerable sum. 

I insensibly learned music by teaching it. My life was tolerably 
pleasant; a sensible man would have been content with it, but my 
restless heart wanted something more. On Sundays and other days 
when I was at liberty, I roamed the country and forests in the neigh- 
bourhood, ever wandering, musing, and sighing; and, when once 
out of the city, I never returned till the evening. One day, being at 
Boudry, I went into an inn to dine; I saw there a man with a long 
beard, a violet-coloured coat after the Greek style, a fur cap, of some- 
what noble appearance and presence, who often had great difficulty 
in making himself understood, since he spoke an almost unintelli- 


THK AKCHIMANDRITE OF JERUSALEM 159 


gible jargon, which resembled Italian more than any other language. 
I understood nearly evergthing he said, and I was the only person 
who did. He could only express his meaning by making signs to the 
landlord and the country people. I said a few words to him in Ital- 
ian, which he understood perfectly; he got up and embraced me with . 
delight. The acquaintance was soon made, and from that moment 
I acted as his interpreter. His dinner was a good one, mine was 
barely tolerable; he invited me to share his, and I accepted without 
ceremony. Drinking and chattering, we became quite intimate, and 
at the end of the meal we were inseparable. He told me that he was 
a Greek prelate and Archimandrite of Jerusalem, and that he had 
been commissioned to make a collection in Europe for the restora- 
tion of the Holy Sepulchre. He showed me beautiful patents from 
the Czarina and the Emperor; he had several more from other 
sovereigns. He was well satisfied with the amount he had already 
collected, but he had found incredible difficulties in Germany, since 
he did not understand a word of German, Latin, or French, and 
was reduced to his Greek, Turkish, and the lingua franca, as his 
sole resource, which had not helped him much in the country in 
which he had made so bad a beginning. He proposed that I should 
accompany him as secretary and interpreter. Although I had just 
bought a new violet coat, which was not ill-suited to my new em- 
ployment, I looked anything but smart, so that he thought it would 
be an easy matter to secure my services, and in this he was not mis- 
taken. Our agreement was soon made; I asked nothing, and he 
promised much. Without security, without bond, without knowing 
anything about him, I submitted myself to his guidance, and the 
next morning behold me on my way to Jerusalem! 

We commenced our journey with the Canton of Fribourg, where 
he did not do much. His episcopal rank did not allow him to play 
the beggar and collect money from private persons; but we pre: 
sented his commission to the senate, who gave him a small! sum. 
From there we went to Berne. We put up at the Falcon, at that time 
a good inn, where good company was to be found. The guests were 
numerous and the table well served. I had so long had to put up with 
bad fare, that I needed to recruit myself; I had the opportunity and 
made use of it. The worthy Archimandrite was himself very good 


160 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


company, lively, fond of the table, and conversed well with those 
who understood him. He was not without a certain amount of 
knowledge, and employed his Greek erudition with considerable 
taste. One day, while cracking nuts at dessert, he cut his finger very 
deeply; and as the blood poured forth in streams, he showed his 
finger to the company, and said, with a laugh, Mirate, Signori; 
questo è sangue pelasgo." 

At Berne my services were of some use to him, and I did not 
come off as badly as I had expected. I was more courageous and 
eloquent than I should have been on behalf of myself. But it was not 
so simple a matter as at Fribourg; lengthy and frequent conferences 
with the chief men of the State were necessary, and the examination 
of his papers was not the work of a day. At length, when everything 
was in order, he was admitted to an audience by the Senate. I went 
with him as his interpreter, and was ordered to speak. This was the 
last thing I had expected; it had never entered my head that, after 
long conferences with the individual members, it would be necessary 
to address the assembly in a body as if nothing had been said. Judge 
of my embarrassment! For a man as bashful as myself, to speak, not 
only in public but before the Senate of Berne, and to speak extem- 
pore, without having a single minute for preparation, was enough 
to annihilate me. And yet I did not even feel nervous. Briefly and 
clearly I explained the Archimandrite’s commission. I praised the 
piety cf those princes who had contributed to the collection he had 
come to make. In order to stir their excellencies to emulation, I said 
that no less was to be expected from their accustomed munificence; 
and then, having tried to prove that this good work was equally 
meritorious for all Christians without distinction of sect or creed, 
I ended by promising the blessings of Heaven to all those who should 
take part in it. I will not say that my speech made a great impression, 
but it was certainly to the taste of the audience, and, on leaving, the 
Archimandrite received a considerable donation, and, in addition, 
tompliments upon the intelligence of his secretary, which I had the 
pleasing task of interpreting, although I did not venture to render 
them word for word. This is the only time in my life that I have 
ever spoken in public and in the presence of a sovereign, and per- 


Admire, gentlemen; this is Pelasgian blood! 


ARRIVES AT SOLEURE 161 


haps, also the only time that I have spoken well and boldly. What a 
difference in the temperdfent of the same man! Three years ago, 
I went to Yverdun to see my old friend M. Roguin, and received a 
deputation, which came to thank me for some books which I had 
presented to the town library. The Swiss are great orators; they . 
harangued me. I felt obliged to reply; but I was so embarrassed when 
I began to do so, and my head became so confused, that I stopped 
short and made myself ridiculous, Although naturally shy, I have 
sometimes shown confidence in my youth, never in my riper years. 
The more I have seen of the world, the less I have been able to con- 
form to its manner. 

On leaving Berne, we went to Soleure; for the Archimandrite 
intended to pass through Germany again and to return by way of 
Hungary or Poland, which was an enormously long round; but 
as his purse filled rather than emptied on the road, he had little fear 
of a roundabout way. As for me, it was a matter of indifference 
whether I was on horseback or on foot; and I should have desired 
nothing better than to travel in the same manner my whole life- 
time; but it was written that I should not go so far. 

The first thing we did:on our arrival at Soleure, was to go and 
pay our respects to the French ambassador. Unfortunately for my 
Bishop, this ambassador was the Marquis de Bonac, who had been 
ambassador at the Sublime Porte, and was bound to be well ac- 
quainted with everything concerning the Holy Sepulchre. The 
Archimandrite had a quarter of an hour’s audience, to which I was 
not admitted, as the ambassador was acquainted with the lingua 
franca and spoke Italian at least as well as myself. When my Greek 
went out, I was going to follow him, but was detained; it was my 
turn next. Having given myself out as a Parisian, I was, as such, 
under his Excellency’s jurisdiction. He asked me who I was, and 
exhorted me to tell the truth. I promised to do so, and asked him 
for a private audience, which was granted. He took me to his study, 
and shut the door. I threw myself at his feet and kept my word. I 
should not have confessed less, even if I had made no promise; for 
a continual need of opening my heart brings it every moment to 
my lips, and, having disclosed myself unreservedly to the musician 
Lutold, I was not likely to play the mysterious with the Marquis de 


162 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Bonac. He was so satisfied with my little story, and the frankness 
with which I had unbosomed myself, that he took me by the hand, 
conducted me to his wife, and introduced me to her, at the same 
time giving her an outline of my story. Madame de Bonac received 
me kindly, and said that I must not be allowed to go with the Greek 
monk. It was decided that I should stay at the hotel, until they saw 
what could be done with me. I wished to go and say good-bye to my 
poor Archimandrite, for whom I had conceived a liking, but they 
would not allow me. He was informed that I had been detained, 
and, a quarter of an hour afterwards, I saw my little bundle arrive. 
M. de la Martinière, secretary to the embassy, was, in a manner, in- 
trusted with the care of me. While showing me to the room which 
was intended for me, he said: “This room, in the time of the Comte 
du Luc, was occupied by a celebrated man of the same name as 
yourself;® it rests with yourself to supply his place in every respect, 
so that it may one day be said, Rousseau the first, Rousseau the 
second.” This similarity, of which at that time I had little hopes, 
would have flattered my ambition less, if I had been able to foresee 
how heavy would be the price I should one day have to pay for it. 

M. de la Martiniére’s words excited my curiosity. I read the works 
of the writer whose room I occupied; and, having regard to the 
compliment which had been paid me, and believing that I had a 
taste for poetry, I composed a cantata in praise of Madame de Bonac 
as a first attempt. This fancy did not last. From time to time I have 
written indifferent verses; it is a fairly good exercise, for practising 
oneself in elegant turns and improving one’s prose; but I have never 


ê This was Jean Baptiste Rousseau (1671-1741), a French lyric poet. Pierre 
Rousseau (1725-1785) was a writer of plays. The following lines are quoted by 
Mr. John Morley, in his “Life of Rousseau”: 


“Trois auteurs que Rousseau l’on nomme, 
Connus de Paris jusqu’ A Rome, 
Sont différens: voici par ot: 
Rousseau de Paris fut grand homme; 
Rousseau de Genéve est un fou: 
Rousseau de Toulouse un atome.” 


A fourth, Théodore (1808-1867), was a celebrated landscape painter. 


- 


LEAVES FOR PARIS 163 


found sufficient attraction in French poetry to devote myself to it 
entirely. e 

M. de la Martinière wanted to see how I could write, and asked 
me to give him in writing the same details as I had given to the 
ambassador. I wrote him a long letter, which I hear has been pre- 
served by M. de Marianne, who was for a long time attached to the 
embassy under the Marquis de Bonac, and has since succeeded M. de 
la Martinière during the ambassadorship of M. de Courteilles. I 
have asked M. de Malesherbes to try and get me a copy of this letter. 
If I can procure it through him or others, it will be found in the col- 
lection which is intended to accompany my Confessions. 

The experience which I began to acquire by degrees moderated 
my romantic plans; for instance, I not only did not fall in love with 
Madame de Bonac, but I immediately saw that I had little chance of 
advancement in her husband’s house. M. de la Martinière in office, 
and M. de Marianne waiting as it were to step into his shoes, left 
me nothing higher to hope for than the post of under-secretary, 
which was not excessively tempting to me. For this reason, when I 
was consulted as to what I should like to do, I showed a great desire 
to go to Paris. The ambassador liked the idea, which at least seemed 
likely to relieve him of me. M. de Merveilleux, secretary and inter- 
preter to the embassy, said that his friend, M. Godard, a Swiss 
colonel in the service of France, was looking for a companion for 
his nephew, who was entering the service very early, and thought 
that I might suit him. With this idea, which was adopted without 
much consideration, my departure was settled; and I, who saw be- 
fore me a journey, with Paris at the end of it, was highly delighted. 
They gave me some letters, a hundred francs for my travelling ex- 
penses, together with some very good advice, and I set out. 

The journey took me a fortnight, which I may reckon amongst the 
happy days of my life. I was young, and in good health; I had suff- 
cient money and abundant hopes; I travelled on foot and I travelled 
alone. That I should consider this an advantage would appear sur- 
prising, if the reader were not by this time familiar with my disposi- 
tion. My pleasing chimeras kept me company, and never did my 
heated imagination give birth to any that were more magnificent, 


164 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


When anyone offered me an empty seat in a carriage, or accosted me 
on the road, I made a wry face when I saw that fortune overthrown, 
the edifice of which I reared during my walk. This time my ideas 
were warlike. I was going to be attached to a military man and to 
become a soldier myself; for it had been arranged that I should begin 
by being a cadet. I already saw myself in an officer’s uniform, with 
a beautiful white plume. My breast swelled at this noble thought. 
I had a smattering of geometry and fortification; I had an uncle an 
engineer; I was, in a manner, a soldier born. My short sight was a 
slight obstacle, which, however, did not trouble me much; and I 
hoped, by dint of coolness and intrepidity, to supply this defect. I had 
read that Marshal Schomberg was very short-sighted; why should 
not Marshal Rousseau be the same? I grew so warm in pursuit of 
these foolish ideas, that I saw nothing but troops, ramparts, gabions, 
batteries, and myself, in the midst of fire and smoke, calmly giving 
my orders with my field-glass in my hand. However, when I passed 
- through beautiful scenery, when I saw groves and rivulets, this 
touching sight made me sigh regretfully; in the midst of my glory, 
I felt that my heart was not made for such din and noise; and soon, 
without knowing how, I found myself in the midst of my beloved 
sheepfolds, renouncing for ever the toils of Mars. 

How greatly did the entrance into Paris belie the idea I had 
formed of it! The external decorations of Turin, the beauty of its 
streets, the symmetry and regularity of the houses, had made me 
look for something quite different in Paris. I had imagined to my- 
self a city of most imposing aspect, as beautiful as it was large, where 
nothing was to be seen but splendid streets and palaces of gold and 
marble. Entering by the suburb of St. Marceau, I saw nothing but 
dirty and stinking little streets, ugly black houses, a general air of 
slovenliness and poverty, beggars, carters, menders of old clothes, 
criers of decoctions and old hats. All this, from the outset, struck me 
so forcibly, that all the real magnificence I have since seen in Paris 
has been unable to destroy this first impression, and I have always 
retained a secret dislike against residence in this capital. I may say 
that the whole time, during which I afterwards lived there, was 


employed solely in trying to find means to enable me to live away 
from it. 


PARISIAN ACQUAINTANCES 165 


Such is the fruit of a too lively imagination, which exaggerates 
beyond human exaggeratfon, and is always ready to see more than 
it has been told to expect. I had heard Paris so much praised, that I 
had represented it to myself as the ancient Babylon, where, if I had 
ever visited it, I should, perhaps, have found as much to take off 
from the picture which I had drawn of it. The same thing happened — 
to me at the Opera, whither I hastened to go the day after my ar- 
rival. The same thing happened to me later at Versailles; and again, 
when I saw the sea for the first time; and the same thing will always 
happen to me, when I see anything which has been too loudly an- 
nounced; for it is impossible for men, and difficult for Nature her- 
self, to surpass the exuberance of my imagination. 

To judge from the manner in which I was received by all those 
to whom I had letters, I thought my fortune was made. The person 
to whom I was specially recommended, and who received me with 
the least enthusiasm, was M. de Surbeck, who had left the service 
and was living in philosophic retirement at Bagneux, where I went 
to see him several times, and where he never offered me so much as 
a glass of water. I was better received by Madame de Merveilleux, 
the interpreter’s sister-in-law, and by his nephew, an officer in the 
guards; mother and son not only received me kindly, but they gave 
me a standing invitation to their table, of which I often availed my- 
self during my stay at Paris. Madame de Merveilleux seemed to me 
to have been handsome once; her hair was a beautiful black, and 
worn in ringlets on her forehead in the old-fashioned style. She still 
retained what does not perish with personal attractions: an agreeable 
mind. She appeared satisfied with mine, and did all she could to 
help me; but no one supported her, and I was soon undeceived in 
regard to the great interest which was apparently taken in me. I 
must, however, do justice to the French; they do not exhaust them- 
selves so much in protestations as is said, and those they make are 
nearly always sincere; but they have a way of appearing to be in- 
terested in you, which is more deceptive than words. The coarse 
compliments of the Swiss can only impose upon fools. The manners 
of the French are more seductive, for the very reason that they are 
simpler; one would think that they are not telling you all they mean 
to do for you, in order to give you a more agreeable surprise. I will 


166 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


say more: they are not false in their professions; they are naturally 
obliging, kindly, benevolent, and even, whatever one may say, more 
sincere than any other nation; but they are fickle and flighty. The 
feelings which they express towards you are genuine; but these feel- 
ings are no sooner come than they are gone. When you converse 
with them, they are full of you; as soon as you are out of their sight, 
they forget you. Nothing is permanent in their hearts; with them 
everything is the work of che moment. 

Thus I was greatly flattered, but little benefited. This Colonel 
Godard, to whose nephew I had been sent, turned out to be a fright- 
ful old miser, who, although rolling in riches, wanted my services 
for nothing, when he saw the distress I was in. He wanted me to 
be a sort of valet to his nephew, without wages, rather than a real 
tutor. As I was permanently attached to him, and thereby exempt 
from service, he said that I ought to live on my pay as a cadet—that 
is, as a soldier. He would scarcely consent to give me a uniform; he 
would have liked me to content myself with that of the regiment.. 
Madame de Merveilleux, indignant at his proposals, herself per- 
suaded me not to accept them; her son was of the same opinion.. 
They looked for something else for me, but found nothing. In the 
meantime, I began to be pressed for money; a hundred francs, out 
of which I had paid the expenses of my journey, could not carry me 
very far. Fortunately, I received from the ambassador a small addi- 
tional remittance which was very useful to me, and I think that he 
would not have abandoned me if I had had more patience; but I am. 
unable to wait long for what I desire, or to solicit it. I lost heart, I 
appeared no more, and all was at an end. I had not forgotten my 
poor mamma; but how was I to find her? where was I to look for 
her? Madame de Merveilleux, who was acquainted with my story, 
had assisted me in my inquiries for a long time without success. At 
last, she informed me that Madame de Warens had left Paris more 
than two months ago, but that no one knew whether she had gone 
to Savoy or Turin, and that some said she had returned to Switzer- 
land. This was enough to decide me to follow her, as I was sure that, 
wherever she was, I should find her in the country more easily than 
I had been. able to do in Paris. 


Before setting out, I exercised my new poetical talent in a letter 


WRITES TO COLONEL GODARD 167 


to Colonel Godard, in which I abused him to the best of my power. 
I showed this scrawl to Madame de Merveilleux, who, instead of 
reproving me, as she ought to have done, was highly amused at my 
sarcasms; and so was her son, who, I fancy, had no great affection 
for M. Godard, and, indeed, I must confess that he was by no means _ 
an amiable person. I felt tempted to send him my verses; they en- 
couraged me to do so. I made them up into a parcel addressed to 
him, and, as there was no city post in Paris at that time, I put it in 
my pocket and sent it to him from Auxerre as I passed through. I 
still sometimes laugh when I think of the wry face he must have 
made when he read this panegyric, in which he was described to 
the life. It began as follows:— 


“Tu croyais, vieux pénard, qu’une folle manie 


D’élever ton neveu m’inspirerait l’envie.” ° 


This trifle—in truth, a poor production, but which was not want- 
ing in wit, and showed a talent for satire—is, nevertheless, the only 
satirical composition which has proceeded from my pen. I have too 
little malice in my heart to make use of such a talent; but I think 
one may judge, from those polemics which I have written from 
time to time in my own defence, that, if I had been of a quarrelsome 
disposition, my aggressors would seldom have had the laugh on 
their side. 

What I most regret in regard to the details of my life which 
have escaped my memory, is that I never kept a diary of my travels. 
I have never thought so much, existed so much, lived so much, been 
so much myself, if I may venture to use the phrase, as in the jour- 
neys which I have made alone and on foot. There is something in 
walking which animates and enlivens my ideas. I can scarcely think 
when I remain still; my body must be in motion to make my mind 
active. The sight of the country, a succession of pleasant views, the 
open air, a good appetite, the sound health which walking gives me, 
the free life of the inns, the absence of all that makes me conscious 
of my dependent position, of all that reminds me of my condition— 
all this sets my soul free, gives me greater boldness of thought, 


® You thought, you old sinner, that a mad folly would inspire me with a long- 


ing to bring up your nephew. 


168 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


throws me, so to speak, into the immensity of things, so that I can 
combine, select, and appropriate them at pleasure, without fear or 
restraint. I dispose of Nature in its entirety as its lord and master; 
my heart, roaming from object to object, mingles and identifies 
itself with those which soothe it, wraps itself up in charming fancies, 
and is intoxicated with delicious sensations. If, in order to render 
them permanent, I amuse myself by describing them by myself, 
what vigorous outlines, what fresh colouring, what power of ex- 
pression I give them! All this, it is said, has been found in my works, 
although written in my declining years. Ah! if only one had seen the 
compositions of my early youth, those which I wrote during my 
travels, those which I sketched and have never written down! Then, 
why not write them? you will say. Why should I? I answer. Why 
deprive myself of the actual charms of enjoyment, in order to tell 
others that I did enjoy them? What did I care for readers, the pub- 
lic, or the whole world, while I was mounting to the skies? Besides, 
did I carry pens and paper with me? If I had thought of all that, 
nothing would have occurred to me. I did not foresee that I should 
have ideas; they come to me when it pleases them, not when it 
pleases me. They either do not come at all, or they come in crowds, 
and overwhelm me with their force and number. Ten volumes a day 
would not have been sufficient. When could I find time to write 
them? When J arrived at any town, I thought of nothing but a good 
dinner; when I left it, of nothing but a good walk. I felt that a new 
paradise was waiting for me at the door. I thought only of going to 
find it. 

I have never felt this so strongly as during the return journey of 
which I am speaking. On my way to Paris, my ideas were limited 
to what I was going to do there. I had thrown myself into the career 
which I thought lay before me, and should have gone through it 
with sufficient honour; but this career was not the one to which my 
heart summoned me, and the beings of reality injured the beings of 
imagination. Colonel Godard and his nephew ill suited a hero like 
myself. Thank Heaven! I was now freed from al! these obstacles; I 
could plunge at will into the land of chimeras, for that alone lay 
before me. I went astray in it so completely, that several times I really 
lost my way; but I should have been very sorry to have taken a more 


ON THE WAY TO LYONS 169 


direct route; for, having a presentiment that at Lyons I should again 
find myself on earth, I should have liked never to arrive there. 

One day, amongst others, having purposely turned out of my way 
to get a nearer view of a spot which appeared worthy of admira- 
tion, I was so delighted with it, and went round it so often that, at 
last, I completely lost myself. After several hours of useless walk- 
ing, tired, and dying of hunger and thirst, I entered a peasant’s hut, 
not much to look at, but the only dwelling I saw in the neighbour- 
hood. I expected to find it the same as in Geneva, or Switzerland, 
where all the well-to-do inhabitants are in a position to show hospi- 
tality. I begged him to give me dinner, and offered to pay for it. He 
offered me some skimmed milk and coarse barley bread, saying that 
that was all he had. I drank the milk with delight, and ate the bread, 
husks and all; but it was not very invigorating fare for a man ex- 
hausted by fatigue. The peasant, who examined me closely, esti- 
mated the truth of my story by my appetite, and immediately after- 
wards declared that he could see that I was a good and honourable 
young man,’ who had not come there to betray him for money. He 
opened a little trapdoor near the kitchen, went down, and came up 
a minute afterwards with a nice brown wheaten loaf, a very 
tempting-looking ham, although considerably cut down, and a bot- 
tle of wine, the sight of which rejoiced my heart more than all the 
rest; to this he added a substantial omelette, and I made a dinner 
such as none but a pedestrian ever enjoyed. When it came to the 
question of payment, his uneasiness and alarm returned; he would 
take none of my money, and refused it with singular anxiety; and 
the amusing thing was that I could not imagine what he was afraid 
of. At last, with a shudder, he uttered the terrible words, “Revenue- 
officers and excisemen.” 11 He gave me to understand that he hid 
his wine on account of the excise, that he hid his bread on account 
of the tax, and that he was a lost man, if anyone had a suspicion 
that he was not starving. All that he said to me on this subject, of 
which I had not the least idea, made an impression upon me which 


10 At that time, apparently, my features did not as yet resemble those of my 


later portraits. 
1 Literally, “cellar-rats,” rats de cave. 


170 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


will never be forgotten. It was the germ of the inextinguishable 
hatred which subsequently grew up in my heart against the oppres- 
sion to which these unhappy people are subject, and against their 
oppressors. This man, although in good circumstances, did not dare 
to eat the bread which he had obtained by the sweat of his brow, 
and could only escape utter ruin by displaying the same poverty as 
prevailed around him. I left his house, equally indignant and 
touched, lamenting the lot of these beautiful countries, upon which 
Nature has only lavished her gifts to make them the prey of bar- 
barous farmers of taxes. 

This is the only distinct recollection I have of the incidents of this 
journey. The only other thing I remember is that, when near Lyons, 
I was tempted to prolong my journey in order to visit the banks of 
the Lignon, for, amongst the romances which I had read with my 
father, “Astraea” had not been forgotten, and returned most fre 
quently to my mind. I asked the way to Forez; and, while talking 
with the landlady of an inn, was informed by her that it was a good 
country for workmen, that there were many forges in it, and a con- 
siderable amount of work done in iron. This panegyric cooled my 
romantic curiosity at once, and it seemed incongruous to look for 
Dianas and Sylvanders amongst a tribe of blacksmiths. The good 
woman, who encouraged me in this manner, must have taken me 
for a journeyman locksmith. 

I did not go to Lyons entirely without an object. As soon as I ar- 
rived, I went to the Chasottes to see Mademoiselle du Châtelet, a 
friend of Madame de Warens, to whom she had given me a letter 
when I went there with M. le Maitre, so that it was an acquaintance 
already made. She informed me that her friend had, in fact, passed 
through Lyons, but that she did not know whether she had gone on 
as far as Piedmont; and that Madame de Warens herself, when she 
left, had been uncertain whether she would not have to stop in 
Savoy; that, if I desired, she would write for information, and that 
the best thing I could do would be to wait at Lyons till she had heard 
from her. I accepted her offer, but I did not venture to tell her that 
I was in a hurry for the answer, and that, as my small means were 
exhausted, I was not in a position to wait long for it. What restrained 
me was not any unfriendliness in her reception; on the contrary, she 


ADVENTURE WITH A WORKMAN I7I 


had been very cordial to me, and had treated me on a footing of 
equality, which deprived#me of the courage to disclose my circum- 
stances to her, and to come down from the róle of an agreeable com- 
panion to that of a miserable beggar. 

I seem to have a tolerably clear view of the sequence of events | 
which I have described in this book. Nevertheless, I think that I 
recollect another voyage to Lyons belonging to this period, which I 
cannot fix, and during which I found myself in great straits. A little 
incident, which I find some difficulty in relating, will never allow 
me to forget it. One evening, I was sitting in Bellecour, after having 
partaken of a very light supper, musing how I should get out of my 
difficulties, when a man in a cap came and sat by my side. He looked 
like one of those silk-workers who, at Lyons, are called taffetatiers. 
He spoke to me; I answered him. After we had talked for about a 
quarter of an hour, with the same coolness and without any altera- 
tion in the tone of his voice, he proposed that we should amuse our- 
selves together. I waited for him to explain what amusement he 
meant, but, without another word, he made ready to give me a prac- 
tical illustration. We were almost touching each other, and the night 
was not too dark to prevent me from seeing what he was going to ` 
do. He had no designs upon my person; at least, nothing seemed to 
show that he meditated anything of the kind, and the place would 
not have been adapted for it; just as he had told me, he only wanted 
each of us to amuse himself separately. This appeared to him so 
simple a matter, that it never occurred to him that I should not look 
upon it in the same light. I was so terrified at this disgraceful pro- 
posal, that, without replying, I got up in a hurry, and ran away as 
fast as I could, fancying the wretch was at my heels. I was so con- 
fused that, instead of making for my lodging, I ran in the direction 
of the quay, and did not stop till I had crossed the wooden bridge, 
trembling as if I had just committed a crime. I was addicted to the 
same vice; the recollection of this incident cured me of it for a long 
time. 

During this journey I met with an adventure of an almost similar 
kind, but which exposed me to greater danger. Finding that my 
funds were nearly exhausted, 1 economised the miserable sum that 
remained. At first I took my meals less frequently at my inn; soon I 


172 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


gave up taking them there altogether, since, for five or six sous, I 
could satisfy myself quite as well at the tavern, as for twenty-five 
sous at the inn. As I no longer took my meals there, I did not feel 
justified in sleeping there, not that I was much in debt, but I was 
ashamed to occupy a bedroom without putting any profit into my 
landlady’s pocket. It was beautiful weather. One very hot evening 
I decided to pass the night in the public square. I had already settled 
myself upon a bench, when an Abbé, who was passing by, saw me 
lying down, came up to me, and asked me if I had anywhere to 
sleep. I confessed the state of my affairs, and he seemed touched. He 
sat down by my side and we conversed. He was an agreeable talker; 
all he said gave me the highest possible opinion of him. When he 
saw that I was favourably inclined, he told me that he had not very 
extensive quarters himself; that he had only one room, but that he 
certainly would not leave me to sleep in the square; that it was too 
late to find a lodging, and he offered me half his bed for the night. 
I accepted his offer, for I already had hopes of finding in him a 
friend who might be useful to me. We went. He struck a light. His 
room seemed neat and clean, and he did the honours with great po- 
liteness. He took some cherries steeped in brandy out of a glass jar; 
we each ate two, and went to bed. 

This man had the same tastes as my Jew of the hospice, but did 
not show thein so brutally. Either because he knew that I should 
be heard and was afraid to force me to defend myself, or because he 
was really less determined in his designs, he did not venture to pro- 
pose their accomplishment openly, and tried to excite without alarm- 
ing me. Taught by my former experience, I soon understood what 
he wanted, and shuddered. Not knowing in what kind of house or 
in whose hands I was, I was afraid to make a noise for fear of being 
murdered. I pretended not to know what he wanted of me; but, 
appearing greatly annoyed at his caresses, and quite decided not to 
let them go on, I managed so well that he was obliged to restrain 
himself. Then I spoke to him with all the gentleness and firmness of 
which I was capable; and, without appearing to suspect anything, I 
excused my uneasiness on the score of my recent adventure, which I 
made a show of relating to him in terms so full of horror and dis- 
gust, that I believe I disgusted him, and he altogether abandoned 


-. 


DISGUST WITH PEOPLE OF LYONS 173 


his filthy designs. We spent the rest of the night quietly; he even 
gave me some good an@sensible information; certainly he was a 
man of some intelligence, although a great rascal. 

In the morning, the Abbé, not wishing to appear dissatisfied, 
spoke of breakfast, and asked one of his landlady’s daughters, who 
was a pretty girl, to send some to him. She answered that she had 
no time. He turned to her sister, who did not deign to give him an 
answer. We still waited; no breakfast. At last, we went into these 
young ladies’ room. They received the Abbé in a manner that was 
anything but cordial. I had still less reason to congratulate myself 
on my reception. The elder, turning round, stepped upon my toes 
with the pointed heel of her boot, where a very painful corn had 
obliged me to cut a hole in my shoe; the other abruptly pulled away 
from behind me a chair on which I was just going to sit down; their 
mother, while throwing water out of the window, splashed my face; 
wherever I sat down, they made me move that they might look for 
something. I had never in my life been so entertained. In their jeer- 
ing and insulting looks I saw concealed rage, which I was so stupid 
as to fail to understand. Astounded, stupefied, and inclined to think 
they were all bewitched, I began to feel seriously alarmed, when the 
Abbé, who pretended to see and hear nothing, judging correctly 
that no breakfast was to be expected, decided to leave the house. I 
hastened to follow him, thinking myself lucky to escape from the 
three furies. As we were walking along, he proposed that we should 
go and have breakfast at the café. Although I was very hungry, I de- 
clined his offer, which he did not press me to accept, and we sepa 
rated at the third or fourth turning. I was delighted to get out of 
sight of everything connected with that accursed house; and I be- 
lieve that he was very glad to have taken me so far frora it that I 
should have found great difficulty in recognising it. No simiiar ad- 
ventures have ever happened to me either in Paris or any other city. 
They have given me so disagreeable an impression of the people of 
Lyons, that I have always looked upon this city as the most fright- 
fully corrupt in all Europe. 

The remembrance of the extremities to which I was there reduced, 
does not help to give me pleasant recollections of it. If I had been 
like anyone else, if I had possessed the art of borrowing and getting 


174 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


into debt at my inn, I should easily have got out of my difficulties; 
but in such matters my incapacity was equalled by my repugnance. 
To give an idea of the extent of both, it is enough to mention that, 
although I have spent nearly all my life in distressed circumstances, 
and have often been almost entirely without bread, I have never 
once been asked for money by a creditor without paying him at 
once. I have never been able to incur petty debts, and have always 
preferred to suffer than to owe money. 

It was certainly suffering, to be reduced to spend the night in the 
streets, which was frequently my lot at Lyons. I preferred to spend 
the few sous I had left in buying bread than in paying for a ledging, 
because, after all, I ran less risk of dying of want of sleep than of 
hunger. The remarkable thing is that, in my miserable condition, I 
was neither melancholy nor uneasy. I did not feel the least anxiety 
about the future, and waited patiently for the answer which Made- 
moiselle du Chatelet was sure to receive. At night I lay in the open 
air, and, stretched on the ground or on a bench, slept as calmly as 
upon a bed of roses. I remember, especially, that I spent a delightful 
night outside the city, on a road which ran by the side of the Rhône 
or Saône, I do not remember which. Raised gardens, with terraces, 
bordered the other side of the road. It had been very hot during the 
day; the evening was delightful; the dew moistened the parched 
grass; the night was calm, without a breath of wind; the air was 
fresh, without being cold; the sun, having gone down, had left in 
the sky red vapours, the reflection of which cast a rose-red tint upon 
the water; the trees on the terraces were full of nightingales answer- 
ing one another. I walked on in a kind of ecstasy, abandoning my 
heart and senses to the enjoyment of all, only regretting, with a sigh, 
that I was obliged to enjoy it alone. Absorbed in my delightful rev- 
erie, I continued my walk late into the night, without noticing that 
I was tired. At last, I noticed it. I threw myself with a feeling of de- 
light upon the shelf of a sort of niche or false door let into a terrace 
wall; the canopy of my bed was formed by the tops of trees; a night- 
ingale was perched just over my head, and lulled me to sleep with 
his song; my slumbers were sweet, my awaking was still sweeter. It 
was br oad day; my eyes, on opening, beheld the water, the verdure, 
a charming landscape. I got up and shook myself; and, feeling hun- 


M. ROLICHON 175 


gry, set out gaily on my way to the city, resolved to spend the two 
small silver pieces I still had left on a good breakfast. I was in such 
` good spirits, that I sang the whole way: I even remember that I sang 
one of Batistin’s cantatas, called Les Bains de Thomery, which I 
knew by heart. Blessed be the good Batistin and his good cantata, 
which procured me a better breakfast than I had reckoned upon, and’ 
a still better dinner, upon which I had not reckoned at all! While 
walking and singing my best, I heard someone behind me; I turned 
round, and saw an Antonine,!” who was following me, and seemed 
to be listening with pleasure to my singing. He accosted me, greeted 
me, and asked me whether I knew music. I replied, “A little,” by 
which I meant him to understand, A great deal. He continued his 
questions. I told him part of my history. He asked me if I had ever 
copied music. “Often,” I replied, which was true, for I had learned 
most by copying. “Well,” said he, “come with me; I can give you 
something to do for a few days; in the meanwhile you shall want for 
nothing, but you must agree not to leave the room.” I readily agreed, 
and followed him. 

His name was Rolichon; he was very fond of music, which he 
knew well, and sang at some little concerts which he used to give 
with his friends. This was innocent and honourable enough; but 
his hobby was certainly degenerating into a mania, which he was 
partly obliged to conceal. He showed me to a little room, where I 
found a quantity of music which he had copied. He gave me some 
more to copy, particularly the cantata which I had sung, and which 
he was to sing himself in a few days. I remained there three or four 
days, copying all the time that I was not eating, for never in my life 
was I so hungry or better fed. He brought my meals himself from 
their kitchen, which must have been a good one, if the ordinary 
meals were as good as my own. In all my life I had never enjoyed 
my food so much; and I must also confess that these snacks came 
very opportunely, for I was as dry as a piece of wood. I worked al- 
most as heartily as I ate, and that is saying a good deal. It is true 
that my accuracy did not equal my diligence. Some days afterwards, 
M. Rolichon met me in the street and told me that my score had ren- 
dered the music altogether impracticable, being so full of omissions, 


2 The “Antonines” were a community of secularised monks. 


176 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


repetitions, and transpositions. I cannot deny that I chose the one 
profession for which I was least fitted. My notation was good and I 
copied very neatly; but the fatigue of a long task so bewilders me, 
that I spend more time in erasing than writing, and unless I com- 
pare the parts with the greatest carefulness, they always spoil the 
execution. Thus, in my endeavour to perform my task well, I per- 
formed it very badly; and, in my efforts at rapidity, I went all 
wrong. This, however, did not prevent M. Rolichon from treating 
me handsomely to the last; and, when I left him, he gave me a 
crown, which I by no means deserved, and which completely set me 
on my legs again; for, a few days afterwards, I heard of Madame de 
Warens, who was at Chambéri, and sent me some money to rejoin 
her, which I was only too delighted to do. Since then my finances 
have often been very low, but never to such an extent that I have 
been obliged to fast. I note this period of my life with a heart sensi- 
ble of the care of Providence; it was the last time in my life that I 
ever suffered hunger and wretchedness. 

I remained a week or so longer at Lyons, while Mademoiselle du 
Châtelet executed some trifling commissions for mamma. During 
this time I visited her more frequently than before, delighted to talk 
with her about her friend, and no longer distracted by the painful 
thoughts of my situation, or obliged to conceal it. Mademoiselle du 
Chatelet was neither young nor pretty, but was not wanting in come- 
liness; she was affable and familiar, and her mental endowments en- 
hanced the value of this familiarity. She possessed that liking for 
moral observation which leads to the study of character; and it is to 
her that I originally owe the first impulse in this direction. She was 
fond of the romances of Le Sage, especially “Gil Glas”; she talked to 
me about it, and lent it to me; I read it with pleasure, but was not 
yet ripe for such literature; I wanted high-flown romances. In this 
manner I passed my time in her parlour with equal pleasure and 
profit; and it is certain that interesting and intelligent conversation 
with a woman of education and character are better calculated to 
form the understanding of a young man than all the pedantic phi- 
losophy than can be acquired from books. At the Chasottes I be- 
came acquainted with other boarders and their friends, amongst 
others Mademoiselle Serre, a young girl of fourteen, to whom I did 


t 


DEPARTURE FROM LYONS 177 


not pay particular attention at the time, but with whom I fell vio- 
lently in love eight or nime'years later, and no wonder, for she was a 
charming girl. 

Full of the expectation of soon seeing my good mamma again, I 
abandoned my dreams for awhile, and the real happiness which- 
awaited me relieved me of the trouble of seeking for it in what was 
merely visionary. I not only found her again, but also, near her and 
by her assistance, a pleasant situation; for she informed me that she 
had found an occupation for me which she hoped would suit me, 
and one which would not take me far away from her. I exhausted my 
conjectures in trying to guess what this occupation might be, but it 
would ħave needed the gift of prophecy to guess aright. I had 
enough money to make the journey comfortably. Mademoiselle du 
Châtelet wanted me to take a horse; to this I would not agree, and 
I was right; I should have lost the enjoyment of the last journey I 
ever made on foot; for the excursions which I frequently made in the 
neighbourhood of Motiers, while I lived there, do not deserve the 
name. 

It is a very remarkable fact, that my imagination is never more 
agreeably excited, than when my situation is the very reverse of 
agreeable, and that, on the contrary, it is less cheerful ‘when all 
around me is cheerful. My obstinate nature is unable to bow to facts. 
It cannot beautify, it must create. Realities appear to it nothing more 
than they are; it can only embellish the objects of imagination. If I 
wish to depict the spring, it must be in winter; if I wish to describe 
a beautiful landscape, I must be surrounded by walls; and I have 
said a hundred times that, if I were ever imprisoned in the Bastille, 
I should draw the picture of Liberty. When setting out from Lyons, 
I saw only a pleasant future before me; I was—and I had every rea- 
son to be—as happy as I had been the reverse, when I set out from 
Paris. Nevertheless, during this journey, I did not enjoy those de- 
lightful reveries which had accompanied me before. My heart was 
light, and that was all. I drew near with emotion to the excellent 
friend whom I was going to see again, I tasted in advance, but with- 
out any feeling of intoxication, the happiness of living near her; I 
had always expected it; it seemed to me that there was nothing new 
for me in that. I felt anxious about my future occupation, as if that 


178 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


had been a great source of anxiety. My ideas were calm and gentle, 
instead of heavenly and enchanting. All material objects claimed my 
attention; I observed the surounding country; I remarked the trees, 
the houses, the brooks; I took counsel with myself at the cross-roads; 
I was afraid of losing myself and did not do so. In a word, I was no 
longer in the clouds, I was just where I was, just where I was going, 
nowhere else. 

In relating my journeys, as in making them, I do not know how 
to stop. My heart beat with joy when I drew near to my dear 
mamma, but I walked no faster. I like to walk at my ease, and to 
stop when I like. A wandering life is what I want. To walk through 
a beautiful country in fine weather, without being obliged to hurry, 
and with a pleasant prospect at the end, is of all kinds of life the one 
most suited to my taste. My idea of a beautiful country is already 
known. No flat country, however beautiful, has ever seemed so to 
my eyes. I must have mountain torrents, rocks, firs, dark forests, 
mountains, steep roads to climb or descend, precipices at my side to 
frighten me. I had this pleasure, and enjoyed it in all its charm, as 
I approached Chambéri. Not far from a precipitous mountain wall, 
called Le Pas de l’Echelle, below the military road cut out of the 
rocks, at the place called Chailles, a little stream rushes and foams 
in some fearful precipices, which it seems to have spent millions of 
ages in hollowing out. Along the side of the road is a parapet to pre- 
vent accidents, which enabled me to look down and be as giddy as 
I pleased; for the amusing thing about my taste tor steep places is, 
that I am very fond of the feeling of giddiness which they give rise 
to, provided I am in a safe position. Leaning securely over the para- 
pet, I stretched forward, and remained there for hours together, 
from time to time catching a glimpse of the foam and dark water, 
the roaring of which I heard in the midst of the screams of the 
ravens and birds of prey which flew from rock to rock, and from 
bush to bush, a hundred fathoms below me. In places where the 
slope was fairly even, and the brushwood was not too thick to allow 
stones to pass through, I collected from a distance a large number, 
as big as I could carry, and piled them up on the parapet; then, hurl- 
ing them down, one after the other, I amused myself with watch- 


KING, VICTOR AMADEUS 179 


ing them roll, rebound, and shiver into a thousand pieces, before 
reaching the bottom of tHe abyss, 

Nearer Chambéri, I saw a similar sight, of a different kind. The 
road passes at the foot of the most beautiful cascade I have ever 
seen. The mountain is so steep, that the water falls away clear, in. 
the shape of an arch, at a sufficient distance to allow a ‘person to walk 
between it and the rock, sometimes even without being wetted; but, 
unless one is careful, it is easy to be deceived, as I was; for, owing to 
the immense height, the water divides and falls in a spray, and, if 
one goes only a little too near to this cloud, without at first noticing 
that he is getting wet, he is drenched in a moment. 

At length I arrived; I saw her again. She was not alone. The 
Intendant-General was with her when I entered. Without a word, 
she took me by the hand and introduced me to him with that grace- 
ful manner which gained her the affection of all, saying: “Here is 
the poor young man, sir; deign to protect him as long as he deserves 
it, and I shall feel no further anxiety about him for the rest of his 
life.” Then she turned to me; “My child,” she said, “you belong to 
the King; thank Monsieur |’Intendant, who offers you the means 
to live.” I opened my eyes wide and said nothing, without knowing 
exactly what to think of it; my growing ambition nearly turned my 
head, and already I saw myself a young Intendant. My fortune cer- 
tainly did not prove as brilliant as I had expected from such a start; 
but, for the moment, it was enough to keep me, and that, for me, 
was a good deal. The state of the case was as follows: 

King Victor Amadeus, judging, from the issue of preceding wars 
and the state of his ancestral inheritance, that it would one day slip 
from his hands, did his utmost to exhaust it beforehand. A few years 
ago, having resolved to tax the Savoyard nobility, he had ordered a 
general land-register of the country to be made, in order to impose 
taxation on landed property and distribute it more fairly. The work, 
commenced in the father’s time, was completed by the son. Two or 
three hundred persons, land-surveyors who were called geometri- 
cians, and writers who were called secretaries, were employed in the 
task, and mamma had secured me an appointment amongst the lat- 
ter. The post, although not very lucrative, afforded me ample means 


180 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


to live upon in that country; the misfortune was, that the employ- 
ment was only temporary, but it put me in a position to wait and 
look about me, and mamma had purposely endeavoured to secure 
for me the special protection of the Intendant, that I might be able 
to proceed to some more permanent employment, when my present 
work was finished. 

I entered upon my duties a few days after my arrival. The work 
was not difficult and I soon became familiar with it. Thus it came to 
pass, that, after four or five years of vagabondage, of folly, and suf- 
fering, since I had left Geneva, I began for the first time to earn a 
respectable living. 

These lengthy details of my early youth will naturally have seemed 
puerile, and I regret it; although born a man in certain respects, I 
long remained a child, and in many respects I am one still. I have 
never promised to introduce a great character to the public; I have 
promised to describe myself as I am; and, in order to know me in 
my riper years, it is necessary to have known me well in my youth. 
Since, as a rule, objects make less impression upon me than the re- 
membrance of them, and since all my ideas assume the form of the 
representations of objects in my mind, the first traits which have 
stamped themselves upon my mind have remained, and those which 
have since imprinted themfelves there have rather combined with 
them than obliterated them. There is a certain sequence of mental 
conditions and ideas, which exercises an influence upon those which 
follow them, with which it is necessary to be acquainted, in order to 
pass a correct judgment upon the latter. I endeavour in all cases to 
develop the first causes, in order to make the concatenation of effects 
felt. I should like to be able to make my soul to a certain extent 
transparent to the eyes of the reader; and, with this object, I en- 
deavour to show it to him from all points of view, to exhibit it to 
him in every aspect, and to contrive that none of its movements shall 
escape his notice, so that he may be able by himself to judge of the 
principles that produce them. i 
: If I made myself responsible for the result, and said to him, Such 
is my character, he might think that, if I am not deceiving him, I 
am at least deceiving myself. But, in simply detailing to him every- 
thing that has happened to me, all my acts, thoughts, and feelings, 


IMPORTANCE OF. CHILDHOOD RECOLLECTIONS 181 


I cannot mislead him, except wilfully, and even if I wished to do so, 
I should not find it easy/ It is his business to collect these scattered 
elements, and to determine the being which is composed of them; ` 
the result must be his work; and if he is mistaken, all the fault will 
be his. But for this purpose it is not sufficient that my narrative - 
should be true; it must also be exact. It is not for me to judge of the 
importance of facts; it is my duty to mention them all, and to leave 
him to select them. This is what I have hitherto aimed at with all 
my best endeavours, and in the sequel I will not depart from it. But 
the recollections of middle-age are always less vivid than those of 
early youth. I have begun by making the best possible use of the lat- 
ter. If the former return to me with the same freshness, impatient 
readers will, perhaps, grow tired; but I myself shall not be dissatis- 
fied with my work. I have only one thing to fear in this undertaking; 
not that I may say too much or what is not true, but that I may not 
say all, and may conceal the truth. 


BOOK V 


[1732-1736] 


I ran it was in 1732 that, as I have just related, I arrived at Cham- 
béri, and commenced land-surveying in the King’s service. I was 
nearly twenty-one years of age. For my age, my mind was sufficiently 
well formed; not so my powers of judgment, and F sorely needed 
instruction from those into whose hands I fell, in order to learn how 
to conduct myself sensibly; for my few years of experience had not 
been sufficient to cure me completely of my romantic fancies; and, 
in spite of all the sufferings I had endured, I knew as little of the 
world and mankind, as if I had never paid dearly for my knowledge 
of them. 

I lived at home, that is to say, with mamma; but I never found 
my room at Annecy again. No garden, no brook, no landscape! The 
house which she occupied was dark and gloomy, and my room was 
the darkest aid gloomiest in the house. A wall to look out upon, a 
blind alley instead of a street, very little air, light, or room; crickets, 
rats, rotten boards—all combined to make a by no means pleasant 
abode. But I was in her house, I was near her; always at my desk, 
or in her room, I did not notice the ugliness of my own; I had no 
time to think of it. It will appear singular that she should have set- 
tled at Chambéri on purpose to live in this wretched house; but it 
was a piece of cleverness on her part, which I must not omit to ex- 
plain. She very much disliked the idea of going to Turin, as she felt 
that, after the recent changes that had taken place there, and during 
the present excitement at the Court, it was not the right moment to 
present herself. However, her affairs required her presence; she was 
afraid of being forgotten or slandered, especially as she knew that 
the Comte de Saint-Laurent, Intendant-General of Finance, was not 
favourably disposed towards her. He had an old house at Chambéri, 


182 


CLAUDE ANET 183 


badly built, and so disagreeably situated, that it was always empty; 
she took it, and settledethere. This plan succeeded better than a 
journey to Turin; her pension was not discontinued, and from that 
time the Comte de Saint-Laurent was always one of her best friends. 

I found her household arrangements much the same as before, 
and the faithful Claude Anet still with her. I believe I have already 
stated that he was a peasant from Moutru, who, in his childhood, 
used to gather herbs in Jura to make Swiss tea, and whom she had 
taken into her service on account of his knowledge of drugs, finding 
it convenient to have a lackey who understood them. He was so pas- 
sionately fond of the study of plants, and she encouraged his taste so 
strongly, that he became a real botanist, and, if he had not died 
young, might have made himself a name in this department of sci- 
ence, equal to that which he deserved as an honest man. Being seri- 
ous, even grave, and older than myself, he became to me a kind of 
mentor, who kept me from many follies; for he inspired me with 
respect, and I never ventured to forget myself in his presence. He 
made the same impression on his mistress, who knew his good sense, 
uprightness, and unshaken devotion to herself, and repaid it in kind. 
Claude Anet was, undoubtedly, no ordinary man and the only man 
of his kind that I have ever seen. Slow, sedate, thoughtful, prudent 
in his behaviour, cold in manner, laconic and sententious in his ut- 
terances, when under the influence of his passions he was a prey to 
a violent impetuosity, which he never showed, but which inwardly 
devoured him, and never caused him to commit a folly in his life, 
except one, and that a terrible one—he took a dose of poison. This 
tragic event took place shortly after my arrival; nothing but this 
made me aware of the intimacy between him and his mistress; for, 
unless she had told me herself, I should never have suspected it. If 
devotion, zeal, and loyalty can deserve such a recompense, it was 
certainly due to him; and the fact that he never abused her confi- 
dence proves that he was worthy of it. Their disputes, which were 
rare, always ended amicably, with the exception of one, which did 
not terminate so happily. His mistress, in a passion, said something 
insulting to him; unable to endure the affront, he took counsel with 
his despair, and finding a bottle of laudanum ready to hand, he swal- 
lowed it, and then went quietly to bed, never expecting to wake 


184 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


again. Luckily Madame de Warens, uneasy and agitated herself, 
while wandering about the house, found the empty bottle, and 
guessed the rest. She flew to his assistance, with shrieks that attracted 
my attention. She confessed everything, implored my assistance, and 
with much difficulty succeeded in making him bring up the opium. 
Witnessing this scene, I marvelled at my stupidity in never having 
entertained the least suspicion of the connection of which she in- 
formed me. But Claude Anet was so discreet, that keener observers 
than myself might well have been deceived. The reconciliation was 
of such a nature that I was greatly affected by it; and, from that time, 
my esteem for him being increased by a feeling of respect, I became 
in a manner his pupil, which was by no means to my disadvantage. 

However, it was not without pain that I discovered that another 
could live with her on terms of greater intimacy than myself. I had 
never even thought of desiring such a position for myself; but it 
was hard for me to see it filled by another, and my feeling was a very 
natural one. Notwithstanding, instead of conceiving an aversion to 
him who had robbed me of her, I actually found that my attachment 
to her extended itself to him. Before all things I desired her happi- 
ness; and, since he was necessary to it, I was content that he should 
be happy likewise. On his part, he entered completely into his mis- 
tress’s views, and conceived a sincere friendship for the friend whom 
she had chosen. Without claiming the authority over me to which his 
positicn entitled him, he naturally exercised that which his superior 
intelligence gave him over mine. I never ventured to do anything of 
which he appeared to disapprove, and he only disapproved of what 
was bad. Thus we lived in a’ union which made us all happy, and 
which could only be dissolved by death. One of the proofs of the ex- 
cellent character of this admirable woman is, that all those who 
loved her loved one another. Jealousy, even rivalry, submitted to the 
predominant feeling which she inspired, and I have never seen any 
of those who surrounded her ill-disposed towards one another. Let 
my readers pause a moment at this panegyric, and if they can think 
of any other woman of whom they can say the same, I advise them 
to attach themselves to her, if they value their repose. 

Here commences, from the time of my arrival at Chambéri to my 
departure from Paris in 1741, a period of eight or nine years, during 


DUTIES OF THE LAND-SURVEY 185 


which I shall have few events to relate, because my life was as sim- 
ple as it was pleasant. Fhis uniformity was exactly what I most 
wanted to complete the formation of my character, which continual 
troubles had prevented from becoming settled. During this precious 
interval, my miscellaneous and disconnected education acquired 
consistency, and made me what I have never ceased to be, amidst 
all the storms which awaited me. This development was impercep- 
tible and slow, accompanied by few events worth recording; but, 
nevertheless, it deserves to be followed out and described. 

At first, I was almost entirely occupied with my work; the ties of 
the desk left me scarcely any time to think of anything else. The 
little time I had free was spent with my good mamma; and, not hav- 
ing even sufficient leisure to read, I felt no inclination to do so. But 
when my duties, having become a kind of routine, occupied my 
mind less, the feeling of restlessness returned. Reading again became 
necessary, and, as if the desire for it had always been heightened 
when it was difficult to satisfy, it would have again become a passion 
with me, as at my master’s, had not other inclinations interfered 
and diverted my attention from it. 

Although we did not require a very profound knowledge of arith- 
metic for our calculations, we required enough to sometimes cause 
me some trouble. To overcome this difficulty, I bought some books 
on arithmetic, and learned the subject well, for I learned it alone. 
Practical arithmetic is of wider extent than one imagines, when 
strict accuracy is aimed at. There are calculations of extraordinary 
length, in which I have sometimes seen skilled geometricians go 
wrong. Reflection, combined with practice, gives clear ideas, and 
then one discovers short methods, the invention of which is flatter- 
ing to one’s self-complacency, while their accuracy satisfies the 
mind, and which lend a charm to a task thankless in itself. I threw 
myself into it with such success that no problem, which was capable 
of being solved by figures alone, gave me any difficulty; and even 
now, when all that I have known daily fades from my memory, this 
accomplishment in part still remains, after an interval of thirty years. 
A few days ago, when I made a journey to Davenport, being present 
at my host’s house when his children were having their arithmetic 
lesson, I worked out, without a mistake and with incredible pleasure, 


186 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


an extremely complicated calculation. It seemed to me, as I set 
down my figures, that I was still at Chambéri in my happy days. 
What a distant recollection! 

The colouring of the maps of our geometricians had also given 
me a taste for drawing. I bought some colours, and began to paint 
flowers and landscapes. It was a pity that I found I possessed but 
little talent for this art, for I was entirely devoted to it. I could have 
spent whole months in the midst of my crayons and pencils without 
going out. As this occupation occupied too much of my attention, 
they were compelled to drag me away from it. It is always the same 
with all the pursuits to which I begin to devote myself; they grow 
upon me, become a passion, and soon I see nothing else in the world 
but my favourite amusement. Age has not cured me of this fault, 
it has not even diminished it; even while I write this, I sit like an old 
twaddler, infatuated with anether study, which is useless to me and 
of which I understand nothing, which even those who have devoted 
themselves to it during their youth, are obliged to give up at the age 
when I want to begin it. 

At that time, it would have been in its right place. The oppor- 
tunity was favourable, and I had some temptation to make use of it. 
The satisfaction that I saw in Anet’s eyes, when he came home 
loaded with new plants, two or three times nearly made me go out 
botanising with him. I am almost certain that, if I had only gone 
once, I should have been captivated by it, and I should, perhaps, 
now be a famous botanist; for I know no study in the world better 
suited to my natural tastes than that of plants; and the life which I 
have now been leading for ten years in the country is hardly any- 
thing but a continual botanising, although certainly without pur- 
pose, or progress; but, at that time, having no idea of the science of 
botany, I conceived a kind of contempt—even of aversion—for it, 
and only considered it an occupation fit for an apothecary. Mamma, 
whe was very fond of it, made no other use of it herself; she only 
looked for common plants, such as she could make use of in her 
remedies. In this manner, botany, chemistry, and anatomy, con- 
fused in my mind under the general term medicine, only served to 
provide me throughout the day with a subject for humorous sar- 
casms, and, from time to time, brought upon me a box on the ears.. 


STUDY OF MUSIC 187 


Besides, a different and most opposite taste gradually developed it 
self in me, and soon supplanted all the others, I mean music. I must. 
certainly have been born for this art, since I began to love it from 
my earliest childhood, and it is the only one that I have loved con- 
stantly at all times. The remarkable thing is, that an art, for which 
I was intended by Nature, has nevertheless cost me so much trouble 
to learn, and that my progress in it has been so slow, that, although 
I have practised it all my life, I have never been able to sing with 
any certainty at sight. What at that time made this study particu- 
larly a pleasure, was that I could pursue it together with mamma. 
With very different tastes in other respects, we found in music a 
bond of union, which I gladly made use of. She made no objection; 
I was at that time almost as advanced as she was; after two or three 
attempts we could decipher an air. Sometimes, when I saw her busy 
round a furnace, I used to say: “Mamma, here is a charming duet, 
which seems to me just the thing to make your drugs smell of burn- 
ing.” “On my honour,” she would reply, “if you make me burn 
them, I will make you eat them.” While the dispute was going on, I 
pulled her to her piano, where we soon forgot everything else; the 
extract of juniper or absinthe was reduced to powder; she smeared 
my face with it—and how delightful it all was! 

It will be seen that, with little time to spare, I had many things to 
employ it. One amusement, however, was worth all the rest. 

We lived in a dungeon so stifling, that we were sometimes obliged 
to go and get some fresh air in the country. Anet persuaded mamma 
to rent a garden in one of the suburbs, to rear plants. Attached to 
this garden was a pretty little rustic house, which was decently fur- 
nished, and a bed put up in it. We often had dinner, and I some- 
times slept there. Imperceptibly, I became infatuated with this little 
retreat. I took a few books there and a number of prints; I spent part 
of my time in decorating it, and preparing an agreeable surprise for 
mamma when she walked out there. I sometimes left her, that I 
might busy my mind with her, and think of her with greater pleas- 
ure; this was another whim, which I can neither excuse nor explain, 
but which I acknowledge, since it was really the case. I remember 
that Madame de Luxembourg once spoke jestingly to me of a man, 
who used to leave his mistress in order to write to her. I told her 


188 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


that I might very well have been that man, and I might have added 
that I had sometimes acted like him. However, when I was with 
mamma, I never felt it necessary to leave her, in order to love her 
more; for, #éte-a-téte with her, I felt as completely at my ease as if I 
had been alone, which I have never felt in the presence of anyone 
else, man or woman, however much attached to them I may have 
been. But she was so often surrounded by people who were by no 
means congenial to me, that a feeling of annoyance and weariness 
drove me to my refuge, where I could enjoy her as I wanted her, 
without fear of being followed by troublesome visitors. 

In this manner, my time being divided between work, pleasure, 
and instruction, I led a life of sweetest repose. Europe, however, was 
not so calm as myself. France and the Emperor had just declared 
war; the King of Sardinia had taken part in the quarrel, and the 
French army was marching through Piedmont to invade Milanese 
territory. One column passed through Chambéri, amongst others 
the regiment of Champagne, the colonel of which was the Duc de 
la Trémouille, to whom I was presented. He was lavish in his prom- 
ises, and I am quite certain that he never once thought of me again. 
Our little garden was situated just at the end of the suburb through 
which the troops entered, so that I could enjoy to my heart’s content 
the pleasure of seeing them pass, and I was as eager for the success of 
this war as if I had had the greatest interests at stake in it. Hitherto 
it had not entered my head to think about public affairs; and I began 
to read the newspapers for the first time but with such partiality for 
France that my heart beat with joy when it gained the least success, 
while its reverses afflicted me as much as if they had overtaken my- 
self. If this folly had only been transitory, I should not consider it 
worth speaking of; but it has become so rooted in my heart without 
any sufficient reason, that when, later, at Paris, I played the part of 
the enemy of tyrants and the proud republican, I felt, in spite of 
myself, a secret predilection for this very nation I found servile, and 
for the government which I pretended to condemn. The amusing 
thing was that, being ashamed of an inclination so opposed to my 
principles, I never dared to confess it to anyone, and I rallied the 
French on their defeats, while my heart bled for them more than 
their own. I am certainly the only man who, living in the midst of a 


LOVE OF THE FRENCH 189 


people who treated him well and whom he worshipped, has assumed 
amongst them an air of é6ntempt. On my part, this inclination is so 
disinterested, so powerful, so lasting, and so invincible, that, even 
after my departure from France, after the storm which its govern- 
ment, magistrates, and writers have vied with one another in stir- 
ring up against me, and since it has become the fashion to over- 
whelm me with undeserved abuse, I have been unable to cure my- 
self of my folly. I love them in spite of myself, in spite of their ill 
treatment of me. 

I have long endeavoured to discover the reason of this partiality, 
and have been unable to find it anywhere except in the occasion that 
produced it. A growing taste for literature gave me a fondness for 
French books, their authors, and the country of these authors. At 
the moment when the French army was marching past, I read Bran- 
tôme’s “Great Captains.” My head was full of the Clissons, Bayards, 
Lautrecs, Colignys, Montmorencys, and Trimouilles, and I loved 
their descendants as the inheritors of their virtues and their courage. 
In each regiment that passed I thought I beheld again those famous 
black bands which had formerly performed such heroic deeds in 
Piedmont. In short, I connected with what I saw the ideas which I 
drew from my books; my continuous reading, still confined to 
French authors, nourished my affection for their country, and finally 
converted it into a blind infatuation, which nothing has been able to 
overcome. I have later had occasion to remark in the course of my 
journeys that this impression was not peculiar to myself, and that, 
exercising more or less influence in all countries upon that part of 
the nation which loves reading and cultivates literature, it counter- 
balanced the general hatred inspired by the conceited manners of the 
French. Their romances, more than their men, win the hearts of the 
women of all countries, their dramatic masterpieces attract the 
young to their theatres. The fame of the theatres of Paris draws 
crowds of strangers, who return home their enthusiastic admirers. 
In short, the excellent taste displayed in their literature captivates the 
minds of all those who have any mind: and, during the war which 
ended so disastrously for them, I have seen their authors and phi- 
losophers uphold the honour of the French name, so tarnished by its 


warriors. 


190 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


I was, then, an ardent Frenchman, and this made me a news- 
monger. I went with the crowd of gapers to the market-place, to 
wait for the post; and, sillier than the ass in the fable, I was very 
anxious to know what master’s saddle I should have the honour to 
carry; for at that time it was declared that we should belong to 
France, and that Savoy would be exchanged for the territory of 
Milan. However, it must be admitted that I had some reason for 
anxiety; for, if this war had turned out badly for the allies, mamma's 
pension would have been in danger. But I had full confidence in my 
good friends; and, this time, in spite of the surprise of M. de Broglie, 
my confidence was not deceived, thanks to the King of Sardinia, 
whom I had never thought of. 

While there was fighting in Italy, there was singing in France. 
Rameau’s operas began to make a stir, and gave a lift to his theoreti- 
cal works, which, by reason of their obscurity, were within the reach 
of only a few capacities. Having accidentally heard his “Treatise on 
Harmony” mentioned, I had no rest till I had procured the book. 
By another accident I fell ill. The malady was an inflammation, 
which was very violent during the short time it lasted, but my res- 
toration to health was tedious, and I was unable to go out for a 
month, During this period, I worked at, I devoured my “Treatise on 
Harmony”; but it was so long, so diffuse, and so badly arranged, 
that I felt it would take me a considerable time to study and disen- 
tangle it. I suspended my efforts, and refreshed my eyes with music. 
The cantatas of Bernier, which I practised, were never out of my 
mind. [ learned four or five of them by heart, amongst others, The 
Sleeping Cupids, which I have never seen again since then, and 
which I still remember almost perfectly, and also Cupid Stung by a 
Bee, a very pretty cantata by Clérambault, which I learned almost 
at the same time. 

To confirm my passion, a young organist, called the Abbé Palais, 
arrived from Val-d’Aost, a good musician, a good fellow, and an ex- 
cellent accompanist. I made his acquaintance, and we immediately 
became inseparable, He had been the pupil of an Italian monk, a 
fine organist. He spoke to me of his principles of music, which I 
compared with those of my Rameau; I filled my head with harmony, 
accompaniments, and chords. My ear required training for all that, 


PERE CATON IQI 


and I proposed to mamma to give a little concert every month, to 
which she agreed. I was sofull of this concert, that, day and night, I 
thought of nothing else; and it really occupied a considerable part of 
my time to arrange the music, the accompanists, and instruments, to 
write out the parts, and so forth. Mamma sang; Pére Caton—of 
whom I have already spoken, and of whom I shall have occasion to 
speak again—sang also; M. Roche, a dancing-master, and his son 
played the violin; M. Canavas, a Piedmontese musician, who was 
employed in the Survey, and has since married and settled at Paris, 
played the violoncello; the Abbé Palais accompanied on the piano, 
and I had the honour of conducting with my baton. It may be imag- 
ined how delightful it was! Not quite like the concerts at M. de 
Treytorens’s, but nearly so. 

This little concert given by Madame de Warens, a new convert, 
who lived, as was reported, on the King’s charity, gave offence to 
the band of devotees; but for many worthy people it was an agree- 
able amusement. It would not easily be guessed whom I placed at the 
head of these on this occasion. It was a monk, but a monk, talented 
and even amiable, whose later misfortunes keenly affected me, and 
whose memory, connected as it is with that of my happy days, is still 
dear to me. The monk in question was Pére Caton, a Franciscan, 
who, conjointly with Comte Dortan, had caused the music of the 
poor “Kitten” to be confiscated at Lyons, which was not the most 
worthy incident in his life. He was a Bachelor of Sorbonne; he had 
lived a long time in the highest circles in Paris, and was an especial 
favourite with the Marquis d’Antremont, at that time Sardinian am- 
bassador. He was tall, well built, with a full face and prominent eyes, 
black hair, which curled naturally over his forehead, and a manner 
at once noble, frank, and modest; his appearance was simple and 
pleasing, without the hypocritical or impudent attitude of a monk, 
or the haughty demeanour of a man of fashion, although he was 
one; he displayed only the assurance of an honourable man, who, 
without blushing for his cloth, respects himself and always feels him- 
self in his proper place in honourable company. Although he was 
not very learned for a doctor, he was very accomplished for a man 
of the world; and, never eager to display his knowledge, he made 
use of it so opportunely, that he was credited with more than he 


192 í THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


really possessed. Having lived much in society, he had paid more at- 
tention to agreeable accomplishments than to solid learning. He was 
witty, wrote verses, talked well, sang better, had a fine voice, and 
played the organ and piano. This was more than enough to make 
him sought after, as indeed he was; but so little did this cause him to 
neglect the duties of his position, that, in spite of jealous rivals, he 
was chosen Définiteur' of his province, in other words, one of the 
highest dignitaries of the order. 

Pére Caton made mamma’s acquaintance at the Marquis d’Antre- 
mont’s. He heard our concerts spoken of, and expressed a desire to 
take part in them; he did so, and made them delightful. We soon be- 
came attached by our mutual taste for music, which, with both of us, 
was a lively passion, the only difference being that he was really a 
musician, while I was only a bungler. We used to go and play in his 
room together with Canavas and the Abbé Palais, and sometimes, on 
feast days, we had music on his organ. We often shared his little 
table at dinner; for—a thing surprising in a monk—he was liberal, 
profuse, and fond of the pleasures of the table without being a glut- 
ton. On our contert days, he stayed to supper with mamma. These 
suppers were very gay and very pleasant. We spoke as we thought, 
and sang duets; I was in my element, and displayed my wit and hu- 
mour; Pére Caton was delightful, mamma was adorable; the Abbé 
Palais, with his deep voice, was the butt of all. Sweet moments of 
youthful folly, how long is it since you have departed? 

As I shall have no further occasion to speak of this poor Pére 
Caton, let me finish his melancholy story in a few words. The other 
monks, jealous, or rather, furious, at seeing in him good qualities 
and a refinement of manners which had nothing in common with 
monastic debauchery, conceived a violent hatred for him, since he 
was not as hateful as themselves. Their leaders combined against 
him, and stirred up the inferior monks who envied his position, and 
who had hitherto not dared to look at him. They heaped a thousand 
insults upon him, deprived him of his office, took away his room, 
which he had furnished with taste, although quite simply, and ban- 
ished him I know not whither; at last, these wretches so over- 
whelmed him with insults, that his honourable and justly proud soul 


1 Ep; i 
Définiteur: assessor to the head of his order. 


HIS PASSION FOR MUSIC 19%, 


was unable to withstand them; and he who had been the delight of 
the most agreeable society died of grief on a miserable bed, in some 
cell or dungeon, regretted and lamented by all the worthy people 
who had known him and found no other fault in him, except that of 
being a monk. ; 

Living in this manner, I soon became entirely absorbed by music, 
and found it impossible to think of anything else. I never went to my 
desk willingly; the restraint and constant hard work made it an un- 
endurable torture, and at last I expressed a wish to throw up my em- 
ployment, in order to devote myself entirely to music. It may be 
imagined that this folly on my part did not escape opposition. To 
leave a respectable situation and a certain salary in order to run after 
uncertain pupils, was too foolish a plan to meet with mamma’s ap- 
proval. Even if my future success should prove as great as I imag: 
ined, it was fixing very humble limits to my ambition, to confine 
myself for life to the position of a musician. She, whose plans for me 
were all ambitious, and who no longer judged me entirely in accord- 
ance with M. d’Aubonne’s verdict, was sorry to see me seriously oc- 
cupied with a talent which she regarded as unprofitable, and often 
repeated to me the provincial saying, which is less applicable in 
Paris, “He who sings and dances well, has a profession which does 
not lead to much.” On the other hand, she saw me carried away by 
an irresistible inclination; my passion for music was becoming a 
regular madness, and there was reason to fear that my work might 
suffer from my distractions, and that this might cause me to be dis- 
missed, which would be far worse than voluntary resignation. Again, 
I pointed out to her that my employment was only temporary, that 
I should be obliged to do something for a livelihood, and that it was 
far safer to acquire by practice a thorough knowledge of the art to 
which my tastes inclined me and which she had chosen for me, than 
to put myself at the mercy of patrons, or to try something fresh 
which might not succeed, and might leave me, when I was too old to 
learn, without the means of earning my bread. At last, I extorted 
her consent more by dint of importunities and caresses than argu- 
ments which she considered satisfactory. I immediately ran to M, 
Coccelli, general manager of the Survey, to resign my appointment. 
as proudly as if I had performed a most heroic action; and I volun- 


£94 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


tarily resigned my situation, without cause, reason, or excuse, with 
as much and even greater joy than I had accepted it less than two 
years before. 

This step, utterly foolish as it was, procured for me in the coun- 
try a certain consideration which was useful to me. Some imagined 
that I possessed means which I did not possess; others, seeing me 
entirely devoted to music, estimated my talents by the sacrifice that 
I had made, and believed that, with so much passion for this art, I 
must really possess a superior knowledge of it. In the country of 
the blind the one-eyed are kings; I passed for a good master, since 
all the rest were bad. Besides, since I really possessed a certain taste 
for singing, and was also favoured by my age and personal appear- 
ance, I soon had more lady pupils than were necessary to make up 
the pay I had received as a clerk. 

It is certain that, as far as a pleasant life was concerned, it would 
not have been possible for anyone to pass more rapidly from one 
extreme to the other. At the Survey, occupied for eight hours daily 
with the most disagreeable employment, amongst people still more 
disagreeable, shut up in a gloomy office, poisoned by the breath and 
perspiration of a number of clods, most of them dirty and unkempt, 
I was sometimes so overcome by the exertion, smell, restraint and 
weariness, that I felt quite giddy. In place of this, I was suddenly 
launched into the fashionable world, admitted and sought after in 
the best houses, everywhere graciously received, caressed, and féted; 
amiable young ladies, gaily dressed, awaited my arrival, and re- 
ceived me with eagerness; I saw nothing but enchanting objects, I 
smelt nothing but the perfume of roses and orange-flowers, found 
nothing but singing, gossip, laughter and amusement; I only left one 
house to find the same in another. It will be agreed that, the other 
advantages being equal, there could be no hesitation in the choice. I 
was so satisfied with mine, that I never once repented it, and I do 
not regret it even now, when I weigh in the scale of reason the ac- 
tions of my life, and am free from the not very sensible motives 
which led me to make it. 

This was almost the only time that I was not deceived in my ex- 
pectations, when I only obeyed my inclinations. The affable and 
sociable disposition, the easy-going temperament of the inhabitants 


HIS MUSIC PUPILS 195 


of this country rendered my intercourse with the world agreeable, 
and the liking I then conceived for it has clearly proved to me that, 
if I do net like society, it is society’s fault rather than mine. 

It is to be regretted that the Savoyards are not rich, or, perhaps, it 
would be still more to be regretted if they were; for, such as they are, 
they are the best and most sociable people that I know. If there is a 
little city in the world where it is possible to enjoy the pleasures of 
life in agreeable and safe intercourse, it is Chambéri. The noble 
families of the province, who assemble there, have only enough to 
live on, not enough to advance themselves; and, being unable to in- 
dulge in ambitious projects, are obliged to follow the counsel of 
Cineas.? In youth, they devote themselves to military service, and 
return to spend their old age in peace at home. Honour and reason 
have an equal share in this distribution of their lives. The women 
are beautiful, without having any need to be so; they possess all those 
qualities which can give beauty its value, and even supply its place. 
It is remarkable that I, whose profession brought me into contact 
with so many young girls, do not remember to have ever seen one in 
Chambéri who was not charming. It will be said that I was inclined 
to find them so, and there may be some truth in that; but I had no 
need to add anything of my own. In truth, I cannot think of my 
young pupils without pleasure. Why, when I mention here the most 
amiable of them, can I not reinstate them and myself together in. 
those happy times which we then enjoyed, those sweet and innocent 
moments, which we spent together? The first was Mademoiselle de. 
Mellaréde, my neighbour, the sister of M. Gaime’s pupil. She was a 
lively brunette, full of tender vivacity and grace, and free from 
thoughtlessness. Like most girls of her age, she was rather thin;,but 
her bright eyes, her slender figure, and her attractive manner needed 
no fulness to add to her charm. I used to go to her in the morning, 
when she was generally in deshabille, without any headdress except 
` her hair, carelessly pinned up and set off by a few flowers which she 
placed there on my arrival, and which were taken off when I left, 
_ for her hair to be dressed. I am more afraid of a pretty young woman 
in deshabille than of anything else in the world; I should fear them 
a hundred times less in full dress, as Mademoiselle de Menthon, to 


2 The minister of Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, 


196 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


whose house I went in the afternoon, always was. She made upon me 
an equally pleasing but entirely different impression. Her hair was 
very light; she was very slight, very shy, and very fair; her voice was 
clear, correct, and melodious, but she was afraid of employing its 
full compass. She had a scar on her bosom where she had been 
scalded by some boiling water, which was only partly hidden by a 
neckerchief of blue chenille. This mark sometimes drew my atten- 
tion to the place, and, in a short time, no longer on account of the 
scar. Mademoiselle de Challes, another of my neighbours, was fully 
developed, tall, well made, and rather stout. She had been very 
pretty, but was no longer a beauty; but she deserves notice on ac- 
count of her graceful manners, even temper, and good disposition. 
Her sister, Madame de Charly, the prettiest woman in Chambéri, no 
longer learned music, but I gave lessons to her daughter, who was 
still quite young, and whose growing beauty gave promise of equal- 
ling that of her mother, had she not unfortunately been somewhat 
red-haired. At the Convent of the Visitation I gave lessons to a young 
French lady, whose name I have forgotten, but who deserves a place 
in the list of my favourite pupils. She had adopted the slow and 
drawling tones of the nuns, and in this drawling tone made some 
very witty remarks, which seemed quite out of harmony with her 
manner. For the rest, she was idle, not caring to take pains to show 
her wit, which was a favour she did not grant to everyone. It was 
only after a month or two, during which I had given her lessons and 
she had been very idle, that she bethought herself of this expedient 
to make me more punctual, a thing which I have never been able to 
persuade myself to be. I liked my lessons while I was giving them; 
but I did not like the idea of being obliged to attend, or being tied to 
time; restraint and subjection of any kind are to me at all times un- 
‘bearable; they would make me hate even pleasure itself. It is said 
that, amongst the Mohammedans, a man goes through the streets at 
daybreak, ordering husbands to do their duty to their wives. I should 
be a poor Turk at that hour. 

I also had some pupils among the middle classes, amongst others, 
one who was the indirect cause of a change in my relations, of which 
I have to speak, since I must tell everything. She was a grocer’s 
daughter, named Mademoiselle Lard; a perfect model for a Greek 


MADAME LARD a 197 


statue, and whom I should quote as the most beautiful girl I have 
ever seen, if true beauty cguld exist without life and soul. Her in- 
difference, coldness, and want of feeling were almost incredible. It 
was as impossible to please as it was to annoy her; and I am con- 
vinced that, if any man had made an attempt upon her virtue, she 
would have allowed him to succeed, not from inclination, but from 
sheer stupidity. Her mother, who did not wish to run the risk, never 
left her for a moment. In having her taught singing, in providing 
her with a young master, she did all she could to rouse her, but with- 
out success. While the master tried to fascinate the daughter, the 
mother tried to fascinate the master, with equally bad success. Ma- 
dame Lard united with her natural vivacity all the sprightliness 
which her daughter should have possessed. She was a lively; pretty 
little woman, although her features were somewhat irregular and 
marked with the small-pox. She had small, fiery eyes, which were 
rather red, and nearly always sore. Every morning, on my arrival, I 
found my coffee and cream ready; the mother never failed to salute 
me with a hearty kiss on the lips, which I should have liked to re- 
turn to the daughter, merely out of curiosity to see how she would 
have taken it. All this was done so simply and naturally, that, even 
when M. Lard was there, the kissing and caressing went on as usual, 
He was a good fellow, the true father of his daughter, whom his 
wife never deceived, since she had no need to do so. 

I submitted to all these caresses with my usual stupidity, treating 
them simply as tokens of friendship. Sometimes they became trou- 
blesome, for lively Madame Lard always exacted her rights, and if, 
in the course of the day, I had passed the shop without stopping, it 
would have created a disturbance. When I was in a hurry, I was 
obliged to go round by another street; for I well knew that it was not 
so easy a matter to get out of her house as to enter it. , 

Madame Lard showed me too much attention for me to show 
none to her. These attentions touched me greatly. I spoke about 
them to mamma, as something which was no secret; and, even if 
there had been any mystery, I should have spoken to her all the 
same, for it would have been impossible for me to keep a secret of 
any kind from her; my heart was as open before her as in the sight 
of heaven. She did not consider the matter quite as harmless as 


198 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


I did. She saw advances where I had only seen friendship; she 
thought that, if Madame Lard made it a point of honour not to leave 
me as great a fool as she had found me, she would somehow or other 
succeed in making herself understood, and, apart from the consider- 
ation that it was not fair that another woman should undertake the 
instruction of her pupil, she had motives, which were more worthy 
of her, in a desire to protect me from the snares to which my age and 
calling exposed me. At the same time, a more dangerous snare was 
set for me, which I indeed escaped, but which showed her that the 
dangers, which continually threatened me, rendered necessary all the 
measures of protection which she could employ. 

' The Comtesse de Menthon, the mother of one of my pupils, was 
a woman of great wit, and had the reputation of being equally mali- 
cious. It was reported that she had caused several quarrels, amongst 
others, one which had had fatal consequences for the house of An- 
tremont. Mamma was sufficiently intimate with her to be acquainted 
with her character; having quite innocently taken the fancy of some- 
one upon whom Madame de Menthon had designs, mamma was 
charged by her with the offence of the preference shown towards 
her, although she had neither sought nor accepted it; and, from that 
time, Madame de Menthon sought to do her rival several ill turns, 
none of which succeeded. By way of sample, I will relate one of the 
most laughable. They were together in the country, with several 
gentlemen of the neighbourhood, amongst whom was the suitor in 
question. Madame de Menthon one day told one of these gentlemen 
that Madame de Warens was very affected, and she had no taste, 
dressed badly, and kept her bosom covered like a tradesman’s wife. 
“As for the last point,” answered the gentleman, who was fond of a 
joke, “she has her reasons for it; I know she has a scar on her breast, 
just like an ugly rat, so perfectly natural that it looks as if it was 
moving.” Hatred, like love, causes credulity. Madame de Menthon 
resolved to make capital out of this discovery; and one day, when 
mamma was playing cards with the lady’s ungrateful favourite, she 
seized the opportunity to step behind her rival, and, almost upsetting 
her chair, cleverly turned back her neckerchief; but, instead of the 
large rat, the gentleman saw something very different, which it was 


MADAME DE MENTHON 199 


easier to see than to forget, and this was certainly not what the lady 
had intended. &lt; ) 

I was not calculated to attract Madame de Menthon, who only 
liked to see brilliant company around her; nevertheless, she paid me 
some attention, not on account of my personal appearance, about | 
which she certainly did not trouble herself, but because of my sup- 
posed wit, which might have made me serviceable to her. She had 4 
lively taste for satire, and was fond of composing songs and verses 
upon those who displeased her. If she had found me sufficiently 
gifted to assist her in composing her verses, and sufficiently obliging 
to write them, between us we should soon have turned Chambéri 
upside down. These lampoons would have been traced back to their 
source; Madame de Menthon would have got out of it by sacrificing 
me, and I should, perhaps, have been imprisoned for the rest of my 
life, as a reward for playing the Apollo of the ladies. 

Happily, nothing of the kind happened. Madame de Menthon 
kept me to dinner two or three times, to make me talk, and found 
that I was only a fool. I was conscious of this myself, and sighed over 
it, envying the accomplishments of my friend Venture, whereas ] 
ought to have been grateful to my stupidity for saving me from dan. 
ger. I continued her daughter’s singing-master, and nothing more; 
but I lived peacefully, and was always welcome in Chambéri, which 
was far better than being considered a wit by her, and a serpent by 
everybody else. 

Be that as it may, mamma saw that, in order to rescue me fron 
the perils of my youth, she must treat me as a man, which she im- 
mediately proceeded to do, but in the most singular manner that 
ever occurred to a woman in similar circumstances. I found her man: 
ner more serious, and her utterances more moral than usual. The 
playful gaiety, which was usually mingled with her advice, was all at 
once succeeded by a sustained gravity, neither familiar nor severe, 
which seemed to pave the way for an explanation. After having in 
vain asked myself the reason of this change, I asked her, which was 
just what she expected. She proposed a walk in the little garden on 
the following day; the next morning found us there. She had taken 
precautions that we should be left undisturbed all day, and em- 


200 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ployed the time in preparing me for the kindness which she wished 
to show me, not, as another woman would have done, by artifices 
and coquetry, but by language full of feeling and good sense, better 
calculated to instruct than to seduce me, which appealed rather to 
my heart than my senses. But, however admirable and useful the 
words she addressed to me may have been, although they were any- 
thing but cold and mournful, I did not listen to them with all the 
attention they deserved, and did not impress them on my memory, 
as I should have done at any other time. The manner in which she 
began, the appearance of careful preparation had disquieted me; 
while she was speaking, I was dreamy and distracted, thinking less 
of what she was saying than of what she wanted; and, as soon as I 
understood, which was by no means easy, the novelty of the idea, 
which had never once entered my head all the time I had been living 
with her, it so completely took possession of me, that I was no longer 
in a state to pay attention to what she said to me. I only thought of 
her, and did not listen to her. 

Most instructors are liable to the perverse idea, which I have not 
avoided myself in my “Emile,” of making young people attentive to 
that which they desire to impress upon them, by revealing to them 
the prospect of something in the highest degree attractive. Struck 
by the object held before him, a young man devotes his attention to 
that exclusively, and, leaping lightly over your introductory dis- 
courses, makes straight for the goal towards which you are leading 
him too slowly for his liking. If it be desired to make him attentive, 
he must not be allowed to go too far ahead; and it was just in this 
particular that mamma showed her want of judgment. With char- 
acteristic singularity, which accorded with her systematic mind, she 
took the superfluous precaution of attaching conditions; but, as soon 
as I saw their reward, I no longer listened to them, and hastened to 
agree to everything. I even doubt whether there is a man in the 
world sufficiently honest and courageous to make a bargain in a 
similar case, or a woman capable of pardoning him, if he ventured 
to do so. In consequence of the same singularity, she attached to the 
agreement the most solemn formalities, and gave me eight days to 
think over them, which, like a hypocrite, I assured her I did not re- 
quire; for, to crown the singularity of the whole affair, I was really 


MADAME DE WARENS’ PROPOSAL 201 


glad of the respite, so greatly had the novelty of these ideas struck 
me, and so disordered dfd I feel the state of my own to be, that I 
wanted time to set them in order. 

It will be imagined that those eight days seemed eight centuries 
to me; on the contrary, I could have wished that they had really 
lasted as long. I do not know how to describe my condition; it was a 
kind of fright mingled with impatience, during which I was so 
afraid of what I longed for, that I sometimes seriously endeavoured 
to think of some decent way of avoiding the promised happiness. 
Consider my ardent and lascivious temperament, my heated blood, 
my heart intoxicated with love, my vigorous health, my age. Remem- 
ber that, in this condition, thirsting after women, I had never yet 
touched one; that imagination, need, vanity, and curiosity, all com- 
bined to devour me with the burning desire of being a man and 
showing myself one. Add to this, above all—for it must never be 
forgotten—that my tender and lively attachment to her, far from 
. diminishing, had only become warmer every day, that I was never 
happy except with her; that J never left her except to think of her; 
that my heart was full, not only of her goodness and amiability, but 
of her sex, her form, her person; in a word, of her, under every as- 
pect in which she could be dear to me. Do not imagine, that, be- 
cause she was ten or twelve years older than myself, she had either 
grown old, or appeared so to me. During the five or six years since 
the first sight of her had so enchanted me, she had really altered very 
little, and, in my eyes, not at all. She had always appeared charming 
to me, and, at that time, everyone still considered her so. Her figure 
alone had become a little stouter. In other respects, it was the same 
eye, the same complexion, the same bosom, the same features, the 
same beautiful fair hair, the same cheerfulness, even the voice was 
the same, the silvery voice of youth, which always made so deep an 
impression upon me, that, even now, I cannot hear without emo- 
tion the tones of a pretty girlish voice. 

What I had to fear in the expectation of possessing one who was 
so dear to me, was naturally the anticipation of it, and the inability to 
control my desires and imagination sufficiently to remain master of 
myself, It will be seen that, at an advanced age, the mere idea of cet- 
tain trifling favours which awaited me in the company of the person 


202 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


I loved, heated my blood to such a degree that it was impossible for 
me to make with impunity the short journey which separated me 
from her. How then was it that, in the flower of my youth, I felt so 
little eagerness for the first enjoyment? How was it that I could see 
the hour approach with more pain than pleasure? How was it that, 
instead of the rapture which should have intoxicated me, I almost 
felt repugnance and fear? Thére is no doubt that, if I had been able 
to escape my happiness with decency, I should have done so with all 
my heart. I have promised singularities in the history of my attach- 
ment to her; this is surely one which would never have been ex- 
pected. 

The reader, already disgusted, is doubtless of opinion that, being 
already possessed by another man, she degraded herself in my eyes 
by distributing her favours, and that a feeling of dis-esteem cooled 
those with which she had inspired me. He is mistaken. This distribu- 
tion was certainly very painful to me, as much in consequence of a 
very natural feeling of delicacy as because I really considered it un- 
worthy of her and myself; but it never altered my feelings towards 
her, and I can swear that I never loved her more tenderly than when 
I had so little desire to possess her. I knew too well her modest heart 
and her cold temperament to think for a moment that sensual pleas- 
ure had anything to do with this abandonment of herself; I was per- 
fectly convinced that nothing but anxiety to save me from dangers 
that were otherwise almost inevitable and to preserve me entirely 
for myself and my duties, caused her to violate a duty which she did 
not regard in the same light as other women, as will be shown later. 
I pitied her and pitied myself. I should have liked to say to her: “No, 
mamma, it is not necessary; I will answer for myself without that.” 
But I did not dare to do so—first, because it was not a thing to say, 
and, in the second place, because in the main I felt that it was not 
true, and that, in reality, there was only one woman who could pro- 
tect me against other women and secure me against temptations. 
Without desiring to possess her, I was very glad that she prevented 
me from desiring the possession of other women, to such an extent 
did I look upon everything as a misfortune which would draw me 
away from her. Our long-continued and innocent intercourse, far 
from weakening my feelings for her, had strengthened them, but, 


REFLECTIONS ON HIS ATTACHMENT 203 


at the same time, had given them a different turn, which made them 
more affectionate, more tender perhaps, but also less sensual. Having 
so long called her mamma, having enjoyed with her the intimacy of 
a son, I had become accustomed to look upon myself as one. I believe 
that this was really the cause of the little eagerness I felt to possess 
her, although she was so dear to me. I well remember that my early 
feelings, without being livelier, were more sensual. At Annecy, I was 
intoxicated; at Chambéri, I was no longer so. I still loved her as pas- 
sionately as possible; but I loved her more for her own sake than for 
my own, or, at least, I sought happiness with her, rather than enjoy- 
~ ment; she was for me more than a sister, more than a mother, more 
than a friend, even more than a mistress; and for that very reason 
she was not a mistress for me. In short, I loved her too well to desire 
to possess her; that is most clearly prominent in my ideas. 

The day, more dreaded than wished for, at length arrived. [ prom- 
ised everything, and kept my word. My heart sealed all my vows, 
without desiring their reward. However, I obtained it. For the first 
time I found myself in the arms of a woman, a woman whom I 
adored. Was I happy? No; I tasted pleasure. A certain unconquer- 
able feeling of melancholy poisoned its charm; I felt as if I had been 
guilty of incest. Two or three times, while pressing her in ecstasy to 
my arms, I wetted her bosom with my tears. She, on the other hand, 
was neither sad nor excited; she was tender and calm. As she was by 
no means sensual and had not looked for enjoyment, she felt no 
gratification, and never experienced remorse. 

I repeat it: all her faults were due to her errors, none to her pas- 
sions. She was well born, her heart was pure, she loved propriety; 
her inclinations were upright and virtuous, her taste was refined; she 
was formed for an elegance of manners which she always loved but 
never followed, because, instead of listening to her heart, which al- 
ways guided her aright, she listened to her reason, which guided het 
wrongly; for when the latter is led astray by false principles, these 
are always belied by its real feelings; but, unfortunately, she rather 
prided herself on her philosophy, and the morals which she drew 
from it corrupted those which her heart dictated. 

M. de Tavel, her first lover, was her instructor in philosophy, and 
the principles which he taught her were those which he found neces- 


204 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


sary, in order to seduce her. Finding her attached to her husband, 
devoted to her duties, always cold, calculating, and inaccessible to 
sensual feelings, he endeavoured to reach her by sophistries, and suc- 
ceeded in convincing her that the duties, to which she was so at- 
tached, were so much catechism-nonsense, intended solely for the 
amusement of children; that the union of the sexes was in itself a 
matter of the greatest indifference; that conjugal fidelity was merely 
an apparent obligation, the inner morality of which only had refer- 
ence to public opinion; that the husband’s repose was the only rule of 
duty which the wife need respect, so that secret acts of unfaithful- 
ness, being nothing to him against whom they were committed, 
were equally nothing to the conscience; in short, he persuaded her 
that the thing was nothing in itself, that only scandal called it into 
existence, and that every woman who appeared virtuous owed it to 
that alone. In this manner the wretch attained, his object, by corrupt- 
ing the mind of a child whose heart he had been unable to corrupt. 
He was punished for it by an all-devouring jealousy, being con- 
vinced that she treated him as he had persuaded her to treat her hus- 
band. I do not know whether he was mistaken in this. The minister 
Perret was supposed to have been his successor. All I know is, that 
the cold temperament of this young woman, which ought to have 
protected her against this system, was just what subsequently pre- 
vented her froin abandoning it. She could not conceive that anyone 
should attach such importance to that which possessed no impor- 
tance for her. She never honoured by the name of virtue an absti- 
vence which cost her so little. 

She hardly ever misused these false principles for her own sake; 
but she misused them for the sake of others, and that in consequence 
of another maxim almost equally false, but more in harmony with 
the goodness of her heart. She always believed that nothing attached 
a man so strongly to a woman as possession; and, although her love 
for her friends was only friendship, it was a friendship so tender, 
that she employed all possible means at her disposal to attach them 
more strongly to her. The remarkable thing is, that she nearly always 
succeeded. She was so truly amiable, that, the greater the intimacy 
in which one lived with her, the more one found fresh reasons far 


MADAME DE WARENS’ CHARACTER 205 


loving her. Another thing worthy of notice is that, after her first 
weakness, she rarely bestowed her favours except upon the unfor- 
tunate; persons of distinction spent their labour upon her in vain; 
but, if she once began to feel sympathy for a man, he must have been 
little deserving of love if she did not end by loving him. If she 
sometimes chose those who were unworthy of her, the blame rested, 
not on any low inclinations, which were far removed from her noble 
heart, but only on her too generous, too kindly, too compassionate, 
and too feeling disposition, which she did not always control with 
sufficient judgment. 

If some false principles led her astray, how many admirable ones 
did she possess, to which she always remained constant! By how 
many virtues did she make up for her weaknesses, if those errors can 
be so called, with which the senses had so little to do! The same man, 
who deceived her in one point, instructed her admirably in a thou- 
sand others; and, as her passions were not so unruly as to prevent her 
from following her reason, she took the right path when her soph- 
isms did not mislead her. Her motives, even in her errors, were 
praiseworthy; owing to her mistaken ideas, she might do wrong, but 
she was incapable of doing so wilfully. She abhorred duplicity and ly- 
ing; she was just, fair, humane, disinterested, faithful to her word, 
her friends, and the duties which she regarded as such, incapable of 
revenge or hatred, without the least idea that there was any merit in 
forgiveness. Finally, to return to those qualities which less admit of 
excuse, without knowing how to estimate the value of her favours, 
she never made a common trade of them; she was lavish of them, but 
she never sold them, although she was always at her wit’s end how 
to live; and I venture to assert, that if Socrates could esteem Aspasia, 
he would have respected Madame de Warens. | 

I know beforehand, that, when I ascribe to her a sensitive disposi- 
tion and a cold temperament, I shall, as usual, be accused of contra- 
diction, and with as much reason. It may be that Nature was wrong, 
and that this combination ought not to have existed; I only know 
that it did exist. All who have known Madame de Warens, many of 
whom are still alive, know well that this was the case. I will even 
venture to add, that she never knew but one real pleasure in life— 


206 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


to procure enjoyment for those whom she loved. Anyone is at liberty 
to judge of that as he pleases, and learnedly prove that it is not true. 
My duty is to state the truth, not to make people believe it. 

By degrees I became acquainted with all I have just said in the 
course of the conversations which succeeded our union, and which 
alone rendered it delightful. She had been right in hoping that her 
complaisance would be useful to me; I derived great advantages 
from it as regards my instruction. Hitherto, she had only spoken to 
me of myself alone as if she had been talking to a child. She now 
began to treat me as a man, and spoke to me of herself. All that she 
said to me was so interesting, and I felt so touched by it, that, when 
I reflected, I derived greater advantage from these confidences than 
from her instructions. When we truly feel that the heart speaks, our 
own opens to receive its confidences, and all the morality of a peda- 
gogue will never be worth the tender and loving chatter of a clever 
woman, who has gained our affection. 

The intimate terms on which I lived with her afforded her the 
opportunity of forming a more favourable estimate of me than be- 
fore; she was of opinion that, in spite of my awkward manner, I was 
worth being trained for the world, and that, if I one day appeared on 
a certain footing, I should be in a position to make my way. With 
this idea, she devoted herself, not only to forming my judgment, but 
also my appearance and manners, in order to make me amiable as 
well as estimable; and, if it is true that worldly success is compatible 
with virtue—which for my part I do not believe—I am at least con- 
vinced, that there is no other way to such an end than that which she 
had taken and wished to teach me. For Madame de Warens under- 
stood mankind, and understood, in a high degree, the art of dealing 
with them without falsehood and without indiscretion, without de- 
ceiving or offending them. But she taught this art rather by her 
character than by her lessons; she knew better how to practise than 
explain it, and I was of all men in the world the least capable of 
learning it. Thus her efforts in this direction were nearly all labour 
lost, as well as the trouble she took to provide me with fencing and 
dancing-masters. Although supple and of a good figure, I could 
never learn to dance a minuet. Owing to my corns, I had contracted 
the habit of walking on my heels, of which Roche could never cure 


ILL-SUCCESS AT FENCING 207 


me; and, in spite of my active appearance, I have never been able to 
jump an ordinary ditch. If was worse at the fencing-school. After 
three months’ instruction I was still obliged to confine myself to 
parrying, without being able to deliver an attack; my wrist was not 
supple enough, or my arm sufficiently firm, to hold my foil, when- 
ever my master chose to make it fly out of my hand. In addition to 
this, I had a mortal aversion to this exercise, and to the master who 
attempted to teach me. I could never have believed that a man could 
be so proud of being able to kill another. In order to bring his com- 
manding genius within my reach, he always explained himself by 
comparisons drawn from music, about which he knew nothing. He 
discovered striking analogies between a thrust in tierce and carte 
and the musical intervals of the same name. When he intended to 
make a feint, he told me to look out for a dièse,’ because a dièse was 
formerly called a feinte; when he had knocked the foil out of my 
hand, he used to say, with a grin, that it was a pause. In short, I have 
never in my life beheld a more insufferable pedant than this 
wretched fellow with his plumes and his leather stomacher. 

I consequently made little progress in these exercises, which I soon 
gave up from sheer disgust; but I succeeded far better in a more use- 
ful art—that of being content with my lot, and not desiring one 
more brilliant, for which I began to feel that I was not born. En- 
tirely devoted to the desire of making mamma’s life happy, I always 
felt greater pleasure in her company; and, when I was obliged to 
leave her and hurry into the town, in spite of my passion for music, 
I began to feel the restraint imposed upon me by my lessons. 

I do not know whether Claude Anet was aware of the intimacy of 
our relations. I have reason to believe that it did not escape his 
notice. He was very quick-witted, but very discreet; he never said 
what he did not think, but he did not always say what he thought. 
Without giving me the least hint that he knew about it, he seemed 
to show by his conduct that he did. This conduct was certainly not 
due to any lowness of disposition, but to the fact that, having 
adopted his mistress’s principles, he could not disapprove if she 
acted in accordance with them. Although no older than she was, he 
was so mature and serious, that he looked upon us almost as two 


3 Mus., sharp. 


208 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


children, who deserved to be indulged, and both of us regarded 
him as a man worthy of respect, whose esteem we had to conciliate. 
It was not until she had been unfaithful to him, that I understood 
the extent of the attachment that she felt for him. Since she knew 
that I only felt, thought and breathed through her, she showed me 
how much she loved him, in order that I might feel the same affec- 
tion for him, and she laid less stress upon her friendship than upon 
her esteem for him, since this was the feeling which I was capable 
of sharing most fully. How often did she move our hearts, and 
make us embrace with tears, at the same time telling us that we 
were both necessary to her happiness in life! Let not those women 
who read this laugh maliciously. With her peculiar temperament, 
there was nothing suspicious about this necessity; it was solely the 
necessity of her heart. 

Thus a companionship was established between us, of which 
there is, perhaps, no other example upon earth. All our wishes, cares, 
and inclinations were in common; none of them went beyond our 
little circle. The habit of living together, to the exclusion of the rest 
of the world, became so strong, that if, during the course of our 
meals, one of the three was absent, or a fourth came in, everything 
was upset, and, in spite of our special bonds of attachments, our 
téte-a-tétes were not so sweet as our party of three. What prevented 
all restraint between us was an extreme mutual confidence, and 
what prevented weariness was the fact that we were all constantly 
employed. Mamma, always planning and always active, allowed 
neither of us to be idle; and, besides, we each of us had enough to 
do on our own account, to keep our time fully occupied. In my opin- 
ion, want of occupation is equally the scourge of society and solitude. 
Nothing narrows the mind more, nothing begets more nothings— 
gossip, tittle-tattle, bickering, and lies—than for people to be eter- 
nally shut up, opposite one another, in the same room, reduced, for 
the want of anything else to do, to the necessity of chattering inces- 
santly. When everyone is busy, people only speak when they have 
something to say; but, when doing nothing, they are absolutely 
obliged to keep talking, which is the most wearisome and the most 
dangerous kind of constraint. I even venture to go further and main- 
tain that, in order to make company really agreeable, not only must 


2 


MADAME DE WARENS’ VISIONARY PROJECTS 209 


everybody be doing something, but something that requires a cer- 
tain amount of attentione Knitting is as bad as doing nothing; and 
it takes as much trouble to amuse a woman who is knitting, as one 
who is sitting with her arms folded. Embroidering is different; she 
is sufficiently occupied to fill up the intervals of silence. What is dis- 
gusting and ridiculous, is to see, in the meantime, a dozen over- 
grown hobble-de-hoys get up, sit down again, walk backwards and 
forwards, turn round on their heels, move the porcelain chimney- 
ornaments about, and rack their brains in order to keep up an in- 
exhaustible flow of words—a charming occupation truly! Such peo- 
ple, whatever they may do, will always be a burden to themselves 
and others. When I was at Motiers, I used to go to my neighbours’ 
houses to make stay-laces; if I went back into the world, I should 
always carry a cup and ball in my pocket, and amuse myself with it 
all day, to avoid being obliged to speak when I have nothing to say. 
If everyone did the same, men would become less spiteful, their in- 
tercourse would become safer, and, in my opinion, more agreeable. 
In short, let wits laugh if they please, but I maintain that the only 
lesson of morality within the reach of the present generation is the 
morality of the cup and ball. 

Besides, we were not allowed much time for taking precautions 
against ennui when by ourselves; the crowds of troublesome visitors 
caused us too much weariness to allow us to feel any when we were 
left to ourselves. The feeling of impatience, with which they had 
formerly inspired me, had not diminished, and the only difference 
was, that I had less time to abandon myself to it. Poor mamma had 
not lost her old fancy for schemes and systems; on the contrary, the 
more pressing her domestic embarrassments became, the more she 
abandoned herself to visionary projects, in order to meet them; the 
smaller her present resources, the greater she imagined them in the 
future. Advancing years only strengthened her in this folly; and, in 
proportion as she lost the taste for the pleasures of the world and 
youth, she supplied its place by a mania for secrets and schemes. The 
house was never free from quacks, manufacturers, alchemists, and 
promoters of all kinds, who flung millions about them, and ended 
by being in want of a crown-piece. None of them left her empty- 
handed; and it has always amazed me, how she was able to support 


‘210 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


such extravagant expenditure without exhausting her means and the 
patience of her creditors. 

The scheme with which she was most occupied at the time of 
which I am speaking, and which was not the most unreasonable 
that she had formed, was to establish at Chambéri a royal botanical 
garden with a paid demonstrator; it will be guessed for whom this 
post had already been designed. The position of this town, in the 
midst of the Alps, was excellently adapted for botanical purposes; 
and mamma, who always tried to assist one scheme by another, com- 
bined with it the idea of a college of pharmacy, which really seemed 
likely to be very useful in so poor a country, where apothecaries are 
almost the only medical men. The retirement of Grossi, the royal 
physician in ordinary, to Chambéri, after the death of King Victor, 
seemed to her to be very favourable to this idea, or, perhaps, sug- 
gested it. However that may be, she laid herself out to flatter Grossi, 
who was by no means an easy subject; he was certainly the most sar- 
castic and brutal fellow that I have ever known. The reader will be 
able to judge of his character by two or three specimens of it, which 
I will mention. 

One day, he was in consultation with some other physicians, one 
of whom had been summoned from Annecy, and was the patient’s 
usual medical attendant. This young man, who possessed little tact 
for a physician, ventured to disagree with Grossi’s opinion. The lat- 
ter, by way of reply, simply asked him when he was going back, 
which way he meant to go, and by what conveyance he travelled. 
The other, having satisfied Grossi on these points, asked him in his 
turn whether he could do anything for him. “Nothing, nothing,” 
said Grossi, “except that I intend to sit at a window while you are 
passing, to have the pleasure of seeing an ass riding on horseback.” 
He was as mean as he was wealthy and hard-hearted. One of his 
friends once asked him to lend him some money on good security. 
“My friend,” said he, seizing his arm and grinding his teeth, “if St. 
Peter himself came down from heaven to borrow ten pistoles from 
me, and offered me the Trinity as sureties, I would not lend them 
to him.” One day, being invited to dinner with Comte Picon, Gover- 
nor of Savoy, who was a very religious man, he arrived before the 

‘time; and his Excellency, who was busy telling his beads, proposed 


-M. GROSSI 21F 


the same amusement to him. Not knowing exactly what to answer, 
he made a fearful grimac€ and knelt down; but he had scarcely re- 
cited two Aves, when, unable to endure it any longer, he hastily got 
up, took his stick, ‘adi went off without saying a word. Comte Picon 
ran after him, crying, “M. Grossi! M. Grossi! stop, stop! there is an 
excellent red partridge on the spit!” “Monsieur le Comte,” replied 
the other, turning round, “I would not stay if you were to set a 
roasted angel before me.” Such was the chief physician, M. Grossi, 
whom mamma took in hand, and succeeded in taming. Although 
extremely busy, he was in the habit of coming to see her very fre- 
quently, conceived a friendship for Anet, showed that he thought 
highly of his learning, spoke of him in terms of esteem, and, what 
one would not have expected from such a bear, treated him with 
studious respect, to obliterate the impressions of the past. For, al- 
though Anet was no longer on the footing of a servant, it was known 
that he had formerly been one, and it needed nothing less than the 
example and authority of the chief physician, to make people treat 
him in a manner which they would certainly not have adopted from 
anyone else. Claude Anet, with his black coat, well-combed wig,. 
serious and respectable demeanour, prudent and careful behaviour, a 
tolerably extensive knowledge of botany and medicine, and the sup- 
port of the head of the Faculty, might reasonably have hoped to fill 
the place of Demonstrator Royal of plants, if the idea of the estab- 
lishment had been carried out; and, in fact, Grossi had approved of 
the plan, had taken it up, and only waited an opportunity to lay it 
before the Court, when the conclusion of peace should allow it to 
give attention to useful things, and leave some money at its disposal 
to provide for the necessary expenses. 

But this project, the carrying out of which would probably have 
_ plunged me into the study of botany, for which, as it appears to me, 
I was born, failed in consequence of one of those unexpected acci- 
dents which overthrow the best concerted plans. I was fated to be- 
come by degrees an example of human misery. It was as if Provi- 
dence, who summoned me to these great trials, with its own hand 
removed every obstacle which might have prevented me from en- 
countering them. In an excursion which Anet had made to the top 
of the mountains to look for genipi, a rare plant which only grows: 


212 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


upon the Alps and which M. Grossi wanted, the poor fellow got so 
hot that he was attacked by a pleurisy, which the genipi was unable 
to cure, although it is said to be a specific for that complaint; and, 
notwithstanding all the skill of Grossi, who was certainly a very 
clever man, in spite of the unremitting care. and attention of his good 
mistress and myself, he died in our arms on the fifth day, after suf- 
fering the most cruel agonies, during which he had no spiritual ex- 
hortations but mine, which I lavished upon him with such outbursts 
of grief and fervour, that, if he had been able to understand me, they 
must have afforded him some consolation. Thus I lost the most faith- 
ful friend I have had in my life; an uncommon and estimable man, 
in whom Nature took the place of education, who, in his position 
as a servant, nourished in his heart all the virtues of great men, and 
who, in order to show himself one of them to all the world, perhaps 
wanted nothing except a longer life and a different position. 

The next day, I was speaking of him to mamma with the most 
lively and sincere affliction; when suddenly, in the midst of our con- 
versation, the vile and unworthy thought came across my mind, 
that I should inherit his wardrobe, particularly a nice black coat, 
which had caught my fancy. I thought of this, and consequently 
gave utterance to my thought; for when I was with her, to think and 
speak was the same thing for me. Nothing made her feel more 
keenly the loss which she had sustained than this contemptible and 
hateful remark, disinterestedness and nobility of soul being qualities 
for which the deceased had been pre-eminently distinguished. The 
poor woman, without answering a word, turned away from me and 
began to cry. Dear and precious tears! They were understood, and all 
made their way into my heart, from which they washed away even 
the last traces of so contemptible and unworthy a thought. Never 
again, since that time, has a similar thought entered it. 

This loss caused mamma as much harm as sorrow. From this 
moment, her affairs went from bad to worse. Anet had been very 
exact and methodical, and kept his mistress’s house in good order. 
His vigilance was feared, and extravagance was checked. Even 
mamma herself was afraid of his censure, and curtailed her expenses. 
She was not satisfied with his attachment, she wished to preserve 
his esteem, and she dreaded the just reproach which he sometimes 


MADAME DE WARENS’ EXTRAVAGANCE 213 


ventured to utter, that she was squandering not only her own prop- 
erty, but that of others a well. I thought as he did, and even said 
so; but I had not the same influence over her, and my words did not 
make the same impression upon her as his. When he was no more, 
I was obliged to take his place, for which I had as little capacity as 
inclination; consequently, I filled it badly. I was not sufficiently care- 
ful, I was very shy; though grumbling to myself, I let everything go 
on as it liked. Besides, although I had gained the same confidence, I 
had not the same authority. I saw the disorder, I sighed over it, I 
complained of it, but no one paid any attention to me. I was too 
young and too lively to have a right to be sensible; and, when I 
wanted to interfere and play the censor, mamma gave me two or 
three playful slaps on the cheek, called me her little Mentor, and 
obliged me to resume the part which suited me. 

The profound conviction of the distress into which her unlimited 
extravagance was bound, sooner or later, to plunge her, made an 
impression upon me, which was so much the stronger, as, being now 
the overseer of her household, I was able to judge for myself of the 
difference between her income and expenses, in which the balance 
was in favour of the latter. It is from this period that I date the 
tendency to avarice, which I have always felt since then. I have 
never been foolishly extravagant except by fits and starts; but, until 
then, it never troubled me whether I had little or much money. I 
now began to pay attention to this, and to look after my purse. I be- 
came miserly from a very excellent motive; for, in truth, my only 
thought was, how to save something for mamma against the time of 
the crash which I saw coming. I was afraid that her creditors would 
confiscate her pension, or that it might be altogether discontinued; 
and I imagined, with my narrow ideas, that my little savings would 
then be of great service to her. But, in order to save anything, and, 
above all, to keep it, it was necessary for me to hide it from her; for, 
while she was hard pressed for money, it would never have done for 
her to know of the existence of my little hoard. I accordingly looked 
about for various hiding-places, where I stored a few Jouts, intending 
to increase the store from time to time, until the moment when T in- 
tended to lay it at her feet. But I was so awkward in the choice of 
my hiding-places, that she always found them out; and then, in order 


214 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


to let me know that she had done so, she removed the money which 
I had deposited and replaced it by a larger sum in different coinage. 
Then, feeling quite ashamed, I put my little treasure into the com- 
mon purse, and she never failed to lay it out in clothes or other arti- 
cles for my use, such as a silver-hilted sword, a watch, or something 
of the kind. 

Convinced that I should never succeed in saving much money, and 
that, after all, it would only be of very little use to her, I at last felt 
that there was nothing else to be done, in view of the disaster which 
I feared, except for me to secure a position, which would enable me 
to provide for her myself, as soon as she ceased to provide for me 
and found herself reduced to want. Unfortunately, I built my plans 
upon my own inclinations, and foolishly persisted in looking for my 
fortune in music; feeling motifs and melodies rising in my head, I 
thought that, as soon as I should be in a position to make use of 
them, I should become a celebrated man, a modern Orpheus, whose 
notes could not fail to attract all the wealth of Peru. As I now began 
to read music fairly well, the question was, how I was to learn com- 
position. The difficulty was to find anyone to teach me; for I did not 
expect to be able to teach myself with the assistance of my Rameau 
alone; and, since Le Maitre’s departure, there was no one in Savoy 
who knew anything about harmony. 

Here will be seen another of those inconsistencies of which my life 
is full, and which have often led me directly away from the object 1 
had in view, even when I thought that I was making straight for it. 
Venture had often spoken to me of the Abbé Blanchard, his compo- 
sition-master, a man of great merit and talents, who at the time was 
music-master of Besançon Cathedral, and now occupies the same 
post in the Chapel of Versailles. I determined to go to Besançon and 
take lessons from the Abbé Blanchard; and this idea seemed to me 
‘so sensible, that I succeeded in making mamma look upon it in the 
same light. She immediately set about getting ready my little outfit 
with the extravagance she displayed in everything. Thus, with the 
object of preventing her bankruptcy and repairing in the future the 
consequences of her extravagance, I began at the outset by putting 
her to an expenditure of eight hundred francs; I hastened her ruin, 
in order to put myself in a position to prevent it. Foolish as this con- 


LUGGAGE CONFISCATED 215 


duct may have been, the illusion was complete on my part and even 
on hers. We were both of fis convinced—I, that I was working for 
her benefit: she, that I was working for my own. 

I had counted upon finding Venture still at Annecy, and intended 
to ask him for a letter of introduction to the Abbé Blanchard. He was 
no longer there. I could learn nothing more, and was obliged to con- 
tent myself with a mass composed by himself, written in four parts, 
which he had left for me. With this recommendation, I set out for 
Besançon, by way of Geneva, where I paid a visit to my relations, 
and through Nyon, where I saw my father, who received me as 
usual and undertook to send on my trunk, which, as I was on horse- 
back, arrived after myself. I reached Besancon. The Abbé received 
me kindly, promised to teach me, and offered to help me in any way 
he could. When we were ready to begin, I received a letter from my 
father, informing me that my trunk had been seized and confiscated 
at Rousses, a French custom-house on the Swiss frontier. Alarmed 
at this news, I made use of the acquaintances whom I had made at 
Besançon, to find out the reason of this confiscation; for, being cer-’ 
tain that I had nothing contraband, I could not imagine what ex- 
cuse there was for it. At last I discovered the reason, and it was so 
curious that I must relate it. 

At Chambéri I had made the acquaintance of an old Lyonnese, 
named Duvivier, a very worthy fellow, who, under the Regency, had 
been employed at the passport-office, and, for want of occupation, 
had come to assist in the land-survey. He had lived in the fashion- 
able world; he possessed talents and some knowledge, was kind- 
hearted and courteous; he understood music; and, as we worked in 
the same room, we had become attached to each other by preference 
in the midst of the unlicked cubs around us. He had correspondents 
at Paris, who kept him supplied with those little trifles, those ephem- 
eral publications, which circulate, one knows not why, and die, one 
knows not how, of which no one thinks any further after they have 
ceased to be spoken of. As I sometimes took him to dine with 
mamma, he treated me with a certain amount of respect, and, to 
make himself agreeable, endeavoured to inspire me with a taste for 
such twaddle, for which I have always felt such disgust, that I have 
never in my life read any of it myself. Unhappily, one of these cursed 


216 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


papets had been left in the breast-pocket of a new coat which I had 
worn two or three times, to prevent its seizure by the custom-house 
officers. This paper contained an insipid Jansenist parody of the 
beautiful scene in Racine’s Mithridates; I had not read ten lines of 
it, and had forgotten to take it out of my pocket. This was the reason 
of the confiscation of my property. The tax-collectors, at the head of 
the inventory of my trunk, drew up an imposing report, in which, 
assuming that the document was brought from Geneva in order to 
be printed and distributed in France, they launched out into pious 
invectives against the enemies of God and the Church, and into 
praises of those who, by their pious watchfulness, had prevented 
this infernal project from being carried out. No doubt they also 
found that my shirts smelt of heresy, for, on the strength of this ter- 
rible paper, everything was confiscated, and I never received any 
account or news of my poor outfit. The revenue-officers, to whom I 
applied, required so many informations, proofs, vouchers, and 
memorials that, after losing myself a thousand times in the mazes 
of this labyrinth, I was obliged to give up everything. I genuinely 
regret that I have not kept the report drawn up by the officials of 
Rousses; it would have figured with distinction amongst the col- 
lection which is to accompany this work. 

This loss made me return at once to Chambéri, without having 
learned anything with the Abbé Blanchard; and, after weighing 
everything carefully, and seeing that misfortune pursued me in all 
my undertakings, I resolved to attach myself entirely to mamma, to 
share her lot, and no longer to trouble myself to no purpose about a 
future on which I had no influence. She received me as if I had 
brought back treasures, gradually supplied the loss of my wardrobe; 
and my misfortune, sufficiently great for us both, was forgotten al- 
most as soon as it overtook us. 

Although it had cooled my ardour for music, I still continued to 
study my Rameau; and, by dint of repeated efforts, I at length suc- 
ceeded in understanding it, and made some trifling attempts at com- 
position, the success of which encouraged me. The Comte de Belle- 
garde, son of the Marquis d’Antremont, had returned from Dresden 
after the death of King Augustus. He had lived a long time at Paris, 
and was passionately fond of music, especially Rameau’s. His 


CONCERTS AT CHAMBERI 2. 


brother, the Comte de Nangis, played the violin; the Comtesse de la 
Tour, their sister, sang a httle. All this made music the fashion at 
Chambéri, and what may be called public concerts were introduced 
there, which I was at first asked to direct; but it soon became clear 
that this was beyond my powers, and other arrangements were 
made. I still continued, however, to compose some little pieces of my 
own, amongst others a cantata, which met with great approval. It 
was not a well-executed piece of work, but it was full of new airy 
and effects, which were not expected from me. These gentlemen 
could not believe that I, who read music so indifferently at sight, 
could be capable of composing anything tolerable, and felt certain 
that I had taken the credit of someone else’s work. In order to settle 
the matter, M. de Nangis came to see me one morning and brought 
a cantata by Clérambault, which he told me he had transposed to 
suit his voice, and for which anather bass was required, since the 
original could no longer be played in consequence of the transposi- 
tion. I told him that it would involve considerable labour, and that 
it could not be finished on the spot. He thought this was only an ex- 
cuse, and pressed me to write, at least, the bass of a recitative. I did 
so, badly, I have no doubt, since, in order to do anything well, I must 
be free and unrestrained; but, at least, I wrote it according to the 
rules, and, as he was present, he could have no doubt that I knew 
the elements of composition. I did not, therefore, lose my pupils, but 
it somewhat cooled my ardour for music, to see that they could give 
a concert without my assistance. 

It was about this time that peace was concluded, and the French 
army recrossed the Alps. Several officers came to visit mamma, 
amongst others the Comte de Lautrec, colonel of the Orleans regi- 
ment, afterwards Plenipotentiary at Geneva, and subsequently Mar- 
shal of France, to whom she presented me. After hearing her ac- 
count of me, he appeared to take a great interest in me, and made 
me several promises, which he never remembered till the last year 
of his life, when I no longer needed his assistance. The young Mar- 
quis de Sennecterre, whose father was at the time ambassador at 
Turin, passed through Chambéri at the same time. He dined with 
Madame de Menthon. I happened to be dining there the same day. 
After dinner, the conversation turned upon music, which he knew 


218 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


well. The opera of Jephtha was at that time something new; he 
spoke of it and it was brought to him. He made me shudder by pro- 
posing that we should go through the opera together, and opened 
the book just at the famous piece for the double chorus: 
“La terre, l'enfer, le ciel même, 
Tout tremble devant le Seigneur.” * 


He asked me, “How many parts will you take? I will take these 
six.” I was not yet accustomed to French forwardness, and, although 
I had sometimes stammered out the score, I did not understand how 
one man could take six parts at once, or even two. I have found noth- 
ing more difficult in practising music, than skipping lightly from 
one part to the other, and keeping my eye on a whole score at once. 
From the manner in which I evaded this attempt, M. de Sennecterre 
must have been inclined to think that I did not understand music. 
It was, perhaps, in order to clear up his doubts on the point, that he 
suggested to me to compose the score of a song which he wanted to 
give to Mademoiselle de Menthon. I could not refuse. He sang the 
song, and I wrote down the music, without asking him to repeat it 
too often. He afterwards read it, and found that it was correctly 
scored. He had noticed my embarrassment and seemed pleased to 
make the most of my trifling success. It was, however, in reality, a 
very simple matter. In the main, I had a very considerable knowl- 
edge of music; I only needed that first rapid glance, which I have 
never possessed in any single thing, and which can only be acquired 
in music by constant practice. Anyhow, I felt thankful for his hon- 
ourable efforts to efface from the minds of others, as well as my own, 
the trifling disgrace which I had suffered; and, twelve or fifteen 
years later, when I met him at different houses in Paris, I was fre- 
quently tempted to remind him of this incident, and to show him 
that I had not forgotten it. But he had lost his sight since then, and 
I was afraid to renew his regrets, by reminding him of the use he had 
formerly made of it, and I held my tongue. 

I now come to the moment which connects my past with my 
present existence. Some friendships, which have lasted from that 
time to this, are very dear to me. They have often caused me to re- 


‘Earth, hell, heaven itself—everything trembles before the Lord. 


GAUFFECOURT 210 


gret that happy obscurity, when those who called themselves my 
friends were really such, ard loved me for myself, from pure good- 
will, not from the vanity of being intimate with a well-known man, 
or from the secret desire of thus finding more opportunity of in- 
juring him. 

It is from this period that I date my acquaintance with my old 
friend Gauffecourt, who has always remained true to me, in spite of 
the efforts of others to take him away from me. Always? Alas, no! 
I have just lost him. But his affection for me only ended with his 
life; our friendship only ended at his death. M. de Gauffecourt was 
one of the most amiable men who have ever existed. It was impos- 
sible to see him without loving him, or to live with him without be- 
coming devotedly attached to him. I have never seen more frank 
or more kindly features, or an expression which showed greater 
calmness, feeling and intelligence, or inspired greater confidence. 
However reserved a man might be, it was impossible for him to help 
being, at first sight, as familiar with him as if he had known him for 
twenty years. I myself, who found it so hard to feel at ease with 
strangers, was at home with him from the first moment. His man- 
ner, his way of speaking, his conversation were in perfect accord 
with his features. The tone of his voice was clear, full, well modu- 
lated, a fine bass, sonorous and powerful, which filled the ear and 
penetrated to the heart. It is impossible to imagine a gentler or more 
uniform cheerfulness, simpler or more unaffected grace, more nat- 
ural or more tastefully cultivated talents. Add to this a loving heart 
—a little too affectionate towards all the world—a character too 
ready to oblige without discretion, serving his friends zealously, or 
rather making friends of people whom he was able to serve, capable 
of managing his own affairs very cleverly, while warmly promoting 
the interests of others. Gauffecourt was the son of a humble watch- 
maker, and had himself followed his father’s trade. But his personal 
appearance and merits summoned him to another sphere, into 
which he was not slow to enter. He made the acquaintance of M. de 
la Closure, the French Resident at Geneva, who took a fancy to him. 
He procured him other acquaintances at Paris who proved useful 
to him, and by their influence he secured the right of supplying the 
salt at Valais, which brought him in an income of twenty thousand 


220 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


francs. His good fortune, which was amply sufficient, ended there 
as far as men were concerned; but, in regard to women, it was a 
great struggle; he had to choose, and made what choice he thought 
best. It was a rare and most honourable point about him, that, hav- 
ing connections with persons in all ranks of life, he was everywhere 
beloved and sought after by all, without ever incurring anyone’s 
hatred or jealousy; and I believe that he died without ever having 
had a single enemy. Happy man! He went every year to the baths 
at Aix, the resort of the best society of the neighbouring countries. 
Intimate with all the nobility of Savoy, he came from Aix to Cham- 
béri to visit the Comte de Bellegarde and his father the Marquis 
d’Antremont, at whose house mamma made his acquaintance and 
introduced me to him. This acquaintance, which did not seem des- 
tined to lead to anything, and was broken off for several years, was 
renewed on an occasion which I will afterwards relate, and became 
a genuine attachment. This is enough to justify me in speaking of a 
friend with whom I have been so closely connected; but, even if I 
had no personal interest in remembering him, he was so amiable a 
man and born under so lucky a star, that, for the credit of the human 
race, I should always think his memory worth preserving. Certainly, 
this charming man had his faults like others, as will be afterwards 
seen; but, if he had not had any, he would, perhaps, have been less 
amiable. To make him as attractive as possible, it was necessary that 
he should sometimes require to be pardoned. 

Another connection of the same period is not yet entirely extinct, 
and still tempts me with the hope of earthly happiness, which dies 
so hard in the heart of man. M. de Conzié, a Savoyard gentleman, 
at that time young and amiable, took it into his head to learn music, 
or rather to make the acquaintance of him who taught it. With con- 
siderable intelligence and a taste for polite acquirements, M. de 
Conzié combined a gentleness of character which made him very 
fascinating, and I also easily made myself attractive to people in 
whom I found such a disposition. Our friendship was soon formed. 
The germs of literature and philosophy, which were beginning to 


5 Bas be 
I have seen him since, and found him entirely changed. What a mighty ma- 


gician is M. Choiseul! None of my old acquaintances have been proof against his 
powers of transformation. 


= 


VOLTAIRE 221 


stir in my head and only waited for a little care and encouragement 
to develop themselves completely, found them in him. M. de Conzié 
had little talent for music, which was a good thing for me; for the 
lesson hours were devoted to everything else but singing scales. We 
breakfasted, talked, and read new publications, but never said a 
word about music. Voltaire’s correspondence with the Crown 
Prince of Prussia was at that time causing some stir; we frequently 
conversed about these two celebrated men, one of whom, who had 
only lately ascended the throne, already gave promise of what he 
was soon to become, while the other, as vilified as he is now admired, 
caused us to lament sincerely the misfortune by which he seemed to 
be pursued, and which is so often the heritage of great minds. The 
prince had enjoyed little happiness in his youth; and Voltaire seemed 
born never to enjoy any. The interest which we took in both ex- 
tended to everything connected with them. Nothing that Voltaire 
wrote escaped us. The pleasure which these readings afforded me 
inspired me with the desire of learning to write elegantly, and of at- 
tempting to imitate the beautiful colouring of this author, which en- 
chanted me. Some time afterwards his “Philosophical Letters” 
appeared. Although certainly not his best work, it was that which 
most attracted me to study, and this growing taste was never extin- 
guished from that time. 

But the moment had not yet come for me to devote myself to it 
entirely. I still had a somewhat fickle disposition, a desire for ram- 
bling, which had been restrained rather than eradicated, and which 
was fostered by our manner of living at Madame de Warens’, which 
was too noisy to suit my solitary disposition. The crowd of strangers 
who swarmed around her from all directions, and my conviction 
that they were only seeking, each in his own way, to deceive her, 
made my life at home a regular torture. Since I had taken the place 
of Claude Anet in his mistress’s confidence, I attentively followed 
the condition of her affairs, and saw them going from bad to worse 
in a most alarming manner. A hundred times I had remonstrated, 
begged, pressed and entreated her, but always in vain. I had thrown 
myself at her feet, and represented to her, as forcibly as I was able, 
the catastrophe which threatened her; I had strongly advised her 
to curtail her expenses, and to begin on me; to undergo a little 


222 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


privation while she was still young, -ather than, by continually in- 
creasing her debts and the number of her creditors, to expose herself 
to their annoyance and to poverty in her old age. Touched by the 
sincerity of my zeal, she became affected like myself, and made me 
the finest promises in the world. But, the moment some worthless 
fellow arrived, all was forgotten. After a thousand proofs of the use- 
lessness of my remonstrances, what was left for me to do but to turn 
my eyes away from the mischief which I could not prevent? I with- 
drew from the house, the door of which I was unable to guard; I 
made little excursions to Nyon, Geneva and Lyons, which distracted 
my attention from my secret trouble, while at the same time they in- 
creased the cause of it owing to the expense. I can swear that I would 
joyfully have put up with any kind of retrenchment, if mamma 
would really have profited by such saving; but, feeling convinced 
that the money I denied myself would only find its way into the 
pockets of swindlers, I abused her generosity in order to share it 
with them, and, like a dog returning from the slaughter-house, car- 
ried off my bit from the piece which I had not been able to save. 

I never lacked excuses for all these journeys; mamma herself 
would have supplied me with them in abundance, having so many 
engagements, negotiations, affairs and commissions in all parts, 
which required a trustworthy agent to execute them. She desired 
nothing better than to send me away; I was always ready to go; the 
result of this could only be a wandering kind of life. These journeys 
afforded me the opportunity of making acquaintances, who proved 
either agreeable or useful to me. At Lyons, M. Perrichon, whom I re- 
proach myself for not having cultivated sufficiently, considering the 
kindness he showed me; at Grenoble, Madame Deybens and the 
wife of the President of Bardonanche, a woman of great intelligence, 
who would have shown me especial favour, if I had had the opportu- 
nity of seeing her oftener; at Geneva, the French Resident, M. de la 
Closure, who often spoke to me of my mother, who still retained a 
hold upon his heart, in spite of death and time; the two Barillots, 
whose father, who called me his grandson, was a most agreeable 
companion and one of the worthiest persons I have ever known. 
During the troubles of the Republic, these two citizens took oppo- 
site sides; the son, that of the people, the father, that of the authori- 


REFLECTIONS ON CIVIL WAR 223 


ties; and when fighting began in 1737, happening to be at Geneva, 
I saw father and son leaye the same house with arms in their hands, 
the former to go to the town hall, the latter to his headquarters, cer- 
tain of finding themselves, two hours later, face to face, with the 
chance of cutting each other’s throat. This terrible sight made so 
deep an impression upon me, that I took an oath never to’take part 
in any civil war, and never to defend liberty at home by force of 
arms, either in my own person or by my approval, if I ever entered 
upon my rights as a citizen. I can prove that I kept my oath on a 
difficult occasion, and it will be found—at any rate I hope so—that 
my restraint was not without its value. 

But I had not yet arrived at that first fermentation of patriotism 
which Geneva in arms excited in my heart. How far I was removed 
from it may be judged from a very serious fact which reflects upon 
myself, which I have forgotten to mention in its proper place, but 
which ought not to be omitted. 

My uncle, Bernard, some years ago, had crossed over to Carolina, 
to superintend the building of the city of Charlestown, the plan of 
which he had designed, and died there shortly afterwards. My poor 
cousin had also died in the service of the King of Prussia, and thus 
my aunt lost her son and husband almost at the same time. These 
losses somewhat revived her friendship for her nearest surviving 
relative, who happened to be myself. Whenever I went to Geneva, 
I stayed with her, and amused myself with rummaging through and 
turning over the books and papers which my uncle had left. 
Amongst them I found several curious things, together with some 
letters, of the existence of which certainly no one had any suspicion. 
My aunt, who attached little value to these papers, would have al. 
lowed me to take them all away, if I had wanted to do so. I con- 
tented myself with two or three books annotated by my grandfather 
Bernard, the minister, amongst others a quarto edition of the post- 
humous works of Rohault, the margin of which was full of excellent 
remarks, which gave me a fondness for mathematics. This book has 
remained with those of Madame de Warens; I have always regretted 
that I did not keep it. Besides these books, I took five or six manu- 
script pamphlets, and one printed one, written by the famous 
Micheli Ducret, a man of great talent, learned and enlightened, but 


224 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


too revolutionary in his ideas. He was cruelly treated by the Coun- 
cil of Geneva, and recently died in the fortress of Arberg, in which 
he had been imprisoned for many years, in consequence, it is said, of 
having been mixed up in the Bernese conspiracy. 

This pamphlet was a judicious criticism of the extensive and 
absurd plan of fortification which has partly been carried out at 
Geneva, and is the laughing-stock of experts who do not know the 
secret purpose which the Council had in carrying out this mag- 
nificent enterprise. M. Micheli, who had been excluded from the 
fortification-commission for having found fault with the plan, imag- 
ined that he, as a member of the Two Hundred, and even as a citi- 
zen, might venture to express his opinion at greater length; this he 
did in the pamphlet in question, which he was imprudent enough 
to get printed, although he did not publish it; for he only had a suff- 
cient number of copies struck off to send to the Two Hundred, 
which were all seized at the post-office by order of the Senate. I 
found the pamphlet amongst my uncle’s papers, together with the 
reply which he had been commissioned to make to it, and I took 
both away with me. I had taken this journey soon after leaving the 
Survey, and I was still on good terms with the advocate Coccelli, 
who was at the head of it. Some time afterwards, the Director of 
Customs took it into his head to ask me to stand godfather to his 
child, with Madame de Coccelli as godmother. This compliment 
turned my head; and proud of being so closely connected with the 
advocate, I tried to put on an air of importance, to appear worthy of 
so great an honour. 

With this idea, I thought I could do nothing better than show 
him Micheli’s printed pamphlet—which was really a curiosity—to 
prove to him that I belonged to the important personages of Geneva 
who were acquainted with State secrets. However, with a kind of 
semi-reserve which I should find it difficult to account for, I did not 
show him my uncle’s reply to the pamphlet, perhaps because it was 
in manuscript, and nothing but printed matter was worth the advo- 
cate s attention. However, he had so strong an opinion of the value 
of the document, which I had been foolish enough to intrust to him, 
that I was never able to get it back or ever to see it again; and, con- 
yinced of the uselessness of my efforts, I made a merit of the matter, 


EXPERIMENTS 225 


and changed the theft into a present. I do not doubt for a moment 
that he made the most ofthis pamphlet, although it was more curi- 
ous than useful, at the Court of Turin, and that, somehow or other, 
he took care to reimburse the money which it was naturally sup- 
posed he must have spent in getting possession of it. Happily, of . 
all possible future contingencies, one of the least likely is that the 
King of Sardinia will ever besiege Geneva. But, as it is not impossi- 
ble, I shall always reproach myself for my foolish vanity in having 
revealed the weaknesses of that place to its most inveterate enemy. 

In this manner I passed two or three years, my attention divided 
between music, magisteries, schemes, and journeys; wandering in- 
cessantly from one thing to another; wanting to settle down to some- 
thing, without knowing what, but gradually being drawn towards 
study, associating with men of letters, hearing literature discussed, 
even sometimes venturing to join in the discussion myself; rather 
adopting the terminology of books than understanding their con- 
tents. In my journeys to Geneva, I occasionally called upon my good 
old friend M. Simon, who encouraged my growing eagerness by en- 
tirely fresh news from the republic of letters, taken from Baillet or 
Colomiés. At Chambéri I also frequently saw a Jacobin, a professor 
of physics, a good-natured friar, whose name I have forgotten, who 
often performed little experiments which amused me extremely, 
From his directions, and with the assistance of the “Mathematical 
Recreations” of Ozanam, I tried to make some sympathetic ink. 
With this object, having filled a bottle more than half full with 
quicklime, orpiment and water, I corked it tightly. Almost immedi 
ately it began to effervesce violently. I ran to uncork the bottle, but 
was too late; it burst in my face like a bomb. I swallowed so much 
chalk and orpiment that it nearly killed me. I could not see for more 
than six weeks, and this taught me not ta dabble again in experi- 
mental physics, without any knowledge of the elements of the 
science. 

This event proved very detrimental to my health, which for some 
time had been sensibly deteriorating. I do not understand how it 
was that, although I had a good constitution, and did not indulge in 
any excesses, I visibly declined. I am pretty strongly built and broad. 
chested, and my lungs must have ample room to play; notwith 


226 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


standing, I was short of breath, had a feeling of oppression, sighed 
involuntarily, had palpitation of the heart, and spat blood; a slow 
fever supervened, from which I have never been entirely free. How 
can one fall into such a state in the flower of one’s age, without any 
internal injury, without having done anything to destroy health? 

It is sometimes said that the sword wears out the scabbard. That 
is my history. My passions have made me live, and my passions have 
killed me. What passions? will be asked. Trifles, the most childish 
things in the world, which, however, excited me as much as if the 
possession of Helen or the throne of the universe had been at stake. 
- In the first place—women. When I possessed one, my senses were 
calm; my heart, never. The needs of love devoured me in the midst 
of enjoyment; I had a tender mother, a dear friend; but I needed a 
mistress. I imagined one in her place; I represented her to myself in 
a thousand forms, in order to deceive myself. If I had thought that 
I held mamma in my arms when I embraced her, these embraces 
would have been no less lively, but all my desires would have been 
extinguished; I should have sobbed from affection, but I should 
never have felt any enjoyment. Enjoyment! Does this ever fall to the 
lot of man? If I had ever, a single time in my life, tasted all the de- 
lights of love in their fulness, I do not believe that my frail existence 
could have endured it; I should have died on the spot. 

Thus I was burning with love, without an object; and it is this 
state, perhaps, that is most exhausting. I was restless, tormented by 
the hopeless condition of poor mamma’s affairs, and her imprudent 
conduct, which were bound to ruin her completely at no distant 
date. My cruel imagination, which always anticipates misfortunes, 
exhibited this particular one to me continually, in all its extent and 
in all its results. I already saw myself compelled by want to separate 
from her to whom I had devoted my life, and without whom I could 
not enjoy it. Thus my soul was ever in a state of agitation; I was de- 
voured alternately by desires and fears. 

Music was with me another passion, less fierce, but no less wast- 
ing, from the ardour with which I threw myself into it, from my 
persistent study of the obscure treatises of Rameau, from my invin- 
cible determination to load my rebellious memory with them, from 


PASSIONS AND RESTLESSNESS 22 


SP 


my continual running about, from the enormous heap of compila- 
tions which I got together and often spent whole nights in copying, 
But why dwell upon permanent fancies, while all the follies whick; 
passed through my inconstant brain—the transient inclinations of 
a single day, a journey, a concert, a supper, a walk to take, a novel 
to read, a comedy to see, everything that was entirely unpremedi- 
tated in my pleasure or business, became for me so many violent 
passions, which, in their ridiculous impetuosity, caused me the most 
genuine torment? The imaginary sufferings of Cleveland, which 1 
read of with avidity and constant interruption, have, I believe, af: 
flicted me more than my own. 

At Chambéri there was a Genevese, named M. Bagueret, who 
had been employed by Peter the Great at the Russian Court; he was 
one of the greatest rascals and greatest fools that I have ever seen, 
always full of schemes as mad as himself, who flung millions about 
like rain and thought nothing of an extra cipher. This man, whe 
had come to Chambéri on account of some law-suit before the Sen 
ate, got hold of mamma, as was only to be expected, and in return 
for the ciphers which he generously lavished upon her, drew her few 
crowns, one by one, out of her purse. I disliked him; he saw it— 
never a difficult matter in my case—and left no kind of meanness 
untried, in order to gain my favour. He took it into his head to pro- 
pose to teach me chess, which he himself played a little. I tried it, 
almost against my inclination; and, after I had learnt the moves in- 
differently, I made such rapid progress that, before the end of the 
first sitting, I was able to give him the rook which at first he had 
given me. That was enough; I was mad for chess from that mo- 
ment. I bought a chess-board and a “Calabrois’;® I shut myself up 
in my room, and spent days and nights in trying to learn all the 
openings by heart, in stuffing them into my head by force, and in 
playing by myself without rest or relaxation. After two or three 
months of this praiseworthy occupation and these incredible efforts, 
I went to the café, thin, sallow, and almost stupid. I tried my hand, 
I played again with M. Bagueret; he beat me once, twice, twenty 


€A treatise by a famous Italian chess-player, Gioachino Greco, called “Le 
Calabrois”’; he lived in the time of Louis XIV. 


228 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


times; all the different combinations had become mixed up in my 
head, and my imaginatjon was so enfeebled, that I saw nothing but 
a cloud before my eyes. Whenever I wished, with the help of Phili- 
dor or Stamma, to practise myself in studying different games, the 
same thing happened to me; and, after exhausting myself with 
fatigue, I found myself weaker than before. For the rest, whether I 
gave up chess for a time, or endeavoured to improve myself by con- 
stant practice, I never made the slightest progress after the first sit- 
ting, and always found myself just where I was when it was over. 
. I might practise for thousands of generations and not be able to do 
more than give Bagueret the rook, and nothing else. Time well em- 
ployed! you will say; and I employed not a little of it in this way. I 
did not finish the first attempt, until I no longer had strength to 
continue it. When I left my room, I looked like a corpse, and, if I 
had continued to live in the same manner, I should certainly not 
have remained long above ground. It will be admitted that it is dif- 
cult, especially in the ardour of youth, for such a disposition to allow 
the body to enjoy continued good health. 

The decline in my health affected my temper and moderated the 
ardour of my imagination. Feeling myself weaker, I became quieter, 
and lost, in some degree, my mania for travelling. I remained more 
at home, and was attacked, not by ennui, but by melancholy; my 
passions were succeeded by hysteria; my languor changed to sadness; 
I wept and I sighed about nothing; I felt life slipping away from 
me before I had enjoyed it. I sighed over the state in which I was 
leaving my poor mamma; over the state into which I saw her ready 
to fall. I can assert that my only regret was at leaving her, and leav- 
ing her in so lamentable a condition. At length, I became really ill. 
She nursed me more tenderly than any mother ever nursed her 
child; and this was beneficial to herself, since it diverted her from 
schemes, and kept away the promoters of them. How sweet would 
death have been if it had come then! If I had not enjoyed many of 
the good things of life, I had felt but few of its sorrows. My peaceful 
soul would have departed without that cruel feeling of the injustice 
of mankind, which poisons both life and death. I should have had 
the consolation that I was surviving myself in the better half of me; 


DECLINING HEALTH 229 


it could hardly have been called death. Had it not been for the un- 
easiness I felt concerningrher lot, I could have died as easily as I 
could have fallen asleep; and my very uneasiness was connected with 
an affectionate and tender object, which softened its bitterness. I 
said to her: “My whole being is in your hands; make it happy.” Two 
or three times, when I was worse than usual, I got up during the | 
night and dragged myself to her room, to give her advice upon her 
conduct, which I may say was thoroughly correct and sensible, but 
in which my sympathy for her was more marked than anything 
else. As if tears had been food and medicine, those which I shed by 
her side, sitting on her bed, holding her hands in mine, seemed to 
give me strength. The hours slipped away in these nightly conversa- 
tions, and I left her, feeling better than when I entered; calm and 
content with the promises which she had made me, with the hopes 
with which she had inspired me, I went to sleep, peace in my heart, 
and resigned to Providence. 

After I have had so many reasons to hate life, after all the storms 
which have shaken my existence, and only make it a burden to me, 
may God grant that the death which is to end it may not be more 
cruel than it would have been to me at that moment! 

By her unremitting attention and watchfulness, and incredible 
exertions she saved me; and it is certain that she alone could have 
done so. I have little faith in the medicine of physicians, but a great 
deal in that of true friends; those things on which our happiness 
depends are always more salutary than anything else. If there is such 
a thing as a delightful sensation in life, it is that which we felt when 
we were restored to each other. Our mutual attachment was not in- 
creased, that was impossible; but it assumed a more intimate form 
which I cannot explain, more touching in its great simplicity. I be- 
came entirely her work, entirely her child, more so than if she had 
been really my mother. We began, without thinking of it, to be in- 
separable, to share, as it were, our existence in common; and feeling 
that we were not only necessary, but sufficient, for each other, we 
accustomed ourselves to think of nothing that was foreign to us, to 
limit our happiness and all our desires to that possession of each 
other, which was, perhaps, unique of its kind amongst human be- 


230 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ings, which, as I have said, was not love, but a more real possession, 
which, without being dependent upon the senses, sex, age or per- 
sonal appearance, was concerned with all that which makes one 
what one is, and which one can only lose by ceasing to exist. 

How came it that this delightful crisis did not bring happiness for’ 
the rest of her days and mine? It was not my fault; I can console my- 
self with the conviction of that. Neither was it hers, at least, not wil- 
fully. It was written that the ineradicable tendency of my disposi- 
tion should soon reassert its sway. But this fatal recoil did not take 
place all at once. There was, thank Heaven, an interval—a short and 
precious interval—which did not end through any fault of mine, 
and which I cannot reproach myself with having badly employed. 

Although cured of my serious complaint, I had not recovered my 
strength. My chest was still weak; some traces of fever remained, 
and made me languid. I desired nothing except to end my days near 
her who was so dear to me, to support her in her good resolutions, 
to make her fee! what constituted the real charm of a happy life, to 
make her life such, as far as it depended on me. But I saw, I even 
felt, that the continual solitude of our intercourse in a dull and 
gloomy house would end in becoming equally dull and gloomy. The 
remedy presented itself as it were of its own accord. Mamma had 
prescribed milk for me, and wanted me to go into the country to 
take it. I consented, provided she went with me. That was enough 
to determine her; the only question to be decided was, where we 
should go. The garden in the suburb could not be properly called 
country—surrounded by houses and other gardens, it did not pos- 
sess the charm of a rustic retreat. Besides, after Anet’s death, we had. 
given up the garden for the sake of economy, since we no longer had. 
any desire to rear plants, and other considerations caused us to feel 
but little regret for that retreat. 

Taking advantage of the dislike, which I discovered she felt to- 
wards the town, I proposed to her to leave it altogether, and to settle 
in pleasant solitude, in some little house, at a sufficient distance from. 
the town to baffle troublesome visitors. She would have done so, and 
the resolution, which her good angel and mine suggested to me,, 
would probably have assured us a happy and peaceful life, until 


LES CHARMETTES 231 


death should have separated us. But we were not destined for such a 
lot. Mamma was fated o experience all the miseries of want and 
discomfort, after having passed her life in abundance, to enable her 
to quit it with less regret; while I, overwhelmed with misfortune of 
all kinds, was destined one day to serve as a warning to all who, in- 
spired solely by love of justice and the public welfare, and trusting 
to the strength of their innocence alone, have the courage to tell the 
truth openly to the world, without the support of cabals, and with- 
out having formed a party to protect them. 

An unfortunate apprehension kept her back. She did not dare to 
leave her uncomfortable house, for fear of displeasing the landlord. 
“Your plan of retirement,” she said, “is charming, and I like it very 
much; but in such retirement we should have to live. If I leave my 
prison, I run the risk of losing my bread; and, when this fails us in 
the woods, we shall be obliged to return again to town to look for it. 
To lessen the chance of being obliged to do so, do not let us leave 
the town altogether. Let us pay this trifling annuity to the Comte de 
St. Laurent, that he may leave me mine. Let us look for some re- 
treat, far enough from the town to allow us to live in peace, and 
near enough for us to return to it whenever it is necessary.” This 
was what we did. After looking about a little, we settled upon Les 
Charmettes, an estate belonging to M. de Conzié, close to Chambéri, 
but as retired and solitary as if it had been a hundred leagues away. 
Between two rather high hills, there is a little valley extending from 
north to south, at the bottom of which a stream of water. runs 
amongst the trees and pebbles. Along this valley, half-way up the 
hill, there are some scattered houses, a very pleasant retreat for any- 
one who is fond of a somewhat wild and retired asylum. Having 
looked at two or three of these houses, we at last chose the nicest, 
which belonged to a gentleman in the army, named Noiret. The 
house was very habitable. In front was a garden with a terrace, above 
that, a vineyard, and below, an orchard; facing it was a little forest 
of chestnut-trees, and a fountain close by; higher up on the mountain 
were pasture meadows; in short, everything requisite for the little 
country establishment we intended to set up. As far as I can remem- 
ber times and dates, we took possession of it towards the end of the 


232 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


summer of 1736. I was delighted the first night we slept there. “Oh, 
mamma,” said I to my dear friend, while I embraced her with tears 
of tenderness and joy, “this is the abode of happiness and innocence. 


If we do not find both here, it will be useless to look for them any- 
where else.” 


BOOK VI 


[1736] 


Hoc erat in votis; modus agri non ita magnus, 
Hortus ubi et tecto vicinus iugis. aquae fons, 
Et paulum silvae super his foret.* 


Í cannot add: 
Auctius atque 


Di melius fecere.” 
—Horace, Satire II., vi., 1-4. 


But no matter; I had no need of more; I did not even need any prop- 
erty at all; the enjoyment of it was enough for me, and I have long 
ago said and felt, that the proprietor and the possessor are often two 
very different persons, even if one leaves husbands and lovers out of 
the question. 

At this period commences the brief happiness of my life; here 
approach the peaceful, but rapid moments which have given me the 
right to say, I have lived. Precious and regretted moments! begin 
again for me your delightful course; and, if it be possible, pass more 
slowly in succession through my memory, than you did in your 
fugitive reality. What can I do, to prolong, as I should like, this 
touching and simple narrative, to repeat the same things over and 
over again, without wearying my readers by such repetition, any 
more than I was wearied of them myself, when I recommenced the 
life again and again? If all this consisted of facts, actions, and words, 
I could describe, and in a manner, give an idea of them; but how is 
it possible to describe what was neither said nor done, nor even 


1 This used to be the height of my wishes: a small piece of land, with a gar- 
den, a stream of running water near the house, and a little wood besides. 
-? The gods have blessed me with more than I desire. 


233 


THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


~ thought, but enjoyed and felt, without being able to assign any other 
reason for my happiness than this simple feeling? I got up at sun- 
rise, and was happy; I walked, and was happy; I saw mamma, and 
was happy; I left her, and was happy; I roamed the forests and hills, 
I wandered in the valleys, I read, I did nothing, I worked in the gar- 
den, I picked the fruit, I helped in the work of the house, and hap- 
piness followed me everywhere—happiness, which could not be re- 
ferred to any definite object, but dwelt entirely within myself, and 
which never left me for a single instant. 

Nothing that occurred to me during that delightful period, noth- 
ing that I did, said, or thought, during all the time it lasted, has es- 
caped my memory. Preceding and subsequent periods only come 
back to me at intervals; I recall them unequally and confusedly; but 
I recall this particular period in its entirety, as if it still existed. My 
fancy, which, during my youth, always looked ahead, and now al- 
ways looks back, compensates me by these charming recollections 
for the hope which I have lost for ever. I no longer see anything in 
the future to tempt me; only the reminiscences of the past can flat- 
ter me, and these reminiscences of the period of which I speak, so 
vivid and so true, often make my life happy, in spite of my misfor- 
tunes. 

I will mention one single instance of these recollections, which 
will enable the reader to judge of their liveliness and accuracy. The 
first day we set out to pass the night at Les Charmettes, mamma was 
in a sedan-chair, and I followed on foot. The road was somewhat 
steep, and, being rather heavy and afraid of tiring her bearers, she 
got down about half-way, intending to finish the rest of the journey 
on foot. During the walk, she saw something blue in the hedge, and 
said to me, “Look! there is some periwinkle stili in flower.” I had 
never seen any periwinkle, I did not stoop down to examine it, and 
I am too near-sighted to distinguish plants on the ground, when 
standing upright. I merely cast a passing glance at it, and nearly 
thirty years passed before I saw any periwinkle again, or paid any 
attention to it. In 1764, when I was at Cressier with my friend Du 
Peyrou, we were climbing a hill, on the top of which he has built a 
pretty salon, which he rightly calls Belle-Vue. I was then beginning 
to botanise a little. While ascending the hill, and looking amongst 


A STRANGE MALADY 235 


the bushes, I exclaimed with a cry of joy, “Ah! there is some peri- 
winkle!” as in fact it was»Du Peyrou observed my delight, without 
knowing the cause of it; he will learn it, I hope, one day, when he 
reads these words. The reader may judge, from the impression 
which so trifling a circumstance made upon me, of the effect pro 

duced by everything which has reference to that period. ; 

In the meantime, the country air did not restore me to my former 
state of health. I was sickly, and grew worse. I could not take milk, 
and was obliged to give it up. At that time hydropathy was the rage, 
as a cure for every complaint. I rushed into it with so little discre- 
tion, that it nearly put an end, not to my ailments, but to my life. 
Every morning, when I got up, I went to the spring with a large 
goblet, and, walking about, drank about two bottlefuls without stop- 
ping. I entirely gave up drinking wine at my meals. The water 
which I drank was rather hard and difficult to pass, like most moun- 
tain waters. In short, I managed so well, that in less than two months 
I completely ruined my stomach, which had hitherto been excellent, 
and I recognised that I could no longer hope to be cured, as I was 
totally incapable of digesting anything. At the same time, an acci- 
dent occurred to me, as curious in itself as in its results, which will 
only end with my life. 

One morning, when I was no worse than usual, while lifting the 
top of a little table upon its stand, I became conscious of a sudden 
and almost incomprehensible disturbance in my whole body. I can- 
not compare it better than with a kind of storm, which arose in my 
blood, and in a moment gained the mastery over all my limbs. My 
veins began to beat so violently that I not only felt, but even heard 
it, especially the beating of the carotid arteries. This was accom. 
panied by a loud noise in my ears, of three, or rather, four kinds; a 
dull and heavy buzzing, a more distinct murmur like that of run- 
ning water, a sharp whistling sound, and the beating which I have 
just described, the pulsations of which I could easily count, without 
feeling my pulse or touching my body with my hands. This internal 
noise was so loud, that it deprived me of my hitherto keen faculties 
of hearing, and made me not altogether deaf, but hard of hearing, 
as I have continued to be from that day. 

My surprise and affright may easily be imagined. I looked upon 


236 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


myself as dead; I took to my bed, and the physician was sent for; 
trembling with fear, I told him my case, which I considered hope- 
less. I believe he thought the same, but he acted as became his pro- 
fession. He strung together a series of lengthy explanations of which 
I understood nothing; then, in consequence of his sublime theory, he 
commenced, in anima vili, the experimental cure which he was 
pleased to try. It was so painful, so disgusting, and produced so little 
effect, that 1 soon became tired of it; and, at the end of a few weeks, 
finding myself neither better nor worse, I left my bed and resumed 
my ordinary occupations, although the beating of my arteries and 
the buzzing in my ears still continued, and, in fact, have never left 
me for a moment from that day, that is to say, for thirty years. 

Hitherto I had been a great sleeper. The total inability to sleep, by 
which all these symptoms have been accompanied, even to the pres- 
ent day, finally convinced me that I had not long to live. This con- 
viction at first calmed my anxiety to recover. As I could not prolong 
my life, I resolved to get as much as possible out of the few years or 
months that remained to me; and this I was enabled to do, thanks 
to a special favour of Nature, which, notwithstanding my melan- 
choly condition, gave me exemption from the pain by which it 
would naturally have been accompanied. I was inconvenienced by 
the noise, but it caused me no suffering; the only habitual inconven- 
iences by which it was attended were, inability to sleep at night, and 
a perpetual shortness of breath, not, however, amounting to asthma, 
and which only made itself felt when I attempted to run or exert 
myself more than usual. 

This accident, which should have killed my body, only killed my 
passions; and I bless Heaven every day for the happy effect which it 
produced upon my soul. I can certainly say that I never began to live, 
until I looked upon myself as a dead man. While estimating at their 
true value the things I was going to leave, I began to occupy my 
thoughts with nobler cares, as if in anticipation of the duties I should 
soon have to fulfil, and which until then I had seriously neglected. 
I had often burlesqued religion after my own fashion, but I had 
never been entirely without it. It was easier for me to hark back to 
this subject, so melancholy for so many, but so sweet for one who 
can find in it a source of hope and consolation. On this occasion, 


= 


MME. DE WARENS’ RELIGION 237 


mamma was far more useful to me than all the theologians in the 
world could have been. p 

As she always reduced everything to a system, she had not failed 
to treat religion in the same manner. Her system of religion was 
made up of ideas of the most different kinds, some very sensible, 
others very foolish, of feelings connected with her character, and of 
prejudices arising from her education. As a rule, believers make God 
like themselves; the good represent him as good, the wicked, as 
wicked; malicious and bilious devotees see nothing but hell, because 
they would like to see the whole world damned; while loving and 
gentle souls do not believe in the existence of such a place. I have 
never been able to recover from my astonishment at finding the good 
Fénélon speak of it in his “Telemachus,” as if he sincerely believed 
in it; but I hope that he lied then, for, after all, however truthful a 
man may be, he is obliged to lie sometimes—when he is a Bishop. 
Mamma did not lie to me; and her soul, free from gall and bitterness, 
which could not imagine a vindictive and ever-wrathful God, saw 
only mercy and compassion, where devotees see nothing but retribu- 
tive justice and punishment. She often used to say that, if God were 
to be strictly just towards us, it would not be justice on His part, 
since He has not made us such as to require it, and would in such a 
case require from us more than He has given. The curious thing was 
that, while not believing in hell, she still believed in purgatory. The 
reason of this was that she did not know what to do with the souls of 
the wicked, feeling unable either to damn them or to put them with 
the good until they had become good themselves. In fact, it must be 
confessed that, both in this world and the next, the wicked are al- 
ways a source of considerable embarrassment. 

Another of her curious ideas was the following. It is obvious that 
the whole doctrine of original sin and redemption is destroyed by 
this system, that the foundations of ordinary Christianity are shaken, 
and that Catholicism, at any rate, cannot exist. Mamma, however, 
was a good Catholic, or professed to be one, and certainly in all good 
faith. It seemed to her that people were accustomed to explain the 
Scriptures too literally and too harshly. All that we read in thera 
about eternal torments was, according to her, to be taken only as a 
threat or in a figurative sense. The death of Jesus Christ appeared to 


230 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


her an example of truly divine charity, to teach men to love God and 
one another in the same manner. In a word, true to the religion 
which she had adopted, she accepted in all sincerity its entire pro- 
fession of faith; but, when it came to a discussion of each article, it 
was manifest that her belief was quite different from that of the 
Church to which she always professed submission. In reference to 
this, she displayed a simplicity of heart, and a frankness which was 
more eloquent than petty cavillings, and which frequently embar- 
rassed even her confessor, from whom she concealed nothing. “I am 
a good Catholic, and desire always to remain one,” she used to say 
to him; “I submit with my whole heart to the decisions of Holy 
Mother Church. I am not mistress of my belief, but I am mistress of 
my will, which I control without reserve, and am prepared to believe 
everything. What more can you ask of me?” 
Even had no Christian morality existed, I believe she would have 
followed its principles, since they harmonised so completely with 
her character. She did all that was prescribed; but she would have 
done it just the same, even if it had not been prescribed. In unim- 
portant matters she liked to show her obedience; and, if it had not 
been permitted, even if she had been ordered, to eat meat on fast- 
days, she would have fasted in order to please God, without any re- 
gard for considerations dictated by prudence. But all these princi- 
ples of morality were subordinated to the principles of M. de Tavel, 
-or rather, she declared that she found nothing contradictory therein. 
She would have slept every day with twenty men with a calm con- 
science, and without feeling any more scruple than desire in the 
matter. I know that many devotees are not more scrupulous on this 
point, but the difference is that, while they are led astray by their 
passions, she was only misled by her sophisms. In the course of the 
most touching, I even venture to say the most edifying, conversa- 
tions, she would have been able to allude to this matter without any 
alteration of tone or manner, and without thinking that she was in 
the least inconsistent. She would even, if necessary, have interrupted 
such a conversation to speak of the subject, and would have been 
able to resume it as calmly as before, so intimate was her conviction 
that the whole matter was only a principle of social economy, which 
every intelligent person was at liberty to interpret, apply, or reject, 


- 


TRANQUILLITY 3 239 


according to his or her view of the matter, without the least danger 
of offending God. Although I certainly did not share her opinion 
upon this point, I confess that I never ventured to contradict her, 
since I was ashamed of the lack of politeness which such conduct on 
my part would have forced me to exhibit. I might, certainly, have 
endeavoured to establish a rule for others, and attempted to make an 
exception in my own case; but, not only was her temperament a 
sufficient protection against the abuse of her principles, but I knew 
that she was not a woman to be easily deceived, and, if I had claimed 
exception for myself, I should only have left it for her to grant it to 
anyone else who might be agreeable to her. Besides, I only mention 
this inconsistency incidentally by the side of the rest, although it has 
never had much influence upon her conduct, and at that time, had 
none at all; but I have promised to give a faithful account of her 
principles, and I wish to fulfil this promise. Let me now return to 
myself. 

As I found in her all the principles which I needed in order to 
fortify my soul against the terrors of death and its consequences, I 
drew upon this source of confidence with perfect security. I became 
more closely attached to her than I had ever been: I should have 
been willing to hand over to her entirely the life which I felt was 
ready to leave me. The result of this redoubled attachment to her, of 
the conviction that I had only a short time to live, of the profound 
calmness with which I contemplated my future state, was an habit- 
ual condition of tranquillity—even of enjoyment—which, while it 
allayed all those passions, which remove our hopes and fears to a 
distance, permitted me to enjoy, without anxiety or trouble, the few 
days which remained to me. Another thing helped to make them 
more agreeable: the endeavour to foster her taste for country life by 
every amusement that I could think of. While I made her fond of 
her garden, her poultry-yard, her pigeons, and her cows, I myself 
acquired a liking for them all, and these trifling occupations, which 
filled up my day without disturbing my tranquillity, did me more 
good than the milk and all other remedies employed to keep my poor 
machine in order, and even repaired it as far as was possible. 

The vintage and the gathering of the fruit amused us for the re- 
mainder of this year, and made us more and more attached to coun- 


240 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


try life, amongst the good people by whom we were surrounded. We 
were very sorry to see the approach of winter, and went back to 
town as if we had been going into exile—myself especially, since I 
did not think that I should live to see the spring again, and believed 
that I was saying good-bye to Les Charmettes for the last time. Be- 
fore I left, I kissed the ground and the trees, and turned back several 
times as I went on my way. As I had long given up my pupils, and 
lost my taste for the amusements and society of the town, I never 
went out, and never saw anybody, except mamma and M. Salomon, 
who had recently become her physician and mine, an honourable 
and intelligent man, a strong Cartesian, who talked sensibly about 
the system of the world, and whose agreeable and instructive con- 
versation did me more good than all his prescriptions. I have never 
been able to endure the silly and nonsensical padding of ordinary 
conversation, but serious and useful discourse always affords me 
great pleasure, and I never refuse to take part in it. I took great de- 
light in M. Salomon’s conversation; it seemed to me that, while in 
his company, I was acquiring a foretaste of that higher knowledge, 
which was reserved for my soul, when it had lost the fetters which 
confined it. My predilection for him extended to the subjects which 
he discussed, and I began to look for books which might help me to 
understand him better. Those which combined devotion and science 
were most suitable for me, particularly those of the Oratory and 
Port Royal,* which I began to read, or rather, to devour. I came 
across one written by Father Lamy, entitled “Entretiens sur les Sci- 
ences,” a kind of introduction to the knowledge of those books 
which treated of them. I read and re-read it a hundred times, and 
resolved to make it my guide. At last, I felt myself, in spite of, or 
rather by reason of, my condition, gradually and irresistibly at- 
tracted to study, and, while looking upon each day as my last, I 
studied with as great eagerness as if I had been destined to live for 
ever. | was told that this was injurious to me. I believe that it was 
beneficial, not only tomy mind, but also to my body; for this occupa- 
tion, to which I passionately devoted myself, became so delightful to 


A follower of the doctrines of Descartes, 
* The school of the Jansenists. 


ENLIVENED TASTE FOR STUDY 241 


me, that I no longer thought of my sufferings, and was much less 
affected by them. It is cergainly true that nothing afforded me any 
real relief; but, as I felt no acute pain, I became accustomed to lan- 
guor and sleeplessness, to thought instead of action, and, at last I 
came to look upon the sloW and gradual decay of my powers as am 
unavoidable process, which death alone could arrest. 

Not only did this opinion release me from all idle and earthly 
cares, but it also delivered me from the annoyance of the various 
remedies to which, hitherto, I had been obliged to submit, in spite of 
myself. Salomon, convinced that his drugs could not cure me, spared 
me the unpleasantness of taking them, and was content to soothe 
poor mamma’s grief with some of those harmless prescriptions 
which deceive the sick man with hopes and keep up the reputation 
of the physician. I gave up strict diet, began to take wine again, and, 
as far as my strength allowed me, led the life of a man in perfect 
health, temperate in everything, but denying myself nothing. I even 
went out sometimes, and began to visit my acquaintances again, es- 
pecially M. de Conzié, whose society I found very agreeable. In 
short, whether it was that I thought it a fine thing to keep on learn- 
ing till my last hour, or that some slight hope of life still remained 
concealed at the bottom of my heart, the expectation of death, far 
from diminishing my taste for study, seemed rather to enliven it, 
and I made great haste to pick up a little knowledge for the next 
world, as if I had believed that in it I should only possess such 
knowledge as I took with me. I became fond of the bookshop of a 
M. Bouchard, frequented by several men of letters; and, as the 
spring, which I had never expected to live to see, was close at hand, 
I looked out some books to take to Les Charmettes, in case I should 
have the good fortune to return there. 

I had this good fortune, and I made the best use of it. The joy 
with which I beheld the first buds is indescribable. To me it was like 
a resurrection in Paradise to see the spring again. No sooner had the 
snow begun to melt than we left our dungeon, and arrived at Les 
Charmettes soon enough to hear the first notes of the nightingale. 
From that time I no longer thought of dying; and it is really re- 
markable, that I have never had any serious illness in the country. I 
have suffered much there, but have never been confined to my bed. I 


242 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


have often said, when feeling more than usually unwell: “When you 
see me at the point of death, carry me under the shade of an oak. I 
promise you that I shall get well again.” Although still weak, I re- 
sumed my country occupations, but to an extent proportionate to 
my powers. I was truly grieved not to betable to see after the garden 
alone; but after half a dozen digs with the spade, I was quite out of 
breath, the sweat poured down my face, and I felt quite exhausted. 
When I stooped, my palpitations increased, and the blood flew to my 
head with such violence that I was obliged to stand upright immedi- 
ately. Compelled to confine myself to less fatiguing occupations, I 
undertook, amongst other things, the care of the pigeon-house, to 
which I became so strongly attached, that I often spent several hours 
in succession there without feeling a moment’s weariness. The 
pigeon is a very timid creature, and difficult to tame. However, I 
succeeded in inspiring mine with such confidence that they followed 
me everywhere, and allowed me to catch them whenever I wanted. 
I could not show myself in the garden or court without immediately 
finding two or three of them on my arms and head; and at last, in 
spite of the pleasure this afforded me, this following became so 
troublesome to me, that I was obliged to discourage their excessive 
familiarity. I have always found singular pleasure in taming animals, 
especially such as are shy and wild. It appeared to me delightful to 
inspire them with a confidence which I have never abused. I desired 
their fondness for me to be perfectly unrestricted. 

I have mentioned that I took some books with me; but I made use 
of them in a manner less calculated to instruct than to overwhelm 
me. The false idea which I entertained of things caused me to be- 
lieve that, in order to read a book with profit, it was necessary to 
possess all the preliminary knowledge which it presupposed. I had 
no suspicion that very frequently the author himself did not possess 
it, and that he extracted it from other books as he required it, Pos- 
sessed by this foolish idea, I was detained every moment, and obliged 
to run incessantly from one book to another: sometimes, before I had 
reached the tenth page of the work I wanted to study, I should have 
been obliged to exhaust the contents of whole libraries. However, I 
followed. this senseless method so persistently that I lost an enor- 
mous amount of time, and my head became so confused that I al- 


PLAN OF STUDY 243, 


most lost the power of seeing or comprehending anything. Happily, 
I at last perceived that I wa§ on the wrong track, which was leading 
me astray in an interminable labyrinth, and I left it before I was: 
quite lost in it. 

The first thing that strikes anyone who has a genuine taste for 
learning, however slight, when he devotes himself to it, is the close 
connection of the sciences, which causes them to attract, support, and 
throw light upon each other, so that one cannot dispense with the 
other. Although the human intellect is not capable of mastering all, 
and one must always be regarded as the principal object of study, 
yet, without some idea of the rest, a man often finds himself in the 
dark in his own particular branch. I felt that what I had undertaken 
was good and useful in itself, and that all that was necessary was a 
change of method. Taking the Encyclopedia first, I had divided it 
into its different branches. I saw that I should have done exactly the 
opposite; that I ought to have taken each branch separately and fol- 
lowed it up to the point at which all unite. Thus, I returned to the 
ordinary synthetical method, but like a man who knows what he is. 
about. In this, meditation supplied the place of knowledge, and a 
very natural reflection helped me on the right road. Whether I lived 
or died, I had no time to lose. A man who, at the age of five-and- 
twenty, knows nothing and wishes to learn everything, is bound to 
make the best use of his time. Not knowing at what point destiny or 
death might arrest my zeal, I desired, in any case, to get an idea of 
everything, in order to discover the special bent of my natural abili- 
ties, and also to judge for myself what was worthy of cultivation. 

In the execution of this plan I found another advantage which had 
not occurred to me—that of economising my time. I certainly cannot 
have been born for study, for continuous application tires me to such 
an extent, that J am utterly unable to devote more than half an hour 
together to the close study of the same subject, especially when fol- 
lowing another’s train of thought; for it has sometimes happened 
that I have been able to devote myself to my own ideas longer, and 
even with tolerable success. When I have read a few pages of an au- 
thor who must be read carefully, my mind wanders from him, and 
is lost in the clouds. If I persist, I exhaust myself to no purpose; I be- 
come dazed, and cease to see anything. But if different subjects fol- 


244 THE CONFESSIONS OF- ROUSSEAU 


low each other, even without interruption, one relieves me from the 
other, and, without feeling the need of any relaxation, I follow them 
more easily. I profited by this observation in my plan of study, and 
I combined them in such a manner that I was busy the whole day 
without ever fatiguing myself. It is true that rural and domestic oc- 
cupations afforded me useful distractions; but, in my increasing zeal, 
I soon found means to spare time from these to devote to study, and 
to busy myself with two kinds of things at the same time, without 
thinking that the result in each case was less satisfactory. 

In these trifling details, which afford me delight, and with which 
I often weary my reader, I nevertheless exercise a reserve which he 
would scarcely suspect unless I took care to inform him. Here, for 
example, I remember with delight all the various attempts I made to 
distribute my time in such a manner as to derive from it as much 
pleasure and profit as possible; and I can say that this period, during 
which I lived in retirement and always in ill-health, was the period 
of my life during which I was least idle and least wearied. Two or 
three months were thus spent in trying the bent of my mind, and in 
enjoying, in the most beautiful season of the year, and in a spot 
which it rendered delightful, the charm of life, the value of which I 
so well appreciated,—the charmi of an unrestrained and sweet com- 
panionship, if such a name can be given to a union so perfect, and of 
the wonderful knowledge which I proposed to acquire; for it seemed 
to me as if I already possessed it, or rather, it was still better, since the 
pleasure of learning counted for much in my happiness. 

I must pass over these attempts, which were all a source of enjoy- 
ment to me, but are too simple to be satisfactorily expressed. I repeat, 
true happiness cannot be described; it can only be felt, and felt the 
more, the less it can be described, since it is not the result of a num- 
ber of facts, but is a permanent condition. I often repeat myself, but 
I should do so still more if I said the same thing as often as it occurs 
to me. When my frequently-changed manner of life had at last 
adopted a regular course, it was distributed as nearly as possible in 
the following manner. 

I got up every day before sunrise; I climbed through a neighbour- 
ing orchard to a very pretty path above the vineyard which ran along 
the slope as far as Chambéri. During my walk I offered a prayer, 


LIFE AT LES CHARMETTES 245 


which did not consist merely of idle, stammering words, but of a 
sincere uplifting of the heagt to the Creator of this delightful Nature, 
whose beauties were spread before my eyes. I never like to pray in a 
room: it has always seemed to me as if the walls and all the petty 
handiwork of man interposed between myself and God. I love to 
contemplate Him in His works, while my heart uplifts itself to Him. 
My prayers were pure, I venture to say, and for that reason deserved 
to be heard. I only asked for myself and for her, who was inseparably 
associated with my wishes, an innocent and peaceful life, free*from 
vice, pain, and distressing needs; the death of the righteous, and 
their lot in the future. For the rest, this act of worship consisted 
rather of admiration and contemplation than of requests, for I knew 
that the best means of obtaining the blessings which are necessary 
for us from the giver of all true blessings, was to deserve, rather than. 
to ask for, them. My walk consisted of a tolerably long round, dur- 
ing which I contemplated with interest and pleasure the rustic scen- 
ery by which I was surrounded, the only thing of which heart and 
eye never tire. From a distance I looked to see if it was day with 
mamma. When I saw her shutters open, I trembled with joy and ran 
towards the house; if they were shut, I remained in the garden until 
she awoke, amusing myself by going over what I had learned the 
evening before, or by gardening. The shutters opened, I went to em- 
brace her while she was still in bed, often still half asleep; and this 
embrace, as pure as it was tender, derived from its very innocence a 
charm which is never combined with sensual pleasure. 

We usually took café au lait for breakfast. This was the period of 
the day when we were most undisturbed, and chatted most at our 
ease. We usually sat a considerable time over our breakfast, and 
from that time I have always had a great liking for this meal. I in- 
finitely prefer the fashion of the Swiss and English, with whom 
breakfast is really a meal at which all the family assemble, to that of 
-the French, who breakfast.separately in their rooms, or, most com- 

monly, take no breakfast at all. After an hour or two of conversation, 
I went to my books till dinner. I began with some philosophical 
treatise, such as the Logic. of Port-Royal, Locke’s Essay, Male- 
branche, Leibnitz, Descartes, &amp;c. I soon observed that all these, au- 
‘thors nearly always contradicted, each- other, and I conceived the 


246 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


fanciful idea of reconciling them, which fatigued me greatly, and 
made me lose considerable time. I muddled my head without mak- 
ing any progress. At last, abandoning this plan, I adopted one that 
was infinitely better, to which I attribute all the progress which, in 
spite of my want of talent, I may have made; for it is certain that I 
never had much capacity for study. As I read each author, I made 
a practice of adopting and following up all his ideas, without any 
admixture of my own or of those of anyone else, and without ever 
attempting to argue with him. I said to myself: “Let me begin by 
laying up a store of ideas, no matter whether they be true or false, 
provided only they are definite, until my head is sufficiently equipped 
with them to be able to select and compare them.” I know that this 
method is not without its inconveniences; but it has answered my 
purpose of self-instruction. After I had spent some years in thinking 
exactly as others thought, without, so to speak, reflecting, and almost 
without reasoning, I found myself in possession of a fund of learn- 
ing sufficient to satisfy myself, and to enable me to think without 
the assistance of another. Then, when travelling and business mat- 
ters deprived me of the opportunity of consulting books, I amused 
myself by going over and comparing what I had read, by weighing 
everything in the scale of reason, and, sometimes, by passing judg- 
ment upon my masters. I did not find that my critical faculties had 
lost their vigour owing to my having begun to exercise them late; 
and, when I published my own ideas, I have never been accused of 
being a servile disciple, or of swearing in verba magistri® 

From these studies I proceeded to elementary geometry, beyond 
which I never advanced, although I persistently attempted, in some 
degree, to overcome my weakness of memory by dint of retracing 
my steps hundreds of times, and by incessantly going over the same 
ground. I did not like Euclid, whose object is rather a chain of proofs 
than the connection of ideas. I preferred Father Lamy’s “Geometry,” 
which from that time became one of my favourite works, and which 
I am still able to read with pleasure. Next came algebra, in which I 
still took Father Lamy for my guide. When I was more advanced, I 
took Father Reynaud’s “Science of Calculation”; then his “Analysis 


5 “By the words of a master”: an allusion to the disciples of Pythagoras, who 
slavishly reproduced the ideas of their master. 


STUDY OF LATIN 247 


Demonstrated,” which I merely skimmed. I have never got so far as 
to understand properly thé application of algebra to geometry. I did 
not like this method of working without knowing what I was doing: 
and it appeared to me that solving a geometrical problem by means 
of equations was like playing a tune by simply turning the handle of 
a barrel-organ. The first time that I found by calculation, that the 
square of a binomial was composed of the square of each of its parts 
added to twice the product of those parts, in spite of the correctness 
of my multiplication, I would not believe it until I had drawn the 
figure. I had considerable liking for algebra, in so far as it dealt with 
abstract quantities; but, when it was applied to space and dimen- 
sions, I wanted to see the operation explained by lines; otherwise I 
was entirely unable to comprehend it. 

After this came Latin. I found this my most difficult task, and I 
have never made much progress in it. At first I began with the Port- 
Royal method, but without result. Its barbarous verses disgusted me, 
and my ear could never retain them. The mass of rules confused me, 
and when learning the last, I forgot all that had preceded it. A man 
who has no memory does not want to study words; and it was just in 
order to strengthen my memory that I persisted in this study, which 
I was finally obliged to abandon. I was sufficiently acquainted with 
the construction to be able to read an easy author with the help of a 
dictionary. I kept to this plan with tolerable success. I limited my- 
self to translations, not written, but mental. By dint of continual 
practice, I was able to read the Latin authors with tolerable ease, but 
I have never been able to speak or write in that language, which fre- 
quently caused me embarrassment, when I found myself, I know not 
how, enrolled a member of the society of men of letters. Another 
disadvantage resulting from this method of learning is, that I have 
never learned prosody, still less the rules of versification. However, 
in my desire to feel the harmony of the language in verse as well as 
prose, I made great efforts to succeed in this; but I am convinced 
that it is impossible without the aid of a master. After I had learned 
the structure of the easiest of all verses, the hexameter, I had suff: 
cient patience to scan nearly the whole of Virgil, marking the feet 
and quantities; then, when I afterwards had any doubt whether a 
syllable was long or short, I referred to my Virgil. It may easily be 


248 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


conceived that this made me commit many errors, in consequence of 
the licence allowed by the rules of versification. But, if there is an ad- 
vantage in self-instruction, there are also great disadvantages, espe- 
cially the incredible amount of labour necessary. This I know better 
than anyone else. 

Before noon I left my books, and, if dinner was not ready, I paid 
a visit to my friends the pigeons, or worked in the garden until it 
was. When I heard myself called, I was very glad to run to table, 
provided with an excellent appetite; for it is a remarkable thing that, 
however ill I may be, my appetite never fails. We dined:very pleas- 
antly, talking of our affairs, until mamma was able to eat. Two or 
three times a week, when it was fine, we took our coffee in a cool 
and shady arbour behind the house, which I had decorated with 
hops, which made it very agreeable during the heat. We spent some 
little time in looking at our vegetables and flowers, and in talking 
about our mode of life, which heightened the enjoyment of it. I had 
another little family at the bottom of the garden—some bees. I rarely 
failed to visit them, and mamma often accompanied me. I took great 
interest in their work: it amused me immensely to see them return- 
ing from their foraging expeditions, their little legs often so loaded. 
that they could scarcely move. At first my curiosity made me too in- 
quisitive, and I was stung two or three times; but at last they got to 
know me so well, that they let me go as close to them as I pleased; 
and, however full their hives were, when they were ready to swarm, 
Thad them all round me, on my hands and on my face, without ever 
getting stung. All animals rightly distrust human beings; but when 
they once feel sure that they do not mean to hurt them, their confi- 
dence becomes so great that a man must be worse than.a barbarian 
to abuse it. 

I returned to my books, but my afternoon occupations deserved 
less to be called work and study than recreation and amusement. I 
have never been able to endure close application in my room after 
dinner, and, generally speaking, any effort during the heat of the 
day is painful to me. However, I occupied myself with reading with- 
out study, without restraint, and almost without any system. My 
most regular occupations were history and geography; and, as these 
did not require any great effort of mind, I made as much progress 


STUDY OF ASTRONOMY 249 


7 


as was possible, considering my weak memory. I tried to study 
Father Pétau, and plungef into the obscurities of chronology; but I 
was disgusted by the critical portion of it, which is most intricate, 
and by preference I took up the study of the exact measurement of 
time and the course of the heavenly bodies. I should also have be- 
come fond of astronomy, if I had had the necessary appliances; but I 
was obliged to content myself with a few elementary principles, 
learnt from books, and some crude observations which I made with 
a telescope, merely to learn the general idea of the situation of the 
heavenly bodies; for my shortsightedness does not allow me to dis- 
tinguish the stars clearly with the naked eye. In regard to this, I re- 
member an adventure which has often made me laugh since. I had 
bought an astronomical chart, in order to study the constellations. I 
fastened this chart to a frame, and, when the nights were clear, I 
went into the garden, and placed my frame on four stakes about my 
own height, with the chart turned downwards. In order to prevent 
the wind from blowing out my candle, I put it in a pail, which I 
placed between the four stakes on the ground. Then, looking alter- 
nately at the map with my eyes and the stars with my telescope, I 
practised myself in distinguishing the constellations and the individ- 
ual stars. I think I have mentioned that M. Noiret’s garden was in 
the form of a terrace, so that everything that took place could be 
seen from the road. One evening, some peasants, who were passing 
by at rather a late hour, saw me, most comically attired, busy at my 
work. The dim light, which fell upon my chart, without their being 
able to see where it came from, since it was hidden from their eyes 
by the edges of the pail, the four stakes, the large sheet of paper 
covered with figures, the frame, and the movements of my tele- 
scope, which kept appearing and disappearing, gave an air of witch- 
craft to the whole proceeding, which terrified them. 

My dress was not calculated to reassure them. A broad-brimmed 
hat over my cap, and a short, wadded night-dress belonging ta 
mamma, which she had forced me to put on, presented to their eyes 
the appearance of a real sorcerer; and, as it was nearly midnight, they 
had no doubt that a witches’ meeting was going to commence. Feel- 
ing little curiosity to see any more, they ran away in great alarm, 
woke up their neighbours to tell them of the apparition they had 


— 


250 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


seen, and the story spread so quickly that, on the following day, 
everyone in the neighbourhood knew that a witches’ gathering had 
been held in M. Noiret’s garden. I do not know what would have 

' been the result of this rumour, had not one of the peasants, who had 
been a witness of my incantations, carried a complaint on the same 
day to two Jesuits, who often came to see us, and who, without 
knowing what it was all about, in the meantime disabused them of 
the idea. They told us the story; I told them the origin of it, and we 
enjoyed a hearty laugh over it. However, it was decided, for fear of 
its being repeated, that for the future I should take my observations 
without the assistance of a light, and that I should consult my chart 
at home. Those who have read, in my “Letters from the Mountain,” 
of my Venetian magic, will, I hope, find that sorcery had long been 
my vocation. 

Such was my life at Les Charmettes, when I was not occupied with 
country pursuits, to which I always gave the preference, and in any- 
thing which was not beyond my strength I worked like a peasant; 
but it is true that my extreme weakness allowed me little merit on 
this point, except that of good intentions. Besides, I wanted to do 
two different things at once, and consequently did neither well. I had 
resolved to acquire a good memory by violent measures, and per- 
sisted in my attempts to learn a great deal by heart. With this object, 
I always carried some book with me, which I studied and repeated 
to myself while at work, with incredible pains. I cannot understand 
how it was that my persistency in these useless and continued efforts 
did not end by reducing me to a state of stupidity. I must have learnt 
and relearnt at least twenty times the Eclogues of Virgil, and yet I do 
not know a single word of them. I have lost or dismembered num- 
bers of books through the habit of carrying them about with me 
everywhere, in the pigeon-house, in the garden, in the orchard, and 
in the vineyard. While occupied with something else, I put my book 
down at the foot of a tree or on a hedge; I always forgot to take it up 
again, and, at the end of a fortnight, I frequently found it rotted 
away, or eaten by ants and snails. This eagerness for learning became 
a mania which drove me nearly stupid, so incessantly was I em- 
ployed with muttering something or other to myself. 

The writings of Port-Royal and the Oratory, which I read most 


THEOLOGY 251 


frequently, had made me half a Jansenist, and, in spite of all my 
trust in God, their harsh theology sometimes frightened me. The 
dread of hell, which hitherto had had little terror for me, gradually 


disturbed my peace of mind, and, if mamma had not calmed my 


uneasiness, this terrible doctrine would have upset me altogether. _- 


My confessor, who was also hers, did his best to keep me in a com- 
fortable frame of mind. This confessor was a Jesuit, named Father 
Hemet, a good and wise old man, whose memory I shall always 
revere. Although a Jesuit, he was as simple as a child; and his moral- 
ity, rather gentle than lax, was exactly what I needed to counter- 
balance the gloomy impressions of Jansenism. This simple old man 
and his companion, Father Coppier, often came to see us at Les 
Charmettes, although the road was very rough and the journey long 
for persons of their age. Their visits did me great good: may God 
recompense their souls! for they were too old at the time for me to 
suppose that they are still alive. I also went to see them at Chambéri. 
I gradually became quite at home in their house; their library was 
at my disposal. The memory of this happy time is so closely con- 
nected with my recollection of the Jesuits, that I love the one for the 
sake of the other; and, although I have always considered their doc- 
trines dangerous, I have never been able to bring myself to hate 
them cordially. 

I should much like to know, whether the same childish ideas ever 
enter the hearts of other men as sometimes enter mine. In the midst 
of my studies, in the course of a life as blameless as a man could 
have led, the fear of hell still frequently troubled me. I asked myself: 
“In what state am I? If I were to die this moment, should I be 
damned?” According to my Jansenists, there was no doubt about 
the matter; but, according to my conscience, I thought differently. 
Always fearful, and a prey to cruel uncertainty, I had recourse to 
the most laughable expedients to escape from it, for which I would 
unhesitatingly have anyone locked up as a madman if I saw him do- 
ing as I did. One day, while musing upon this melancholy subject, I 
mechanically amused myself by throwing stones against the trunks 
of trees with my usual good aim, that is to say, without hardly hit- 
ting one. While engaged in this useful exercise, it occurred to me to 
draw a prognostic from it to calm my anxiety. I said to myself: “T 


252 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


will throw this stone at the tree opposite; if I hit it, I am saved; if I 
miss it, I am damned.” While speaking, I threw my stone with a 
trembling hand and a terrible palpitation of the heart, but with so 
successful an aim that it hit the tree right in the middle, which, to 
tell the truth, was no very difficult feat, for I had been careful to 
choose a tree with a thick trunk close at hand. From that time I have 
never had any doubt about my salvation! When I recall this char- 
acteristic incident, I do not know whether to laugh or cry at myself. 
You great men, who are most certainly laughing, may congratulate 
yourselves; but do not mock my wretchedness, for I swear to you 
that I feel it deeply. 

However, these troubles and alarms, perhaps inseparable from 
piety, were not lasting. As a rule I was tolerably calm, and the im- 
pression which the idea of a speedy death produced upon my soul 
was not so much one of sadness as of peaceful resignation, which 
even had its charm. I have just found, amongst some old papers, a 
kind of exhortation addressed to myself, in which I congratulated 
myself upon dying at an age when a man feels sufficient courage in 
himself to look death in the face, and without having undergone any 
great sufferings, either bodily or mental, during the course of my 
life. My judgment was only too correct! a presentiment made me 
afraid of living only to suffer. It seemed as if I foresaw the destiny 
which awaited me in my old age. I have never been so near wisdom 
as during those happy days. Without great remorse for the past, free 
from all anxiety regarding the future, my dominant feeling was the 
enjoyment of the present. The devout, as a rule, possess a small 
amount of very lively sensuality, which gives a favour of rapturous 
enjoyment to the innocent pleasures which are permitted to them. 
The worldly look upon this as a crime on their part, I do not know 
why,—or rather, I know quite well; they envy in others the taste for 
simple pleasures which they have lost themselves. This taste I had, 
and I found it delightful to satisfy it with a quiet conscience. My 
heart, still fresh, abandoned itself to everything with a childish 
pleasure, or rather, if I may venture to say so, with angelic rapture; 
for, in truth, these quiet enjoyments possess the serene charm of the 
joys of Paradise. Dinners on the grass at Montagnole, suppers in the 
arbour, the gathering of the fruit, the vintage, the evenings spent in 


A HAPPY EXCURSION 253 


assisting our people to pull off the fibres of hemp—all these were so 
many festivals for us, whéth afforded mamma as much pleasure as 
myself. Solitary walks possessed a still greater charm, because the 
heart had greater freedom of expansion. Amongst others, I remem- 
ber one which marks an epoch in my memory, which we took on one 
St. Louis’s day, after whom mamma was named. We set out alone, 
early in the morning, after having heard mass read by a Carmelite 
at daybreak in a chapel attached to the house. I had proposed that 
we should stroll about the opposite side of the valley, which we had 
never yet visited. We had sent our provisions on ahead, for the ex- 
cursion was to last all day. Mamma, although somewhat stout and 
fat, was a fairly good walker. We wandered from hill to hill, from 
thicket to thicket, sometimes in the sun and frequently in the shade, 
resting now and again, forgetting ourselves for hours, talking of 
ourselves, our union, and our happy lot, and offering up prayers for 
its continuance, which were not heard. Everything seemed in’a con- 
spiracy to enhance the happiness of that day. A shower of rain had 
recently fallen; there was no dust; the brooks were full of running 
-water. A slight, fresh breeze stirred the leaves; the air was pure, the 
‘horizon cloudless; the sky was as serene as our hearts. We took our 
dinner at a peasant’s house, and shared it with his family, who 
showered upon us heartfelt blessings. What good people these poor 
Savoyards are! After dinner, we reached the shade of some tall trees, 
where mamma amused herself with botanising amongst the under- 
wood, while I collected some dry sticks to boil our coffee. Mamma 
‘pointed out to me a'thousand curious‘ things in the structure of the 
flowers which I had picked for her on the way, which greatly de- 
lighted me, and should-have inspired me with a taste for botany; 
but the time for that was not yet come—I was too fully occupied by 
other studies, I was struck by an idea which diverted my mind from 
flowers and plants. My frame of mind, all that we said and did on 
that day, all the objects which had struck my attention, recalled to 
me the dream which I had had at Annecy seven or eight years before, 
of which I have given an account in its proper place. The resem- 
blance was so striking that, when I thought of it, I was moved to 
‘tears, In’ a transport ‘of ‘emotion I embraced. my dear friend. 
‘“Mamma, mamma,” I said passionately, “this day has long been 


254 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


promised to me; I can imagine no greater happiness. My joy, thanks 
to you, is at its height. May it never decline; may it last as long as I 
feel its charm; it will never end except with my life!” 

Thus passed my happy days; happier, since I saw nothing which 
could disturb them, and I only conceived it possible for them to end 
when my own end came. Not that the source of my anxiety was 
completely exhausted; but I found that it took a different course, 
which I did my best to direct towards useful objects, that it might 
carry its remedy with it. Mamma was naturally fond of the country, 
and this taste did not cool while she was with me. She gradually 
conceived a liking for country pursuits. She endeavoured to make 
her property a source of profit, and she took pleasure in making a 
practical use of her knowledge of such matters. Not content with the 
land belonging to the house, she rented a field or a meadow. Direct- 
ing her love of enterprise towards agriculture, she soon bid fair to 
become a regular farmer, instead of remaining idle at home. I was 
not particularly pleased to see her enlarging her sphere of occupa- 
tion, and I opposed it as much as I could, feeling convinced that she 
would always be disappointed, and that her generous and extrava- 
gant disposition would always cause the expenditure to exceed the 
receipts. However, I consoled myself with the thought that these 
receipts would amount to something, and would help her to live. Of 
all the schemes she could possibly have thought of, this appeared to 
me tke least ruinous, and without expecting any profit from it as she 
did, I saw in it a continuous occupation, which would protect her 
from unlucky undertakings and the machinations of swindlers. For 
this reason, I was eager to regain sufficient health and strength to 
enable me to watch over her affairs and to be her foreman or head 
workman; and the exercise, which this obliged me to take, often took 
me away from my books and diverted my thoughts from my condi- 
tion, so that my health was naturally improved. 

[1737-1741.]—The following winter Barillot returned from Italy. 
He brought me some books; amongst others, the “Bontempi” and 
the “Cartella della Musica,” which gave me a taste for the history of 
music and the theoretical investigation of this beautiful art. Barillot 
remained with us some time; and, as I had attained my majority 
some months ago, it was agreed that, in the following spring, I 


HIS LEGACY 255 


should go to Geneva to claim my mother’s fortune, or, at least, the 
share that came to me, unail it should be discovered what had be- 
come of my brother. This plan was carried out as had been arranged: 
I went to Geneva, where I was joined by my father. He had for some 
time been in the habit of visiting the place without anyone molesting 
him, although the decree against him was still in force; but, as he 
was esteemed for his courage and respected for his honesty, it was 
pretended that his little affair was forgotten; and the magistrates 
busy with the grand scheme, which soon afterwards burst forth in 
all its glory, did not desire to irritate the middle classes prematurely, 
by reminding them of their former partisanship at an inopportune 
moment. 

I was afraid of difficulties being raised in consequence of my 
change of religion, but found none. The laws of Geneva are iv. this 
respect not so severe as those of Berne, where anyone who ch nges 
his religion loses, not only his status, but his property as well, My 
claims were not disputed, but the inheritance itself, for some rı ason 
or other which I do not know, was reduced to a very small suri. Al- 
though it was almost certain that my brother was dead, there was no 
legal proof of this. I had not sufficient title to claim his share, and I 
willingly left it to help to support my father, who, as long as he 
lived, enjoyed the use of it. As soon as the legal formalities were 
concluded and I received my money, I laid out part of it in books, 
and flew to lay the rest at mamma’s feet. During the journey my 
heart beat with joy, and, at the moment when I placed this money 
in her hands, I was a thousand times happier than when it was 
placed in mine. She received it with the simplicity of all beautiful 
souls, who, finding no difficulty in such actions themselves, are not 
astonished when they see them performed by others. The money 
was laid out almost entirely upon myself, with the same simplicity. 
It would have been employed in exactly the same manner, if it had 
come from any other source. 

Meanwhile, my health was not completely re-established; on, the 
contrary, I was visibly wasting away. I was as pale as a corpse and 
thin as a skeleton. The beating of my veins was terrible; the palpita- 
tions of my heart were more frequent. I continually suffered from 
shortness of breath, and my weakness at length became so gyviat that 


256 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


I could scarcely move. I could not walk fast without a feeling of suf- 
focation; I could not stoop without turning giddy; I could not lift 
the smallest weight; and I was forced to remain inactive, the greatest 
torment for a man as restless as I was. There is no doubt that my ill- 
ness was, to a great extent, attributable to hysteria. This, which is the 
ailment of happy people, was mine. The tears which I often shed 
without any cause for weeping, my lively charm at the rustling of a 
leaf or the chirping of a bird, my changeable disposition amidst the 
calm of a most happy life—all these were indications of that weari- 
ness caused by happiness, which, so to speak, leads to an extravagant 
sensibility. We are so little formed for happiness in this world, that 
of necessity the soul or the body must suffer, when they do not suffer 
together, and a happy condition of the one nearly always injures the 
other. When I might:have enjoyed life heartily, the decaying ma- 
chinery of my body prevented me without anyone being able to 
localise the cause of the evil. Later, my body, in spite of my declining 
years and very real and painful sufferings, appears to have regained 
its strength, in order to feel my sufferings more keenly; and, while 
Į am writing these words, weak and almost sixty years of age, over- 
whelmed by pains of every description, I feel that I possess more life 
and strength for suffering than I possessed for enjoyment in the 
flower of my age and in the bosom of the truest happiness. 

By way of reducing myself completely, after having read a little 
philosophy, I began the study of anatomy, and took a survey of the 
number and working of the individual parts which composed my 
bodily machine. Twenty times a day I was prepared to feel the whole 
out of gear. Far from being astonished at finding myself in a dying 
condition, I only felt surprised that I was still able to live, and I be- 
lieved that every complaint of which I read the description was my 
own. I am convinced that, if I had not been ill, this fatal study would 
have made me so. Finding in each complaint the symptoms of my 
own, I thought that I was suffering from all; and thereby contracted 
one, which was still more cruel than all the rest, and from which I 
thought I was free,—an eager desire to be cured, which it is difficult 
for a man to escape, when once he begins to read medical books. By 
dint of research, reflection, and comparison, I came to the conclusion 
that the foundation of my malady was a polypus of the heart, and 


‘lucas aa ale TO MONTPELLIER 257 


Salomon himself seemed struck by this idea. These suppositions 
should reasonably have confirmed me in my previous resolutions. 
But this was not the case. I exerted all my mental powers to discover 
how polypus of the heart could be healed, resolved to undertake 
this marvellous cure. Anet, during a journey which he made to 
Montpellier, to visit the botanical gardens and the demonstrator, M. 
Sauvages, had been told that M. Fizes had cured such a polypus. 
Mamma remembered this, and mentioned it to me. This was enough 
to inspire me with a longing to go and consult M. Fizes. The hope of 
being cured restored my courage, and gave me strength to undertake 
the journey. The money which I had brought from Geneva fur- 
nished the means; and mamma, far from attempting to dissuade me, 
encouraged me to go. Behold me, then, on my way to Montpellier! 
I had no need to go so far to find the physician I required. As riding 
fatigued me too much, I took a carriage at Grenoble. At Moirans five 
or six other carriages arrived, one after the other, after my own. This 
time it was, in truth, the story of the sedan-chairs.®° Most of these 
carriages formed part of the equipage of a newly-wedded bride, 
whose name was Madame du Colombier. She was accompanied by 
another lady, Madame de Larnage, who was younger and not so 
good-looking, but equally amiable, who intended to proceed from 
Romans, where Madame du Colombier was stopping, to the town of 
St. Andiol, near the Pont-Saint-Esprit. Considering my well-known 
shyness, it will not be imagined that I readily made the acquaintance 
of these elegant ladies and their suite; but at last, as I travelled by 
the same route, stopped at the same inns, and, under penalty of being 
considered a regular boor, was obliged to appear at the same table, 
it became impossible for me to avoid making the acquaintance. I did 
so, and even sooner than I could have wished, for all this bustle was 
ill-suited to a sick man, especially one of my temperament. But curi- 
osity makes these roguish creatures so insinuating, that, in order to 
make a man’s acquaintance, they begin by turning his head. This is 
what happened to me. Madame du Colombier was too closely sur- 
rounded by young dandies to have time to make advances to me, 
and besides, it was not worth while, since we were soon to separate; 
but Madame de Larnage, who was not so beset by admirers, had to 


€ From Scarron’s Roman Comique: see p. 144. 


28 Ct THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


make provision for her journey. It was Madame de Larnage who 
undertook my conquest; and, from that time, it was good-bye to poor 
Jean Jacques, or rather to my fever, hysteria, and polypus—good-bye 
to everything, when in her company, with the exception of certain 
palpitations of the heart, which remained, and of which she showed 
no inclination to cure me. The bad state of my health was our first 
subject of conversation. They saw that I was ill; they knew that I was 
going to Montpellier; and my appearance and manners must have 
made it clear that I was no profligate, for it was evident, from what 
followed, that they did not suspect that I was going there in order 
to be cured of the effects of debauchery. Although ill-health is no 
great recommendation amongst women, it made me interesting in 
vhe eyes of these ladies. In the morning they sent to know how I was, 
and invited me to take chocolate with them; and asked me how I 
had passed the night. On one occasion, in accordance with my praise- 
worthy habit of speaking without thinking, I answered that I did 
` not know. This answer made them think that I was mad. They ex- 
amined me more closely, and this examination did me no harm. I 
“once heard Madame du Colombier say to her friend: “He has no 
inanners, but he is amiable.” This word greatly encouraged me, and 
caused me to act up to it. 

As we became more intimate, I was obliged to speak about my- 
self; to say who I was, and where I came from. This caused me some 
embarrassment, for I clearly saw that the word “convert” would ruin 
me in polite society and amongst ladies of fashion. I do not know 
what curious whim prompted me to pass myself off as an English- 
man. I gave myself out as a Jacobite. I called myself Dudding, and 
they called me Mr. Dudding. A confounded Marquis de Torignan, 
who was with us, an invalid like myself, and old and ill-tempered 
into the bargain, took it into his head to enter into conversation with 
Mr. Dudding. He talked to me about King James, the Pretender, 
and the old Court of Saint-Germain. I was on thorns: I knew noth- 
ing about them, except the little I had read in Count Hamilton and 
the newspapers; but I made such good use of my scanty knowledge 
that I got out of it pretty well. Luckily, no one thought of asking me 


about the English language, of which I did not understand a single 
word. 


MADAME DE LARNAGE 259 


We got on exceedingly well together, and looked forward with 
regret to our separation. We travelled at a snail’s pace by day. One 
Sunday we found ourselves at Saint-Marcellin. Madame de Lar. 
narge wanted to attend mass, and I accompanied her, which nearly 
spoilt my game. I behaved during service as I had always. been in 
the habit of doing. From my modest and reserved behaviour she 
concluded that I was a devotee, which gave her the worst possible 
opinion of me, as she confessed to me two days later. It required 
great efforts of gallantry on my part to efface this unfavourable im- 
pression; or rather, Madame de Larnage, like a woman of expe- 
rience, not being easily discouraged, was willing to run the risk of 
making advances to see how I would extricate myself. She made 
them so freely and in such a manner that, since I thought nothing of 
my personal appearance, I believed she was laughing at me. In this 
ridiculous idea, there was no kind of folly that I did not commit: 1 
was worse than the Marquis du Legs.” Madame de Larnage stood 
her ground; tried to tempt me so often and spoke so tenderly to me, 
that a wiser man than myself would have found difficulty in taking 
it all seriously. The more she persisted, the more she confirmed me 
in my belief; and what tormented me still more was, that I became 
seriously enamoured of her. I said, with a sigh, to myself and to her: 
“Ah! if all you say were only true, I should be the happiest of men.” 
I believe that my raw simplicity only piqued her fancy, and that she 
was unwilling to acknowledge a defeat. 

We had left Madame du Colombier and her suite at Romans. We 
continued our journey, slowly and most agreeably,—Madame de 
Larnage, the Marquis de Torignan, and myself. The Marquis, al- 
though an invalid and a grumbler, was a decent fellow, but was not 
best pleased at seeing other people enjoying themselves without be- 
ing able to do so himself. Madame de Larnage took so little trouble 


7 A character in Marivaux’s comedy, who is in love for the first time, and, 
being of an exceedingly timid disposition, is afraid to make a declaration; while 
the character of the Countess is exactly the opposite. The plot turns on a legacy 
(legs): hence the name. 

8 Manger son pain à la fumée du rôti: literally, “To eat bread when he could 


smell roast meat.” 


260 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


to conceal her fancy for me, that he perceived it sooner than I did 
myself, and his malicious sarcasms should at least have given me the 
confidence which I did not venture to draw from the lady’s ad- 
vances, had I not imagined, in a spirit of perversity, of which I alone 
was capable, that they had. come to an understanding to amuse them- 
selves at my expense. This foolish idea at last completely turned my 
head, and made me play the utter simpleton in a situation in which 
my heart, being really smitten, might have instructed me to act a far 
more distinguished part. I cannot understand how it was that Ma- 
dame de Larnage was not disgusted with my sullenness, and did not 
dismiss me wtih utter contempt. But she was a clever woman, who 
understood the people she had to deal with, and saw clearly that 
there was more silliness than lukewarmness in my behaviour. 

She at last succeeded, with some difficulty, in making herself 
understood. We had reached Valence in time for dinner, and, ac- 
cording to our praiseworthy custom, remained there for the rest of 
the day. We put up outside the town, at Saint-Jacques. I shall never 
forget this inn or the room which Madame de Larnage occupied. 
After dinner she wanted to go for a walk. She knew that the Mar- 
quis was not fond of walking. It was a plan to secure for herself a 
téte-a-téte, which she had resolved to make the most of, for there 
was no more time to be lost, if any was to be left to make use of. We 
walked round the town, along the moats. I recommenced the long 
story of my complaints, to which she replied so tenderly, sometimes 
pressing my arm to her heart, that only stupidity like mine could 
have prevented me from being convinced that she spoke seriously. 
The unaccountable thing was, that I myself was greatly affected. I 
have said that she was amiable; love made her charming; it restored 
all the brightness of her early youth, and she managed her advances 
so cunningly, that she would have seduced a man of the greatest 
experience. I was very ill at ease, and frequently on the point of 
taking liberties; but the fear of offending or displeasing her, and the 
still greater dread of being derided, laughed at, mocked, of provid- 
ing an anecdote for the table, and being complimented upon my 
courage by the merciless Marquis, kept me back and made me feel 
irritated at my foolish bashfulness, and at my inability to overcome 
it, while I reproached myself with it. I was on the rack. I had already 


MADAME DE LARNAGE 261 


abandoned my timid language,® the absurdity of which I felt, now 
that I was so well on the rad; but as I did not know how to act or 
what to say, I held my tongue and looked sulky. In a word, I did 
everything that was calculated to bring upon me the treatment which 
I feared. Happily, Madame de Larnage was more humane. She 
abruptly interrupted the silence by putting her arm round my neck, 
while, at the same time, her mouth, pressed upon my own, spoke 
too clearly for me to have any further doubt. The crisis could not 
have occurred at a more happy moment. I became amiable. It was 
time. She had given me the confidence, the want of which has always 
prevented me from being natural. For once I was myself: never have 
my eyes, my senses, my heart and my mouth spoken so well; never 
have I repaired my errors so completely; and if this little conquest 
had cost Madame de Larnage some trouble, I had reason to believe 
that she did not regret it. 

If I were to live a hundred years, I could never think of this charm- 
ing woman without delight. I use the word charming, because, al- 
though she was neither young nor beautiful, and yet neither old nor 
ugly, there was nothing in her face to prevent her intellect and grace 
from exercising their full effect. In complete contrast to other 
women, her least freshness was in her face, and I believe that the 
use of rouge had ruined it. She had reasons for her easy virtue: it was 
the best way in which she could assert all her charms. It was possible 
to look at her without loving her; it was impossible to possess her 
without adoring her. This seems to me to prove that she was not 
always so lavish of her favours as she was with me. Her advances to 
me had been too sudden and lively to be excusable; but her heart at 
least had as much to do with it as her senses, and, during the brief 
and delicious period which I spent with her, I had reason to believe, 
from the forced moderation which she imposed upon me, that, al- 
though sensual and voluptuous, she thought more of my health than 
her own pleasure. 

The understanding between us did not escape the Marquis. He 
did not, however, leave off chaffing me, but, on the contrary, treated 


? Mes propos de Céladon: “My Celadonic way of speaking.” Céladon was one 
of the characters in the “Astrée,” a celebrated romance by Honoré d'Urfé (1568- 
1625), and came to be used for a devoted but bashful lover. 


262 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


me more than ever as a bashful lover, a martyr to his lady’s cruelty. 
Not a word, not a smile, not a look escaped him, which could have 
made me suspect that he had found us out; and I should have be- 
lieved that he had been deceived by us, had not Madame de Larnage, 
who was keener than I was, told me that this was not the case, but 
that he was a chivalrous man; and, indeed, no one could have shown 
more polite attention, or behaved more courteously than he always 
did, even towards myself, with the exception of his raillery, espe- 
cially after my success. He perhaps attributed the credit of it to me, 
and considered me not such a fool as I had appeared to be. He was 
mistaken, as has been seen: but no matter, I profited by his mistake; 
and it is true that, since I now had the laugh on my side, I endured 
his epigrams with good heart and grace, and sometimes retorted, 
even happily, proud to be able to exhibit, in the presence of Madame 
de Larnage, the wit with which she had credited me. I was no longer 
the same man. 

We were in a country and a season of good cheer; and, thanks to 
the Marquis, we enjoyed it to the full. I could have dispensed with 
his extending his attentions even to our bedrooms; but he always sent 
his lackey to engage them in advance, and this rascal, either on his 
own responsibility or by the Marquis’s instructions, always took a 
room for him next to Madame de Larnage, while I was poked away 
at the other end of the house. But this caused me little embarrass- 
ment, and only added piquancy to our rendezvous. This delightful 
life lasted four or five days, during which I was intoxicated with the 
sweetest pleasures. They were unadulterated and lively, without the 
least alloy of pain, the first and only pleasures of the kind that I have 
enjoyed; and I can only say that I owe it to Madame de Larnage that 
I shall not leave the world without having known the meaning of 
pleasure. 

If my feeling for her was not exactly love, it was at least so tender 
a return for the love which she showed for me, it was a sensuality 
so burning in its satisfaction, and an intimacy so sweet in its inter- 
course, that it had all the charm of passion without that deliriurn 
which turns the brain and spoils enjoyment. I have only felt true 
love once in my life, and it was not with her. Nor did I love her as I 
had loved, and still loved, Madame de Warens; but for that very 


MADAME DE LARNAGE 263 


reason the possession of her afforded me a hundred times greater 
enjoyment. With mamma, my pleasure was always disturbed by a 
feeling of sadness, by a secret feeling of oppression at the-heart, 
which I found difficult to overcome. Instead of congratulating my- 
self upon possessing her, I reproached myself with degrading her. 
With Madame de Larnage, on the contrary, I was proud of my man- 
hood and my happiness, and abandoned myself with confident joy 
to the satisfaction of my desires. I shared the impression which I 
produced upon hers. I was sufficiently master of myself to regard my 
triumph with as much self-complacency as pleasure, and to derive 
from it the means of redoubling it. 

I do not remember where the Marquis, who belonged to the dis- 
trict, left us; but we were alone when we reached Montélimar, 
where Madame de Larnage made her maid get into my carriage, 
while I travelled in her own. I can assure you that in this manner 
we did not find the journey tedious, and I should have found it 
difficult to describe the country through which we passed. She was 
detained at Montélimar three days on business, during which, how- 
ever, she only left me for a quarter of an hour to pay a visit, which 
brought her in return some importunate and pressing invitations, 
which she was by no means disposed to accept. She pleaded indis- 
position, which did not, however, prevent us from walking together 
alone every day in the most beautiful country and under the most 
beautiful sky in the world. Oh, those three days! I have had reason 
to regret them sometimes! I have never enjoyed their like again! 

Travelling amours cannot last. We were obliged to separate, and 
I confess that it was time: not that I was surfeited, or anything like 
it; I became more attached to her every day; but, in spite of her dis- 
cretion, I had little left except goodwill, and, before we separated, I 
wished to enjoy that little, which she submitted to, by way of pre- 
caution against the young ladies of Montpellier. We beguiled our 
regrets by forming plans to meet again. It was decided that I should 
continue the treatment, which did me considerable good, and spend 
the winter at Saint-Andiol under her superintendence. I was to stay 
only five or six weeks at Montpellier, to allow her time to arrange 
the necessary preliminaries, to prevent scandal. She gave me full in- 
structions about what it was necessary for me to know, what I was 


264 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


to say, and the manner in which I was to behave. Meanwhile, we 
were to write to each other. She spoke to me long and seriously about 
the care of my health, advised me to consult some clever physicians, 
to follow their instructions carefully, and took upon herself to make 
me carry out their directions, however strict they might be, as long 
as I was with her. I believe that she spoke sincerely, for she loved 
me. Of this she gave me numerous proofs, more reliable than her 
favours. From my style of travelling, she judged that I was not 
rolling in money; and, although she herself was by no means well 
off, she wanted to make me share the contents of her purse, which 
she had brought pretty well filled from Grenoble, and I had the 
greatest difficulty in making her accept my refusal. At last I left her, 
my heart full of her, and leaving, as I believe, a true attachment for 
myself in her own. 

I finished my journey, while going over it again in my memory 
from the beginning, and for the moment I was very well content to 
sit in a comfortable carriage and dream at my ease of the pleasures 
which I had enjoyed and of those which were promised to me. I 
thought of nothing but Saint-Andiol, and the delightful life which 
awaited me there. I saw nothing but Madame de Larnage and her 
surroundings: the rest of the world was nothing to me: even mamma 
was forgotten. I employed myself in arranging in my head all the 
details into which Madame de Larnage had entered, in order to give 
me beforehand an idea of her house, her neighbourhood, her friends, 
and her manner of life. She had a daughter, of whom she had often 
spoken to me in terms of most lavish affection. This daughter was in 
her sixteenth year, lively, charming, and amiable. Madame de Lar- 
nage had promised me that I was sure to be a great favourite with 
her. I had not forgotten the promise, and I was very curious to see 
how Mademoiselle de Larnage would behave towards her mamma’s 
good friend. Such were the subjects of my reveries from Pont-Saint- 
Esprit to Remoulin. I had been told to go and see the Pont du Gard, 
and did not fail to do so. It was the first Roman work that I had 
seen. I expected to see a monument worthy of the hands which had 
erected it; for once, and for the only time in my life, the reality sur- 


passed the expectation. Only the Romans could have produced such 
an.effect} su w pti a a a A a 


THE AMPHITHEATRE AR NIMES 265 


The sight of this simple, yet noble, work produced the greater im- 
pression upon me, as it was situated in the midst of a desert, where 
silence and solitude bring the object into greater prominence, and 
arouse a livelier feeling of admiration; for this pretended bridge 
was nothing but an aqueduct. One naturally asks what strength has 
transported these enormous stones so far from any quarry, and 
united the arms of so many thousands of men in a spot where not 
one of them dwells. I went through the three storeys of this superb 
building, within which a feeling of respect almost prevented me 
from setting foot. The echo of my footsteps under these immense 
vaults made me imagine that I heard the sturdy voices of those who 
had built them. I felt myself lost like an insect in this immensity. I 
felt, in spite of my sense of littleness, as if my soul was somehow or 
other elevated, and I said to myself with a sigh, “Why was I not born 
a Roman?” I remained there several hours in rapturous contempla- 
tion. I returned, distracted and dreamy, and this dreaminess was not 
favourable to Madame de Larnage. She had been careful to warn me 
against the girls of Montpellier, but not against the Pont du Gard. 
One never thinks of everything! 

At Nimes I went to see the amphitheatre. It is a far more magnifi- 
cent work than the Pont du Gard, but it made far less impression 
upon me; either the latter had exhausted my powers of admiration, 
or the former, being situated in the midst of a town, was less cal- 
culated to arouse them. This vast and splendid circus is surrounded 
by ugly little houses, and the arena is filled with other houses, still 
smaller and uglier, so that the aspect of the whole produces a con- 
fused and incongruous effect, in which regret and indignation stifle 
pleasure and surprise. Since then I have seen the Circus at Verona, 
which is far smaller and less imposing, but is kept and preserved 
with the greatest possible neatness and cleanliness, and for that very 
reason produced upon me a more forcible and agreeable impression. 
The French take care of nothing, and have no respect for monu- 
ments. They are all eagerness to undertake anything, but do not 
know how to finish, or keep it in repair when it is finished. 

I was so changed, and my sensuality, which had been roused to 
activity, was awakened to such a degree, that I remained for a whole: 
day at the Pont du Lunel, in order to enjoy its good cheer with the 


266 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


other visitors. This inn, the most famous in Europe, at that time 
deserved its reputation. Its proprietors had known how to take ad- 
vantage of its excellent position, in order to keep it abundantly sup- 
plied with choice provisions. It was really curious to find, in a lonely 
and isolated house in the middle of the country, a table furnished 
with salt and fresh-water fish, excellent game, choice wines, served 
with the attention and civility which is only found in the houses of 
the great and wealthy—all for thirty-five sous a head. But the Pont 
du Lunel did not long remain on this footing, and, by presuming 
too much on its reputation, at length lost it altogether. 

During my journey I had quite forgotten that I was ill: I remem- 
bered it when I arrived at Montpellier. My attacks of hysteria were 
certainly cured, but all my other ailments remained; and, though 
familiarity made me less sensitive to them, they were enough to 
make anyone, who was suddenly attacked by them, fancy himself 
at death’s door. In fact, they were more alarming than painful, and 
caused more sufiering of the mind than of the body, the destruction 
of which they seemed to announce. Hence, while distracted by vio- 
lent passions, I thought no more of the state of my health; but, as my 
complaints were not imaginary, I became aware of them again as 
soon as I recovered my coolness. J then began to think seriously of 
Madame de Larnage’s advice, and the object of my journey. I con- 
sulted the most famous physicians, particularly M. Fizes, and, by 
way of excessive precaution, boarded with a doctor. He was an 
Irishman, named Fitzmorris, who took in a considerable number of 
medical students; and what made his house more comfortable for a 
resident patient was, that he was satisfied with a moderate fee for 
board, and charged his boarders nothing for medical attendance. He 
undertook to carry out M. Fizes’ regulations, and to look after my 
health. As far as diet was concerned, he acquitted himself admira- 
bly: none of his boarders suffered from indigestion; and, although I 
am not very sensible to privations of this kind, the opportunities of 
drawing comparison were so near, that I could not help sometimes 
thinking to myself that M. de Torignan was a better purveyor than 
M. Fitzmorris. However, as we were not absolutely starved, and 
the young students were very cheerful, this way of living really did 


BOARDS WITH A DOCTOR 26) 


me good, and prevented me from falling into my former state of 
depression. I spent the merning in taking medicines, especially some 
waters, which I believe came from Vals, although I am not certain, 
and in writing to Madame de Larnage; for the correspondence con- 
tinued, and Rousseau undertook to fetch his friend Dudding’s 
letters. At noon I took a walk to La Canourge with one of our young 
messmates, all of whom were very good lads; after which we as- 
sembled for dinner. When this meal was over, most of us engaged in 
an important occupation until evening: we went a little way out of 
town to play two or three games of mall for our afternoon tea.!° ] 
did not play myself, as I possessed neither the requisite strength nor 
skill, but I betted on the result. In this manner, interested in my 
wager, I followed our players and their balls across rough and stony 
roads, and enjoyed agreeable and healthy exercise, which suited me 
admirably. We took our tea at an inn outside the city. I need not say 
that these meals were very lively; but I may add that there was noth- 
ing improper about them, although the landlord’s daughters were 
very pretty. M. Fitzmorris, who was a great player himself, was our 
president; and I can declare that, in spite of the bad reputation of the 
students, I found more decency and propriety amongst these young 
men than it would have been easy to find amongst an equal number 
of grown-up men. They were noisy rather than licentious, merry 
rather than profligate, and I become so easily accustomed to any 
manner of life, when it is voluntary, that I could have desired noth- 
ing better than a continuance of it. Amongst the students were sev- 
eral Irish, from whom I tried to learn a few words of English, in 
anticipation of Saint-Andiol; for the time of my departure was close 
at hand. Madame de Larnage importuned me by every post, and I 
prepared to obey her. It was clear that my physicians, who did not 
understand my complaint at all, regarded it as existing only in my 
imagination, and, under those circumstances, treated me with their 
Chinaroot, their waters, and their whey. Physicians and philoso- 
phers, differing entirely from theologians, only admit that to be true 
which they are able to explain, and make their understanding the 


10 Goáter: a light meal between dinner and supper. 


268 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


measure of what is possible. These gentlemen understood nothing 
about my complaint: therefore I was not ill at all; for of course doc- 
tors knew everything. I saw that they were only trying to humbug 
me and make me waste my money; and as I thought that their sub- 
stitute at Saint-Andiol would do that just as well as they, but in a 
more agreeable manner, I resolved to give her the preference, and, 
with this wise resolution, I left Montpellier. I set out towards the 
end of November, after a stay of six weeks or two months in that 
city, where I left behind me a dozen Jowis d’or, without any benefit 
either to my health or understanding, with the exception of a course 
of anatomy which I commenced under M. Fitzmorris, and which I 
was obliged to give up, owing to the fearful stench of the bodies 
which were dissected, and which I found it impossible to endure. 
Feeling very ill at ease concerning the resolution that I had taken, 
I began to reflect upon it as I continued my journey towards the 
Pont-Saint-Esprit, which was the road to Chambéri as well as Saint- 
Andiol. The remembrance of mamma and her letters, although she 
did not write to me so often as Madame de Larnage, again aroused 
in my heart the remorse which I had stifled during the first part of 
my journey, and which, on my return, became so keen that, counter- 
balancing the love of pleasure, it put me in a condition to listen to 
reason alone. In the first place, in the rôle of adventurer which I was 
again going to play, I might be less fortunate than I had been on the 
previous occasion: it only needed, in the whole of Saint-Andiol, a 
single person who had been in England, or who was acquainted with 
the English manners or language, to expose me. Madame de Lar- 
nage’s family might take a dislike to me and treat me with dis- 
courtesy. Her daughter, of whom, in spite of myself, I thought more 
than I ought to have done, also caused me considerable uneasiness. 
I trembled at the idea of falling in love with her, and this very ap- 
prehension half finished the business. Was I, by way of repaying the 
mother’s kindness, to attempt to lead the daughter astray, to enter 
upon a most detestable connection, to bring dissension, dishonour, 
scandal, even hell itself into her house? This idea horrified me; I 
firmly resolved to resist and defeat myself, if this wretched inclina- 
tion made itself felt. But why expose myself to such a struggle? 
What a miserable state of things would it be to live with the mother, 


VIRTUOUS PRINCIPLES 269 


of whom I was tired, and to be burning with love for the daughter, 
without daring to discloSe the state of my feelings! What necessity 
was there deliberately to seek such a position, to expose myself to 
misfortunes, affronts and remorse, for the sake of pleasures, the 
greatest charm of which I had exhausted in advance? for it is certain - 
that my fancy had lost its early vivacity. The taste for pleasure was 
still there, but not passion. With these thoughts were mingled re- 
flections upon my situation and my duty, and thoughts of that good 
and generous mamma, whose debts, already heavy, were increased 
by my foolish expenditure, who drained her purse for my sake and 
whom I was so unworthily deceiving. This reproach became so lively 
that it finally turned the scale. When I had nearly reached the Pont- 
Saint-Esprit, I resolved to hasten past Saint-Andiol without stop- 
ping. I carried out this resolution courageously, with a few sighs, I 
confess, but also with the inward satisfaction that, for the first time 
in my life, I could say to myself: “I have a right to think well of my- 
self; I know how to prefer my duty to my pleasure.” This was the 
first real advantage for which I had to thank my studies; they had 
taught me to reflect and compare. After the virtuous principles 
which I had so recently adopted, after the rules of wisdom and 
virtue which I had drawn up for myself and which I had felt such 
pride in following, a feeling of shame at being so little consistent 
with myself, of giving the lie to my own maxims so soon and so 
emphatically, gained the victory over pleasure. Perhaps pride had 
as much to do with my resolution as virtue; but, if this pride is not 
virtue itself, its effects are so similar that it is excusable to confound 
them. 

One of the good results of virtuous actions is, that they elevate the 
soul and incline it to attempt something even better; for so great is 
human weakness, that we must reckon amongst virtuous actions 
abstention from the evil which we are tempted to commit. As soon 
as I had taken my resolution, I became another man, or rather, I be- 
came the man I had formerly been, whom the intoxication of the 
moment had caused to disappear. Full of good sentiments and good 
resolutions, I continued my journey with the intention of expiating 
my error, thinking only of regulating my future conduct by the laws 
of virtue, of devoting myself unreservedly to the service of the best 


270 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


of mothers, of vowing to her a loyalty equal to my attachment, and 
of listening to no other call but that of my duties. Alas! the sincerity 
of my return to virtue appeared to promise a different destiny; but 
my own was already written and begun, and at the moment when 
my heart, full of love for all that was good and honourable, saw 
nothing but innocence and happiness before it, I was approaching 
the fatal moment which was destined to drag behind it the long 
chain of my misfortunes. 

My impatience to reach home made me travel faster than I had 
intended. I had sent a letter to mamma from Valence, to inform her 
of the day and hour of my arrival. As I was half a day in advance, I 
. spent that time at Chaparillan, in order to arrive exactly at the 
moment I had fixed. I wanted to enjoy to the full the pleasure of 
seeing her again. I preferred to put it off a little, in order to add to it 
the pleasure of being expected. This precaution had always proved 
successful: I had always found my arrival celebrated by a kind of 
little holiday; I expected-as much on this occasion, and these atten- 
tions, which I felt so much, were worth the trouble of procuring. 

I arrived, then, punctual to the moment. When I was still some 
distance off, I looked ahead in the hope of seeing her on the road; 
my heart beat more violently, the nearer I approached. I arrived out 
of breath, for I had left my carriage in town; I saw no one in the 
court, at the door, or at the window. I began to feel uneasy and 
afraid that some accident had happened. I entered: everything was 
quiet: some workmen were eating in the kitchen: there were no 
signs that I was expected. The maid appeared surprised to see me: 
she knew nothing about my coming. I went upstairs; at last I saw 
her, my dear mamma, whom I loved so tenderly, so deeply and so 
purely; I ran up to her, and threw myself at her feet. “Ah!” said she, 
embracing me, “you are back again then, little one! have you had a 
pleasant journey? how are you?” This reception somewhat surprised 
me. I asked her whether she had received my letter. She answered, 
“Yes.” “I should not have thought so,” I said, and the explanation 
ended there. A young man was with her. I remembered having seen 
him in the house before I left, but now he seemed established there, 
as in fact he was. In a word, I found my place filled. 

This young man belonged to the Vaud country; his father, named 


M. VINTZENRIED 271 


Vintzenried, was keeper, or, as he called himself, Captain of the 
Castle of Chillon. The sen was a journeyman wig-maker, and was 
travelling the country in pursuit of his calling, when he first pre- 
sented himself to Madame de Warens, who received him kindly, as 
she received all travellers, especially those from her own country. 
He was tall, fair-haired, insipid, tolerably well set up, with a face as 
dull as his intellect, and spoke like a beau Léandre," mingling all 
the airs and tastes of his calling with the long story of his conquests, 
and, according to his own account, mentioning only half the mar- 
chionesses with whom he had slept, and boasting that he had never 
dressed a pretty woman’s head without decorating the husband as 
well. Vain, foolish, ignorant and insolent, he was in other respects 
the best fellow in the world. Such was the substitute who replaced 
me during my absence and the companion who was offered to me 
after my return. 

If souls, when freed from their earthly bonds, still look down from 
the bosom of the eternal light upon that which takes place upon this 
earth, pardon me, dear and honoured shade, if I show no more 
favour to your faults than my own, but unveil both equally before 
the reader’s eyes! I must and will be as true for you as for myself: you 
will always have much less to lose than I. Ah! how your amiable and 
gentle character, your inexhaustible goodness of heart, your frank- 
ness, and all your admirable qualities atone for your weaknesses, if 
simple errors of judgment deserve that name! You erred, but you 
were free from vice; your conduct was blameworthy, but your heart 
was always pure. 

The new-comer had shown himself zealous, diligent and careful 
in carrying out her numerous little commissions, and had appointed 
himself foreman of her labourers. As noisy as I was quiet, he was 
seen and heard everywhere at once, at the plough, in the hay-loft, in 
the wood-house, in the stable, in the farm-yard. Gardening was the 
only thing he neglected, because the work was too quiet, and af- 
forded no opportunity for making a noise. His great delight was to 
load and drive a waggon, to saw or chop wood: he was always to be 
seen with an axe or pick in his hand, running, hustling, and shout- 


1 One of the stock characters of Italian comedy, a fop who takes great pride in 
his personal appearance, and is fond of displaying his ribbons and lace. 


272 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ing with all his might. I do not know how many men’s work he did, 
but he made noise enough for ten or a dozen. All this noise and 
bustle imposed on my poor mamma: she thought that in this young 
man she had found a treasure to assist her in business matters. In 
order to attach him to her, she employed all the means she thought 
likely to produce this result—not forgetting that on which she placed 
most reliance. 

The reader must have gained some knowledge of my heart, and 
of its truest and most constant feelings, especially those which 
brought me back to her at this moment. What a sudden and com- 
plete upset of my whole being! To judge of it, let the reader put 
himself in my place. I saw all the happy future which I had depicted 
to myself vanish in a moment. All the dreams of happiness which I 
had so fondly cherished disappeared, and I, who from my youth had 
never considered my existence except in connection with hers, for 
the first time found myself alone. This moment was frightful! those 
which followed were all gloomy. I was still young, but the pleasant 
feeling of enjoyment and hope which animates youth, deserted me 
for ever. From that time my sensible being was half dead. I saw 
nothing before me but the melancholy remains of an insipid life: 
and, if now and again an image of happiness floated lightly across 
my desires, this happiness was no longer that which was peculiarly 
my own: I felt that, even if I succeeded in obtaining it, I should still 
not be really happy. 

I was so simple, and my confidence was so great that, in spite of 
the new-comer’s familiar tone, which I looked upon as one of the 
results of mamma’s easy-going disposition, which attracted every- 
one towards her, I should never have suspected the real reason of it, 
unless she had told me herself; but she hastened to make this avowal 
with a frankness which might well have increased my rage, if my 
heart had been capable of it. She herself considered it quite a simple 
matter, reproached me with my carelessness in the house, and ap- 
pealed to my frequent absences, as if her temperament had been 
such that it required the void to be filled as quickly as possible. “Ah, 
mamma,” I said to her, with a heart wrung with grief, “what do you 
dare to tell me? What a reward for such devotion as mine! Have you 
so often saved my life, only in order to deprive me of that which 


GRIEF AT BEING SUPPLANTED 273 


made it dear to me? It will kill me, but you will regret my loss.” She 
replied, with a calmness*calculated to drive me mad, that I was a 
child, that people did not die of such thngs, that I should lose 
nothing, that we should be equally good friends, equally intimate in 
all respects, and that her tender attachment to me could neither - 
diminish nor end except with her own life. In short, she gave me to 
understand that all my privileges would remain the same, and that, 
while sharing them with another, I should not find them in any way 
curtailed. Never did the purity, truth and strength of my attachment 
for her, never did the sincerity and uprightness of my soul make it- 
self more plainly felt than at that moment. I threw myself at her 
feet, and, shedding floods of tears, clasped her knees. “No, mamma,” 
I exclaimed, half distracted, “I love you too deeply to degrade you; 
the possession of you is too precious for me to be able to share it with 
another; the regrets which I felt when you first bestowed yourself 
upon me have increased with my affection; I cannot retain possession 
of you at the same price. I shall always worship you: remain worthy 
of it: I have still greater need to respect than to possess you. I resign 
you to yourself; to the union of our hearts I sacrifice all my pleasures. 
I would rather die a thousand times than seek an enjoyment which 
degrades one whom I love.” 

I remained true to this resolution, with a steadfastness worthy, I 
venture to say, of the feeling which had produced it. From that mo- 
ment I only regarded this dear mamma with the eyes of a real son; 
and I must observe that, although my resolution did not meet with 
her private approbation, as I perceived only too clearly, she never at- 
tempted to make me abandon it, either by insinuating proposals, 
caresses, or any of those clever allurements which women so well 
know how to’ make use of without committing themselves, and 
which are rarely unsuccessful. 

Compelled to seek for myself a lot independent of her, and un- 
able even to think of one, I soon fell into the other extreme, and 
sought it entirely in her. There I sought it so completely that I almost 
succeeded in forgetting myself. The ardent desire to see her happy, 
at whatever cost, absorbed all my affections. It was useless for her 
to separate her happiness from mine; I looked upon it as my own, 
in spite of her. 


274 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Thus, together with my misfortunes, those virtues began to de- 
velop, the seeds of which were sown at the bottom of my heart, 
which had been cultivated by study, and only waited for the leaven 
of adversity in order to bear fruit. The first result of this disinterest- 
edness was the removal from my heart of all feeling of hatred and 
envy against him who had supplanted me. On the contrary, I desired 
in all sincerity to become intimate with this young man, to form 
his character, to educate him, to make him sensible of his happi- 
ness, to make him worthy of it, if possible, and, in a word, to do for 
him all that Anet had formerly done for me in similar circumstances, 
But our dispositions were not alike. Although gentler and better in- 
formed than Anet, I possessed neither his coolness nor firmness, nor 
that force of character which inspires respect, and which would have 
been necessary to insure success. Still less did I find in this young 
man the qualities which Anet had found in me: docility, attach- 
ment, gratitude, and, above all, the consciousness that I needed his 
attention, and the eager desire of profiting by it. All these qualities 
were wanting. He whom I wanted to educate considered me as 
nothing more than a tiresome pedant, who could do nothing else but 
chatter. On the other hand, he admired himself as a person of impor- 
tance in the house; and, estimating the services he thought he ren- 
dered by the noise he made about them, he looked upon his axes 
and picks as infinitely more useful than all my old books. In a certain 
sense, he was right; but, starting from that, he gave himself airs 
enough to make anyone die with laughter. With the peasants he at- 
tempted to play the country gentleman. He soon treated me in the 
same way, and even mamma herself. As the name Vintzenried did 
not appear sufhciently distinguished, he abandoned it for that of 
M. de Courtilles, by which name he was afterwards known at Cham- 
béri, and in Maurienne, where he married. 

In a word, this illustrious person soon became everything in the 
house, and I myself nothing. If I had the misfortune to displease him, 
it was mamma, not I, whom he scolded. For this reason, the fear of 
exposing her to his brutal behaviour rendered me subservient to all 
his wishes; and, whenever he chopped wood—an occupation of 
which he was inordinately proud—I was obliged to stand by, an 
idle spectator and quiet admirer of his prowess. His disposition was 


ESTRANGEMENT ; 275 


not, however, altogether bad. He loved mamma because no one 
could help loving her; he showed no aversion even for me; and, in 
his calmer moments, he sometimes listened to us quietly enough, 
and frankly owned that he was only a fool, and, immediately after- 
wards, proceeded to commit fresh follies. In addition to this, his- 
understanding was so limited and his tastes so low, that it was diff- 
cult to reason, and almost impossible to feel at ease with him. Not 
content with the possession of a most charming woman, he added, 
by way of seasoning, that of an old, red-haired, toothless waiting- 
woman, whose disgusting services mamma had the patience to en- 
dure, although it quite upset her. I observed this new intrigue, and 
was beside myself with indignation; but at the same time I perceived 
something else, which affected me still more deeply, and dispirited 
me more than anything else which had as yet occurred. This was a 
growing coldness in mamma’s behaviour towards me. 

The privation which I had imposed upon myself, and of which she 
had pretended to approve, is one of those things which women never 
pardon, however they pretend to take it; not so much for the sake 
of that of which they are themselves deprived, as by reason of the 
feeling of indifference which they consider it implies. Take the most 
sensible, the most philosophical, the least sensual woman: the most 
unpardonable crime that a man, for whom in other respects she cares 
nothing, can be guilty of towards her, is not to enjoy her favours 
when he has the chance of doing so. There can be no exception to 
this rule, since a sympathy, at once so natural and so deep, was im- 
paired in her in consequence of an abstinence, the only motives of 
which were virtue, attachment, and esteem. From that moment, I 
no longer found in her that intimacy of hearts which had always 
afforded the sweetest enjoyment to my own. She no longer un- 
bosomed herself to me, except when she had occasion to complain of 
the new-comer. When they were on good terms, I was rarely admit- 
ted to her confidence. At length, by degrees, she became entirely 
estranged from me. She still seemed pleased to see me, but no longer 
found my company indispensable; even had I passed whole days 
without seeing her, she would not have noticed it. 

Insensibly I felt myself isolated and alone in that house of which 
I had formerly been the soul, and in which I led, so to speak, a 


276 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


double life. I gradually accustomed myself to disregard all that took 
place in it, and even kept aloof from those who dwelt in it. In order 
to spare myself continual torment, I shut myself up with my books, 
or wept and sighed to my heart’s content in the midst of the woods. 
This life soon became unendurable. I felt that the personal presence 
of a woman who was so dear to me, while I was estranged from her 
heart, only aggravated my sorrow, and that I should feel the separa- 
tion from her less cruelly if I no longer saw her. I therefore resolved 
to leave the house. I told her so, and, far from offering any opposi- 
tion, she approved of it. She had a friend at Grenoble, named Ma- 
dame Deybens, whose husband was a friend of M. de Mably, the 
Grand-Prévot of Lyons. M. Deybens suggested to me that I should 
undertake the education of M. de Mably’s children. I accepted the 
post, and set out for Lyons, without causing, almost without feeling, 
the slightest regret at a separation, the mere idea of which would 
formerly have caused us both the most deadly anguish. 

I possessed almost sufficient knowledge for a tutor, and believed 
that I had the necessary qualifications. During the year which I spent 
at M. de Mably’s, I had ample time to undeceive myself. My natu- 
rally gentle disposition would have made me well adapted for this 
profession, had not a violent temper been mingled with it. As long 
as all went well, and I saw that my trouble and attention, of which 
I was not sparing, were successful, I was an angel; but, when things 
went wrong, I was a devil. When my pupils did not understand 
me, I raved like a madman; when they showed signs of insubordi- 
nation, I could have killed them, which was not the way to make 
them either learned or well-behaved. They were two in number, of 
very different dispositions. One, between eight and nine years old, 
. named Sainte-Marie, had a pretty face, was fairly intelligent, lively, 
giddy, playful, and mischievous, but his mischief was always good- 
humoured. The younger, Condillac, who seemed almost stupid, was 
idle and lazy, as obstinate as a mule, and incapable of learning any- 
thing. It may be imagined that, between the two, I had my work 
cut out. With the aid of patience and coolness I might, perhaps, have 
succeeded; but, as I possessed neither, I made no progress, and my 
pupils turned out very badly. I did not lack assiduity, but I wanted 
evenness ef temper, and, above all, tact. I only knew three means to 


UNSUCCESSFUL AS A TUTOR 277 


employ, which are always useless and frequently ruinous to children; 
sentiment, argument, anger. At one time, with Sainte-Marie, I was 
moved to tears, and attempted to arouse similar emotions in him, as 
if a child could have been capable of genuine feeling. At another 
time I exhausted myself in arguing with him, as if he had been able - 
to understand me; and, as he sometimes made use of very subtle 
arguments, I seriously thought that he must be intelligent, because 
he knew how to argue. The little Condillac was still more trouble- 
some, since he understood nothing, never made an answer, and was 
never affected by anything. His obstinacy was immovable, and he 
never enjoyed anything more than the triumph of putting me in a 
rage. Then, indeed, he was the wise man and I was the child. I 
recognised all my faults, and was conscious of them. I studied my 
pupils’ characters, and fathomed them successfully; and I do not 
believe that I was ever once taken in by their artifices. But what 
advantage was it to me to see the evil, if I did not know how to 
apply the remedy? Although I saw through everything, I prevented 
nothing, and succeeded in nothing, and everything that I did was 
exactly what I ought not to have done. 

I was hardly more successful in regard to myself than my pupils. 
Madame Deybens had recommended me to Madame de Mably, and 
had requested her to form my manners and to give me the tone of 
society. She took some pains about it, and wanted to teach me how 
to do the honours of her house; but I showed myself so awkward, I 
was so bashful and so stupid, that she became discouraged, and gave 
me up. This, however, did not prevent me falling in love with her, 
after my usual manner. I managed to make her perceive it, but I 
never dared to declare my passion. She was never disposed to make 
advances, and all my ogling glances and sighs were in vain, so that I 
soon wearied of them, seeing that they led to nothing. 

While with mamma, I had completely lost my inclination for 
petty thefts, because, since everything was mine, I had nothing to 
steal. Besides, the lofty principles which I had laid down for myself 
ought to have made me for the future superior to such meannesses, 
and certainly they have usually done so; but this was not so much the 
result of my having learned to overcome my temptations as of hav- 
ing cut them off at the root, and I very much fear that I should steal, 


278 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


as in my childhood, if exposed to the same desires. I had a proof of 
this at M. de Mably’s, where, although surrounded by trifles which 
I could easily have pilfered, and which I did not even look at, I took 
it into my head to long for a certain light, white Arbois wine, which 
was very agreeable, and for which a few glasses I had drunk at table 
had given me a strong liking. It was a little thick. I prided myself 
upon my skill in clearing wine. This particular brand was intrusted 
to me. I cleared it, and, in doing so, spoiled it, but only to look at, 
for it still remained pleasant to drink, and I took the opportunity of 
occasionally appropriating a few bottles to drink at my ease by my- 
self. Unfortunately, I have never been able to drink without eating. 
How was I to manage to get bread? It was impossible for me to lay 
by a store; to have sent the lackeys to buy it would have betrayed 
me, and would at the same time have been almost an insult to the 
master of the house. I was afraid to buy any myself. How could a 
fine gentleman, with a sword by his side, go into a baker’s shop to 
buy a piece of bread? At length, I recollected the last resource of a 
great princess, who, when told that the peasants had no bread, re- 
plied: “Then let them east pastry.” But what trouble I had to get it! 
I went out alone for this purpose, and sometimes traversed the whole 
town, passing thirty pastrycooks’ shops before entering one. It was 
necessary that there should be only one person in the shop, and 
this person’s features had to be very attractive, before I could make 
up my mind to take the plunge. But, when once I had secured my 
dear little cake, and, shutting myself up carefully in my room, 
fetched my bottle of wine from the bottom of a cupboard, what de- 
lightful little drinking-bouts I enjoyed all by myself, while reading a 
few pages of a novel, for I have always had a fancy for reading while 
eating, if I am alone; it supplies the want of society. I devour alter- 
nately a page and a morsel. It seems as if my book were dining with 
me. 

I have never been dissolute or sottish: in fact, I have never been 
drunk in my life. Thus, my petty thefts were not very indiscreet. 
However, they were discovered: the bottles betrayed me. No notice 
was taken of it, but I no longer had the management of the cellar. 
In all this M. de Mably behaved honourably and sensibly. He was a 
very upright man, who, beneath a manner as harsh as his office, con- 


LEAVES HIS PUPILS 279 


cealed a really gentle disposition and rare goodness of heart. He was 
shrewd, just, and what weuld not have been expected in an officer 
of the Maréchaussée,!? even kindly. Sensible of his indulgence, I 
became more attached to him, and this made me remain longer in 
his house than I should otherwise have done. But, at length, dis- 
gusted with a profession for which I was ill-adapted, and with a very 
troublesome situation, which had nothing agreeable for me, after a 
year’s trial, during which I had spared no pains, I resolved to leave 
my pupils, feeling convinced that I should never succeed in bringing 
them up properly. M. de Mably saw this as well as I did. However, I 
do not think that he would ever have taken upon himself to dismiss 
me, if I had not spared him the trouble, and such excessive con- 
descension in such a case J cannot certainly approve of. 

What made my present situation still more insupportable, was the 
comparison I continually drew with that which I had left: the re- 
membrance of my dear Charmettes, of my garden, of my trees, of my 
fountain, of my orchard, and, above all, of her for whom I felt I was 
born, who was the life and soul to everything. When I thought again 
of our pleasures and our innocent life, my heart was seized by a 
feeling of oppression and suffocation, which deprived me of the 
courage to do anything. A hundred times I felt violently tempted 
to set out instantly on foot and return to Madame de Warens. If I 
could only see her once again, I felt that I should have been content 
to die on the spot. At length I could no longer resist those tender 
remembrances, which called me back to her at any cost. I said to 
myself that I had not been sufficiently patient, obliging, or affec- 
tionate; that, if I exerted myself more than I had hitherto done, I 
might still live happily with her on terms of tender friendship. I 
formed the most beautiful plans in the world, and burned to carry 
them out. 

I left everything, I renounced everything, I set out, I flew, and, ar- 
riving in all the transports of my early youth, found myself again 
at her feet. Ah! I should have died for joy, if I had found again in 
her reception, in her eyes, in her caresses, or, lastly, in her heart, one 
quarter of that which I had formerly found there, and which I my- 
self still brought back to her. 


12 Mounted police, replaced by the gendarmerie in 1791. 


280 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Alas for the terrible illusions of human life! She received me with 
the same excellent heart, which could only die with her; but I sought 
in vain the past which was gone, never to return. I had scarcely re- 
mained with her half an hour, when I felt that my former happiness 
was gone for ever. I found myself again in the same disconsolate 
situation from which I had been obliged to flee, without being able 
to fix the blame on anyone; for, at bottom, Courtilles was not a bad 
fellow, and he seemed more glad than annoyed to see me again. 
But how could I bear to be a supernumerary with her for whom I 
had been everything, and who would never cease to be everything 
for me? How could I live as a stranger in the house of which I felt 
myself the child? The sight of the objects which had witnessed my 
past happiness made the comparison still more painful. I should 
have suffered less in another house. But the sight of so many sweet 
remembrances, continually revived, only irritated the consciousness 
of my loss. Consumed by idle regrets, abandoned to the blackest 
melancholy, I resumed my old manner of life and remained alone, 
except at meal-times. Shut up with my books, I sought to find in 
them some useful distraction; and, feeling that the danger, which I 
had so long dreaded, was imminent, I racked my brains anew, in the 
endeavour to find in myself a means to provide against it, when 
mamma’s resources should be exhausted. I had so managed her 
household affairs, that at least things did not grow worse; but, since 
I had left her, everything was changed. Her steward was a spend- 
thrift. He wanted to make a show with a fine horse and carriage. 
He was fond of playing the noble in the eyes of the neighbours, and 
was continually undertaking something about which he knew 
nothing. Her pension was swallowed up in advance, the quarterly 
payments were mortgaged, the rent was in arrears, and debts ac- 
cumulated. I foresaw that her pension would soon be seized, and ` 
perhaps discontinued altogether. In a word, I saw nothing but ruin 
and disasters ahead, and the moment appeared so close, that I felt 
all its horrors by anticipation. 

My dear little room was my only recreation. After a prolonged 
search for remedies against my mental anxiety, I bethought myself 
of looking about for a remedy against the troubles which I foresaw; 


SETS OUT FOR PARIS 281 


and, returning to my old ideas, I suddenly began to build fresh 
castles in the air, in ordereto extricate my poor mamma from the 
cruel extremities into which I saw her on the point of falling. I did 
not feel myself sufficiently learned, and I did not believe that I was 
sufficiently talented, to shine in the republic of letters, or to make a 
fortune by that means. A new idea, which occurred to me, inspired 
me with the confidence which the mediocrity of my talents could not 
give me. I had not given up the study of music when I left off 
teaching it; on the contrary, I had studied the theory of it sufficiently 
to consider myself learned in this department of the art. Whilst 
reflecting upon the trouble I had found in learning to read the notes, 
and the great difficulty I still felt in singing at sight, I began to think 
that this difficulty might be due to the nature of the case as much 
as to my own incapacity, especially as I knew that no one finds it an 
easy task to learn music. On examining the arrangement of the mu- 
sical signs, I found them frequently very badly invented. I had long 
thought of denoting the scale by figures, to obviate the necessity of 
always drawing the lines and staves when the most trifling air had to 
be written. I had been hindered by the difficulties of the octaves, tne 
time, and the values of the notes. This idea again occurred to me, 
and, on reconsidering it, I saw that these difficulties were not insur- 
mountable. I carried it out successfully, and was at length able to 
note any music whatever by my figures with the greatest exactness, 
and also, I may say, with the greatest simplicity. From that moment, 
I considered my fortune made; and, in my eagerness to share it 
with her to whom I owed everything, I thought of nothing but 
setting out for Paris, feeling no doubt that, when I laid my scheme 
before the Academy, I should cause a revolution. I had brought a 
little money back from Lyons; I sold my books. In a fortnight my 
resolution was taken and carried out. 

At last, full of the magnificent hopes which had inspired me, 
being ever and at all times the same, I started from Savoy with my 
system of music, as I had formerly started from Turin with my 
heron-fountain. 

Such have been the errors and faults of my youth. I have related 
the history of them with a fidelity of which my heart approves. If, 


282 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


later, I have honoured my riper years with any virtues, I should 
have declared them with the same frankness, and such was my in- 
tention. But I must stop here. Time may lift many a veil. If my 
memory descends to posterity, perhaps it will one day learn what I 
had to say; then it will be understood why I am silent. 


PART THE SECOND 


BOOK VII 


[1741] 


AFTER two years of silence and patience, in spite of my resolutions, 
I again take up my pen. Reader, suspend your judgment upon the 
reasons which force me to do so; you cannot judge of them until you 
have read the story of my life. 

You have seen my peaceful youth pass away in a tolerably uniform 
and agreeable manner, without great disappointments or remark- 
able prosperity. This absence of extremes was in great part the result 
of my passionate but weak disposition, which, more easily discour- 
aged than prompt to undertake, only quitted its state of repose when 
rudely shocked, but fell back into it again from weariness and natu- 
ral inclination; and which, while keeping me away from great vir- 
tues, and still further from great vices, led me back steadily to the in- 
dolent and peaceful life for which I felt Nature intended me, and 
never permitted me to attain to greatness in anything, either good or 
bad. What a different picture I shall soon have to draw! Destiny, 
which for thirty years favoured my inclinations, during a second 
thirty thwarted them, and this continued opposition between my 
position and inclinations will be seen to have produced monstrous 
errors, unheard-of misfortunes, and all the virtues that can render 
adversity honourable, with the exception of strength of character. 

The first part of my Confessions was written entirely from mem- 
ory, and I must have made many mistakes in it. As I am obliged 
to write the second part also from memory, I shall probably make 
many more. The sweet remembrances of my best years, passed in 
equal innocence and tranquillity, have left me a thousand charming 
impressions, which I love to recall incessantly. It will soon be seen 

283 


284 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


how different are the recollections of the remainder of my life. To 
recall them renews their bitterness. Far from increasing the pain- 
fulness of my situation by these melancholy retrospects, I put them 
away from me as much as possible, and frequently succeed so well, 
that I am unable to recall them even when it is necessary. This capac- 
ity for easily forgetting misfortunes is a consolation, which Heaven 
has bestowed upon me amidst those afflictions which destiny was one 
day fated to heap upon my head. My memory, which only revives 
the recollection of agreeable things, is the happy counterpoise of my 
fearful imagination, which causes me to foresee only a cruel future. 

All the papers which I have collected to fill the gaps in my mem- 
ory and to guide me in my undertaking, have passed into other 
hands, and will never return to mine. I have only one faithful guide 
upon which I can depend; the chain of the feelings which have 
marked the development of my being, and which will remind me 
of the succession of events, which have been either the cause or the 
effect of these feelings. I find it easy to forget my misfortunes, but 
I cannot forget my faults, still less my virtuous feelings, the recol- 
lection of which is too precious ever to be effaced from my heart. 
I may omit or transpose facts, I may make mistakes in dates, but I 
cannot be deceived in regard to what I have felt or what my feelings 
have prompted me to do; and this is the chief subject under discus- 
sion. The real object of my Confessions is, to contribute to an accu- 
rate knowledge of my inner being in all the different situations of 
my life. What I have promised to relate, is the history of my soul; 
I need no other memoirs in order to write it faithfully; it is suff- 
cient for me to enter again into my inner self as I have hitherto done. 

Very luckily, however, there is an interval of six or seven years 
concerning which I possess trustworthy information in a collec- 
tion of copies of certain letters, the originals of which are in the 
hands of M. du Peyrou. This collection, which ends with the year 
1760, embraces the whole period of my stay at the “Hermitage” and 
my great quarrel with my so-called friends—a memorable epoch of 
my life, which was the origin of all my other misfortunes. In regard 
to any original letters of more recent date, which I may perhaps 
have preserved, and which are only few in number, instead of copy- 
ing and adding them to this collection, which is too voluminous for 


REFLECTIONS CONCERNING THE CONFESSIONS 285 


me to hope to be able to conceal it from the watchful eyes of my 
Arguses, I will copy them#into this work itself, when they seem to 
me to afford any elucidation of facts, either in my favour or against 
me; for I have no fear that the reader, forgetting that I am writing 
my Confessions, will ever imagine that I am writing my Apologia; 
but neither must he expect that I shall keep silence regarding the 
truth, when it speaks in my favour. 

Besides, this truth is all that this second part has in common with 
the first, and the only advantage it can claim over it is, the greater 
importance of the facts related. With this exception, it cannot fail to 
be inferior to it in every respect. I wrote the first part with pleasure 
and gratification, and at my ease, at Wootton or in the Castle of 
Trye.? All the memories which I had to recall were for me so many 
fresh enjoyments. I turned back to them incessantly with renewed 
pleasure, and I was able to revise my descriptions until I was satis 
fied. with them, without feeling in the least bored. At the presen, 
time, my failing memory and enfeebled brain unfit me for almost 
every kind of work. I only undertake my present task under compul- 
sion, with a heart oppressed by grief. It offers me nothing but mis. 
fortunes, treachery, perfidy, melancholy and heartrending recollec. 
tions. I would give anything in the world to be able to bury in the 
darkness of time what I have to say; and, while constrained to speak 
in spite of myself, I am also obliged to hide myself, to employ cun; 
ning, to endeavour to deceive, and to lower myself to conduct utterly 
at variance with my nature. The roof under which I am has eyes, 
the walls around me have ears. Beset by spies and watchful and 
malevolent overlookers, uneasy and distracted, I hurriedly scribble a 
few disjointed sentences, which I have scarcely time to read over, 
still less to correct. I know that, in spite of the barriers set up around 
me in ever-increasing numbers, my enemies are still afraid that the 
truth may find some loophole through which to escape. How am I 
to set about bringing it to the light? I am making the attempt with 
little hope of success. It will be easily understood, that this is not the 
material out of which pleasant pictures are made, or such as is calcu- 
lated to give them an attractive colouring. I therefore give notice te 
those who intend to read this portion of my work that, in the course 


1In the department of the Oise, belonging to the Prince of Conti. 


286 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


of their reading, nothing can guarantee them against weariness, 
unless it be the desire of completing their knowledge of a man, and 
a sincere affection for truth and justice. 

At the conclusion of the first part of my Confessions, I was setting 
out, much against my wish, for Paris, having left my heart at Les 
Charmettes, where I had built my last castle in the air, intending one 
day to return and lay at the feet of mamma, restored to her former 
self, the riches I should have gained, and reckoning upon my sys- 
tem of music as a sure road to fortune. 

I stayed a little time at Lyons, to visit my acquaintances, to get 
some letters of introduction for Paris, and to sell my geometrical 
books which I had taken with me. Everybody received me kindly. M. 
and Madame de Mably were glad to see me again, and invited me to 
dinner several times. At their house I made the acquaintance of the 
Abbé de Mably, as I had previously made that of the Abbé de Con- 
dillac, both of whom were on a visit to their brother. The Abbé de 
Mably gave me some letters for Paris, amongst them one for M. de 
Fontenelle, and another for the Comte de Caylus. I found them 
both very agreeable acquaintances, especially the former, who, up to 
the time of his death, never ceased to show me marks of friendship, 
and, when we were alone, gave me good advice, of which I ought to 
have made better use. 

I saw M. Bordes again, an old acquaintance of mine, who had 
often assisted me with the greatest willingness and with genuine 
pleasure. On this occasion I found him just the same. It was he who 
assisted me in disposing of my books, and himself gave me, or 
procured from others, strongly-worded letters of introduction for 
Paris. I saw the Intendant again, for whose acquaintance I was in- 
debted to M. Bordes, who also procured me an introduction to the 
Duc de Richelieu, who was staying in Lyons at the time. M. Pallu 
presented me to him; he received me kindly, and told me to come 
and see him in Paris, which I did several times; but the acquaintance 
of this distinguished personage, of which I shall frequently have to 
speak in the sequel, has never been of the least use to me. 

I again saw David the musician, who had assisted me in my dis- 
tress on one of my previous journeys. He had lent or given me a cap 
and a pair of stockings, which he has never asked for, and which I 


VISITS FRIENDS IN LYONS 287 


have never returned to him, although we have often seen each other 
since then. However, I afterwards made him a small present, of 
nearly equal value. I should be able to speak more favourably of ` 
myself, if it were a question of what I ought to have done; but it is a 
question of what I have done, which unfortunately is not the same 
thing. 

I again saw the noble and generous Perrichon, who again be- 
haved towards me with his accustomed munificence. He gave me the 
same present as he had formerly given to “Gentil-Bernard”;? he 
paid for my seat in the diligence. I again saw Surgeon Parisot, the 
best and most benevolent of men; I again saw his dear Godefroi, 
whom he kept for ten years, whose gentle disposition and goodness 
of heart were almost her only merits, but whom no one could see 
for the first time without sympathy or leave without emotion, for 
she was in the last stages of consumption, of which she soon after- 
wards died. Nothing shows a man’s true inclinations better than 
the character of those whom he loves.* Whoever had seen the gentle 
Godefroi, had made the acquaintance of the worthy Parisot. 

Although I was greatly indebted to all these worthy people, I 
afterwards neglected them all, not certainly from ingratitude, but 
owing to my unconquerable idleness, which has often made me ap- 
pear ungrateful. The remembrance of their kindnesses has never 
left my heart, but it would have been easier for me to prove my 
gratitude by deeds than to express it continually in words. Regu- 
larity in correspondence has always been beyond my strength: as 


2,4 French poet (1710-1775). The name “Gentil” was given to him by 
Voltaire. 

2 Unless he is at the outset deceived in his choice, or the character of the 
woman to whom he has formed an attachment subsequently changes, in conse- 
quence of a combination of extraordinary circumstances, which is not absolutely 
impossible. If this principle were admitted without modification, Socrates would 
have to be judged by his wife Xantippe, and Dion by his friend Calippus, a 
judgment which would be the most unfair and the most misleading that has ever 
been passed. Further, let no one make any insulting application of it to my wife. 
She is certainly more narrow-minded and more easily deceived than I had im- 
agined; but her pure, excellent and generous character deserves all my esteem, 


which it will enjoy as long as I live. 


288 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


soon as I begin to feel slack, shame and a feeling of embarrassment 
in repairing my fault make me aggravate it, and I leave off writ- 
ing altogether. I have therefore kept silence, as if I had forgotten 
them. Parisot and Perrichon took no notice at all, and I always 
found them the same; but, twenty years later, in the case of M. 
Bordes, it will be seen how far the self-complacency of a wit can 
make him carry his vengeance, when once he fancies himself 
slighted. 

Before I leave Lyons, I must not forget to mention an amiable per- 
son, whom I saw again with greater pleasure than ever, and who left 
in my heart most tender remembrances. This was Mademoiselle 
Serre, of whom I have spoken in the first part of this work, and 
whose acquaintance I had renewed while I was with M. de Mably. 
As I had more time to spare on the present occasion, I saw more of 
her, and conceived a most lively attachment to her. I had some rea- 
son to believe that she herself was not unfavourably disposed towards 
me; but she treated me with a confidence which kept me from the 
temptation to abuse it. She had no means, neither had I. Our posi- 
tions were too much alike for us to become united, and, with the 
views which I then entertained, marriage was far from my thoughts. 
She told me that a young merchant, M. Genéve, seemed desirous of 
paying his addresses to her. I saw him once or twice in her com- 
pany. He had the reputation of being, and appeared to me to be, an 
honourable man. Feeling convinced that she would be happy with 
him, I wanted him to marry her, as he afterwards did, and, in order 
not to disturb their innocent affection, I made haste to depart, offer- 
ing up heartfelt prayers for the happiness of this charming young 
lady, which, alas! were only listened to for a short time on this 
earth: for I afterwards heard, that she died after she had been mar- 
tied two or three years. Filled with tender regrets throughout my 
journey, I felt, and have often felt since then, when I think of it 
again, that, even if the sacrifices which are made to duty and virtue 
are painful to make, they are well repaid by the sweet recollections 
which they leave at the bottom of the heart. 

On my previous journey I had seen Paris in an unfavourable 
aspect. On the present occasion I saw it from a correspondingly bril- 
liant point of view, not, however, in the matter of lodgings, for, upon 


ARRIVES IN PARIS 289 


the recommendation of M. Bordes, I put up at the Hôtel St. Quentin, 
in the Rue des Cordiers, near the Sorbonne; I had a wretched room, 
in a wretched street and a wretched hotel, in which, however, sev- 
eral distinguished persons had stayed, such as Gresset, Bordes, the 
Abbés de Mably and de Condillac and several others, none of whom, 
unfortunately for me, were any longer there; but I made the ac- 
quaintance of a certain M. de Bonnefond, a young country-squire, 
who was lame, fond of litigation, and set up for a purist. Through 
him I made the acquaintance of M. Roguin, now my oldest friend, 
who introduced me to the philosopher Diderot, of whom I shall 
soon have much to say. 

I arrived at Paris in the autumn of 1741, with fifteen louis d’or 
in my pocket, my comedy of Narcissus, and my musical scheme, as 
my sole resource. I had therefore little time to lose in trying to 
lay them out to the best advantage. I hastened to make use of my 
letters of introduction. A young man, who arrives in Paris with a 
pretty good appearance and advertises himself by his talents, is 
always sure of being well received, as I was. This procured me cer- 
tain pleasures, but did not materially assist me. Only three of the 
persons to whom I had letters were of use to me—M. Damesin, a 
Savoyard gentleman, at that time the equerry, and, I believe, the 
favourite of the Princess de Carignan; M. de Boze, Secretary of the 
Academy of Inscriptions and keeper of the King’s collection of 
medals; and Pére Castel, a Jesuit, the inventor of the clavecin ocu- 
laire All these introductions, except that to M. Damesin, had 
been given to me by the Abbé de Mably. 

M. Damesin provided for my most urgent need by introducing 
me to M. de Gasc, President® of the Parliament of Bordeaux, who 
was a very good player on the violin, and also to the Abbé de Léon, 
who was then living in the Sorbonne, a young and amiable noble- 
man, who died in the prime of life, after having cut a brilliant 


4 An instrument with a finger-board and keys, with as many octaves of colours 
as there were octaves of musical notes in the ordinary piano or harpsichord of the 
period. The seven primitive colours corresponded to the seven notes of music. 
The idea of the inventor was to produce sensations of melody and harmony by a 


combination of colours. 
5 President a mortier, that is, who wore the mortier, or round black-velvet cap. 


290 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


figure in the world for a brief period, under the name of the Che- 
valier de Rohan. Both of them took a fancy to learn composition; 
and I gave them a few months’ lessons, which to some extent re- 
plenished my purse, which was almost empty. The Abbé de Léon 
conceived a friendship for me, and wanted me to be his secretary: 
but, as he was by no means rich, and could only offer me a salary of 
800 francs, I felt obliged, to my regret, to refuse his offer, as the sum 
would not have been sufficient to pay for my board and lodging 
and clothes. 

M. de Boze received me very kindly. He had a taste for learning, 
and was himself a learned man, but somewhat pedantic. Madame 
de Boze might have been his daughter; she was brilliant and af- 
fected. I sometimes dined at his house, and it would have been im- 
possible for anyone to be more awkward and confused than I was in 
her presence. Her free and easy manner intimidated me, and made 
my own more ridiculous. When she handed me a dish, I put out my 
fork and modestly took a morsel of what she offered me; whereupon 
she returned to her lackey the dish which she had intended for 
me, at the same time turning round to hide her laughter. She had 
no suspicion that there was, nevertheless, something in the country- 
bumpkin’s head. M. de Boze presented me to his friend M. de 
Réaumur, who dined with him every Friday, when the Academy of 
Sciences held its meeting. He spoke to him of my scheme, and of 
my wish to submit it to the Academy for examination. M. de Réau- 
_mur undertook to bring my proposal forward, and it was accepted. 
On the day appointed, I was introduced and presented by M. de 
Réaumur; and on the same day, the 22nd of August, 1742, I had the 
honour of reading before the Academy the Essay which I had pre- 
pared for the purpose. Although this illustrious assembly was cer- 
tainly very imposing, I felt much less nervous than in the presence 
of Madame de Boze, and I managed to get through my reading 
and examination with credit. The Essay was well received, and I 
was complimented upon it, which equally surprised and flattered 
me, for I did not imagine that, in the opinion of an Academy, any- 
one who did not belong to it could possess common sense. The com- 
mission appointed to examine me consisted of MM. de Mairan, Hel- 
lot and De Fouchy, all three certainly persons of ability, but not 


HIS SYSTEM OF NOTATION 291 


one was sufficiently acquainted with music, at least, to be competent 
to judge of my scheme. # 

[1742.]—In the course of my conferences with these gentlemen, I 
became convinced, with as much certainty as surprise, that if learned 
men are sometimes less prejudiced than others, they cling more 
closely, by way of revenge, to those prejudices which they do enter- 
tain. However weak, however false for the most part their objections 
were—and although I answered them timidly, I confess, and in ill- 
chosen terms, but yet with decisive arguments—I never once suc- 
ceeded in making myself understood or in satisfying them. I was 
always astounded at the readiness with which, by the help of a few 
sonorous phrases, they refuted without having understood me. They 
discovered, somewhere or other, that a monk named Souhaitti had 
already conceived the idea of denoting the scale by figures. This 
was enough to make them uphold that my system was not new. 
That may be; for although I had never heard of Souhaitti—although 
his method of writing the seven notes of plain-song, without paying 
any attention to the octaves, in no respect deserved to be compared 
with my simple and convenient invention for noting all imaginable 
kinds of music, without difficulty, by means of numbers—keys, rests, 
octaves, measures, time, and value of the notes, of which Souhaitti 
had never even thought—nevertheless, it was quite true that, as fat 
as the elementary designation of the seven notes is concerned, he 
- was the first inventor. But they not only attributed to this primitive 
invention more importance than it deserved, but did not stop there; 
and, as soon as they attempted to speak of the fundamental prin- 
ciples of the system, they did nothing else but talk nonsense. The 
greatest advantage of my system was, that it did away with trans: 
positions and keys, so that the same piece could be noted and trans- 
posed at will into whatever key one pleased, by means of the sup- 
posed change of a single initial letter at the beginning of the air. 
These gentlemen had heard it said by Parisian strummers that the 
method of playing a piece of music by transposition was worthless. 
Starting from this, they turned the most distinct advantage of my 
system into an insuperable objection against it, and they came to the 
decision that my system of notation was good for vocal, but unsuit- 
able for instrumental, music, instead of deciding, as they should 


292 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


have done, that it was good for vocal and better for instrumental 
music. As the result of their report, the Academy granted me a cer- 
tificate full of high-flown compliments, between the lines of which 
it was easy to read that, as a matter of fact, it considered my system 
to be neither new nor useful. I did not feel under any obligation to 
adorn with such a document my work entitled, “A Treatise on 
Modern Music,” in which I made my appeal to the public. 

I had reason to observe on this occasion how, even in the case ot 
a person of limited intelligence, an exclusive but thorough knowl- 
edge of anything is more likely to enable him to judge of it cor- 
rectly than all the learning acquired by scientific culture, unless it is 
combined with a special study of the subject in question. The only 
solid objection which could be made to my system was made by 
Rameau. No sooner had I explained it to him than he saw its weak 
side. “Your signs,” he said, “are very good, in so far as they deter- 
mine simply and clearly the value of the notes, accurately represent 
the intervals, and always show the simple way in the double notes— 
things which the ordinary system does not do; they are bad, in that 
they require a mental operation, which cannot always follow the 
rapidity of the execution. The position of our notes,” he continued, 
“is represented to the eye without the assistance of this operation. 
When two notes, one very high and the other very low, are united 
by a series® of intermediate notes, I can see at the first glance the 
gradual progress from one to the other; but according to your sys- 
tem, in order to make sure of this series, I am obliged to spell 
through all your figures in succession; a general glance is unable to 
supply any deficiency.” The objection appeared to me unanswer- 
able, and I immediately admitted the force of it; although it is simple 
and striking, it is one that only great experience in the art could sug- 
gest, and it is not to be wondered at that it occurred to none of the 
members of the Academy, but it is to be wondered at that all these 
great scholars, who know so many things, so little understand that 
cach should only pass judgment upon matters connected with his 
own special branch of study. 

My frequent visits to my examining board and other Academi- 


ine ; E 3 ; 
Tirade: passage que fait la voix ou l'instrument dans l'intervalle d’une note 


a une autre par les notes diatoniques de cette intervalle distinctement articulées. 


HIS SYSTEM PUT TO THE TEST 293 


cians put it within my reach to make the acquaintance of all the 
most distinguished literarf men in Paris; thus their acquaintance 
was already made when, later, I suddenly found myself enrolled 
amongst them. For the moment, entirely absorbed in my musical 
system, I persisted in my design of bringing about a revolution in 
the art, and by this means attaining to a celebrity which, when 
acquired in the fine arts in Paris, is always accompanied by fortune. 
I shut myself up in my room and worked with indescribable zeal for 
two or three months, in order to revise the pamphlet which I had 
read before the Academy, and make it into a work fit for publication. 
The difficulty was to find a publisher who would accept my manu- 
script, as some outlay would have been necessary for the new char- 
acters, and publishers are not in the habit of throwing their money 
at the heads of beginners, although it seemed to me only fair, that 
my work should bring me back the bread which I had eaten while I 
was writing it. 

Bonnefond found me the elder Quillau, who made an agreement 
with me on terms of half profits, without reckoning the privilege,’ 
fof which I had to pay myself. The aforesaid Quillau managed the 
affair so badly, that the money I paid for my privilege was wasted, 
and I never made a farthing by my publication, which probably. 
enough had only a small sale, although the Abbé Desfontaines had 
promised to push it, and the other journalists had spoken fairly well 
of it. 

The greatest impediment to a trial of my system was the fear that, 
if it were not adopted, the time spent in learning it would be lost. 
My reply to this was, that practice in my method of notation would 
make the ideas so clear that, in learning music by means of the ordi- 
nary signs, time would still be gained by commencing with mine. 
To put it to the test, I gave lessons in music for nothing to a young 
American lady, named Mademoiselle des Roulins whose acquaint- 
ance I had made through M. Roguin. In three months she was able 
to read any kind of music according to my notation, and even to 
sing at sight, better than myself, any piece that did not present too 
many difficulties. This success was striking, but did not become 


7 Privilege: the exclusive right granted by the King to a publisher to print a 


work. 


294 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


known. Anyone else would have filled the newspapers with it; but, 
although I possessed some talent for making useful discoveries, I 
was never capable of turning them to account. 

Thus my heron-fountain was again broken; but, on this second 
occasion, I was thirty years old, and I was in the streets of Paris, 
where one cannot live for nothing. The resolution which I came to 
in this extremity will astonish none but those who have not atten- 
tively read the first part of these Memoirs. 

After the great and fruitless exertions I had recently made, I 
needed a little rest. Instead of abandoning myself to despair, I quietly 
abandoned myself to my usual idleness and the care of Providence; 
and, in order to give the latter time to do its work, I proceeded to 
consume, in a leisurely manner, the few louis which I still had left. 
I regulated the expense of my careless pleasures, without entirely 
giving them up. I only went to the café every other day, and to the 
theatre twice a week. As for money spent on women, there was no 
need for retrenchment, for I have never in my life laid out a sow in 
this manner, except on one occasion, of which I shall have to speak 
presently. 

The calmness, delight and confidence with which I abandoned 
myself to this indolent and solitary life, although I had not sufficient 
means to continue it for three months, is one of the peculiarities of 
my life and one of the oddities of my character. The great need of 
sympathy which I felt, was the very thing which deprived me of the 
courage to show myself; and the necessity of paying visits to people 
made them so unendurable, that I even gave up going to see the 
Academicians and other men of letters, with whom I was already on 
more or less intimate terms. Marivaux, the Abbé de Mably, and Fon- 
tenelle were almost the only persons whom I still continued to visit. 
I even showed my comedy of Narcisse to the first. He was pleased 
with it, and was kind enough to touch it up. Diderot, who was not 
so old, was about my own age. He was fond of music, and acquainted 
with the theory of it; we talked about it, and he also spoke to me of 
his own literary projects. This resulted in a most intimate connec- 
tion between us, which lasted fifteen years, and would probably 
have still continued, if I had not, unfortunately, and by his own 
fault, been thrown into the same profession as himself. 


INDOLENT LIFE AT PARIS 295 


No one would guess how I employed this brief and precious in- 
terval, which still remained to me before I was compelled to beg my 
bread. I learned by heart passages from the poets which I had al- 
ready learnt a hundred times and forgotten. Every morning, about 
ten o'clock, I used to walk in the Luxembourg Gardens witha Virgil 
or Rousseau® in my pocket, and, until dinner-time, I recommitted to 
memory a sacred ode or an eclogue, without being discouraged by 
the fact that, while going over the task of the day, I was sure’ to for- 
get what I had learnt the day before. I remembered that, after the 
defeat of Nicias at Syracuse, the Athenian prisoners supported them- 
selves by reciting the poems of Homer. The lesson which I drew 
from this specimen of erudition, in order to prepare myself against 
poverty, was to exercise my admirable memory in learning all the 
poets by heart. 

I possessed an equally solid expedient in chess, to which I regu. 
larly devoted my afternoons at the Café Maugis, on the days when | 
did not go to the theatre. I there made the acquaintance of M. de 
Légal, M. Husson, Philidor, and all the great chess-players of the 
day, without making any progress myself. However, I had no doubt 
that in the end I should become a better player than any of them; 
and this, in my opinion, was enough for my support. Whenever I 
became infatuated with any fresh folly, I always reasoned about it in 
the same manner. I said to myself, “Anyone who excels in some- 
thing, is always sure of being sought after. Let me, therefore, excel 
in something, no matter what: I shall be sought after; opportunities 
will present themselves, and my own merits will do the rest.” This 
childishness was not the sophism of my reason, but of my indolence. 
Frightened at the great and rapid efforts which would have been 
necessary to make me exert myself, I endeavoured to flatter my idle- 
ness, and concealed its disgrace from myself by arguments worthy of 
It. e 

Thus, I quietly waited until my money should be exhausted; and 
I believe that I should have come to my last sou without any further 
uneasiness, had not Father Castel whom I sometimes went to see on 
my way to the café, roused me from my lethargy. He was mad, but, 
after all, a good fellow. He was sorry to see me wasting my time and 


8 Jean Baptiste Rousseau, the French lyric poet. 


296 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


abilities without doing anything. He said to me, “Since musicians 
and savants will not sing together with you, change your string and 
try the women; perhaps you will succeed better in that quarter. I 
have spoken about you to Madame de Beuzenval; go and see her, 
and mention my name. She is a good woman, who will be pleased to 
see a countryman of her son and husband. At her house you will 
meet her daughter, Madame de Broglie, who is a clever and accom- 
plished woman. Madame Dupin is another lady to whom I have 
spoken of you; take your work to her; she is anxious to see you and 
will receive you kindly. No one can do anything in Paris without 
the women; they are like the curves, of which clever people are the 
asymptotes; they constantly approach, but never touch.” 

After having repeatedly put off these terrible tasks, I at length 
summoned up courage and went to call upon Madame de Beuzen- 
val, who received me affably. Madame de Broglie happening to 
enter the room, she said to her, “My daughter, this is M. Rousseau, 
of whom Father Castel spoke to us.” Madame de Broglie compli- 
mented me upon my work, and, conducting me to her piano, 
showed me that she had paid some attention to it. Seeing that it was 
nearly one o'clock, I wanted to retire, but Madame de Beuzenval 
said to me, “It is a long way to your quarter; stop and dine here.” I 
needed no pressing. A quarter of an hour later I understood, from 
something she said, that the dinner to which she invited me was in 
the servants’ hall. Although Madame de Beuzenval was undoubt- 
edly a very good woman, she was of limited understanding, and, too 
full of her illustrious Polish nobility, had little idea of the respect 
due to talent. Even on this occasion, she judged me more by my 
manner than by dress, which, although simple, was very respectable, 
and by no means indicated a man who ought to be invited to dine at 
the servants’ table. I had too long forgotten the way there, to desire 
to learn it again. Without showing all the annoyance I felt, I told 
Madame de Beuzenval that I remembered I was obliged to return to 
my quarter on business, and J again prepared to leave. Madame de 
Broglie went up to her mother and whispered a few words in her 
ear, which had their effect. Madame de Beuzenval rose to detain me, 
and said, “T hope you will do us the honour of dining with us.” Be- 
lieving that to show pride would be to play the fool, I stayed. Be- 


MADAME DE BROGLIE 297 


sides, Madame de Broglie’s kindness had touched me, and rendered 
her attractive to me. I wafvery glad to dine with her, and I hoped 
that, when she knew me better, she would have no cause to regret 
having procured me this honour. The President of Lamoignon, a 
great friend of the family, dined there on the same occasion. Like 
Madame de Broglie, he was familiar with the small-talk jargon of 
Paris, which consisted of petits mots and delicate little allusions. In 
this poor Jean Jacques had little chance of shining. I had the good 
sense not to try to play the wit, when Minerva was not agreeable, 
and I held my tongue. Would that I nad always been as wise!—I 
should not be in the abyss in which I find myself to-day. 

I was deeply grieved at my own dulness, and also because I was 
unable to justify, in the eyes of Madame de Broglie, what she had 
done in my behalf. After dinner, I bethought myself of my usual re- 
source. I had in my pocket a letter in verse, which I had written to 
Parisot during my stay at Lyons. This fragment was not wanting in 
fire, to which I added by my manner of reciting, and I moved all 
three to tears. Whether my own vanity or the truth made me so in- 
terpret it, I thought I saw that Madame de Broglie’s eyes said to her 
mother, Well, mamma, was I wrong in telling you, that this man 
. was more fitted to dine with you than with your waiting-women? 
Until this moment my heart had been somewhat heavy, but after I 
had thus avenged myself, I was satisfied. Madame de Broglie pushed 
her favourable opinion of me a little too far, and believed that I 
should cause a sensation in Paris and become a favourite with the 
ladies. To guide my inexperience, she gave me the “Confessions of 
the Comte de .” “This book,” said she to me, “is a Mentor, of 
which you will have need in the world; you will do well to consult 
it sometimes.” I have kept this copy for more than twenty years, out 
of a feeling of gratitude to the hand from which I received it, al- 
though I often laugh at the opinion which this lady appeared to en- 
tertain of my capacities for gallantry. Directly I had read the work, I 
desired to gain the friendship of the author. This inspiration was 
justified by the event. He is the only true friend I have had amongst 
men of letters.® 





?I was so long and so firmly convinced of this, that it was to him that I in- 
trusted the manuscript of my Confessions after my return to Paris. The distrust- 


298 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


From that time, I felt confident that Madame de Beuzenval and 
Madame de Broglie, considering the interest they had shown in me, 
would not long leave me without resources, and I was not mistaken. 
Let me now speak of my introduction to Madame Dupin, the conse- 
quences of which were more lasting. 

As is well known, Madame Dupin was the daughter of Samuel 
Bernard 2nd Madame Fontaine. There were three sisters, who might 
be called the three Graces—Madame de la Touche, who ran away to 
England with the Duke of Kingston; Madame d’Arty, the mistress 
and, what was more, the friend, the only true friend, of the Prince 
de Conti—a woman worthy to be adored as much for the gentleness 
and goodness of her charming character as for her pleasant wit and 
the unalterable cheerfulness of her disposition; lastly, Madame 
Dupin, the most beautiful of the three, and the only one of them 
who has never been reproached with any irregularity of conduct. 
She was the reward of the hospitality of M. Dupin, upon whom her 
mother bestowed her, together with a post as farmer-general of taxes 
and an immense fortune, out of gratitude for the kindly manner in 
which he had received her in his province. When I saw her for the 
first time, she was still one of the most beautiful women in Paris. 
She received me while she was dressing herself. Her arms were bare, 
her hair dishevelled, and her dressing-gown disarranged. Such an 
introduction was quite new to me; my poor head could not stand it; 
I was troubled and confused; in short, I fell madly in love with her. 

My confusion did not appear to create a bad impression: she took 
no notice of it. She received the book and the author kindly, spoke 
to me about my system like one who knew all about it, sang, accom- 
panied herself on the piano, made me stay to dinner, and gave mea 
seat at table by her side. This was more than enough to turn my 
head completely, and it did so. She gave me permission to call upon 
her, which permission I used and abused. I went to her house nearly 
every day, and dined there two or three times a week. I was dying to 
declare myself, but did not dare. Several reasons increased my natu- 
ral shyness. The entry into a wealthy house was an open door to for- 
tune; in my present position, I was unwilling to run the risk of shut- . 


ful Jean Jacques has never been able to believe in treachery and falschood until 
_ he has been their victim. 


MADAME DUPIN 299 


ting it against myself. Madame Dupin, with all her amiability, was 
serious and cold; I found mothing in her behaviour sufficiently en- 
couraging to embolden me. Her house, which at that time was as 
brilliant as any in Paris, was the rendezvous of a society, which, if it 
had only been a little less numerous, would have contained the pick 
of all persons of distinction. She was fond of gathering around her 
all who made any stir in the world—great personages, men of let- 
ters, and handsome women. Only dukes, ambassadors and knights 
of the blue ribbon?® were seen at her house. Madame la Princesse de 
Rohan, Madame la Comtesse de Forcalquier, Madame de Mirepoix, 
Madame de Brignolé and Lady Hervey might be considered her 
friends. M. de Fontenelle, M. de Fourmont, M. de Bernis, M. de 
Buffon, M. de Voltaire, the Abbé de Saint-Pierre and the Abbé Sal- 
lier were members of her circle and were invited to her table. If her 
reserved manner did not attract a large number of young people, 
the society which assembled at her house was the more select and, 
consequently, more imposing; and the poor Jean Jaques could not 
flatter himself with the idea of making a brilliant figure in the midst 
of such surroundings. I therefore did not venture to speak, but, be- 
ing unable to keep silence any longer, I ventured to write. She kept 
the letter for two days without saying anything to me about it. On 
the third day she returned it to me, with a few words of admonition, 
spoken in a tone of coldness which froze my blood. I tried to speak, 
the words died upon my lips; my sudden passion was extinguished 
with my hope, and, after a forma! declaration of my love, I con- 
tinued to visit her as before, without saying a word more, even with 
my eyes. 

I believed that my folly was forgotten: I was wrong. M. de Fran- 
cueil, her stepson, was about the same age as myself and his step- 
mother. He was witty, and a man of handsome person, who might 
have looked high. It was reported that he aspired to the favours of 
Madame Dupin, perhaps simply because she had procured him a 
very ugly but at the same time very gentle wife, and lived in perfect 
harmony with both. M. de Francueil admired talent in others and 


1 Knights of ihe Holy Ghost, so called from the colour of the ribbon worn by 
them. But cordons bleus may simply mean here “distinguished persons” gener- 


ally. 


300 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


cultivated it. Music, which he understood well, was a bond of union 
between us. I saw him frequently, and became intimate with him. 
Suddenly, he gave me to understand that Madame Dupin found my 
visits too frequent, and requested me to discontinue them. Such a 
compliment would not have been out of place when she gave me 
back my letter; but, eight or ten days after, without any further ap- 
parent reason for it, it seemed to me inopportune. What made the 
situation still more curious was, that I was made no less welcome at 
M. and Madame de Francueil’s house than before. However, I went 
there less frequently; and I should have discontinued my visits alto- 
gether, had not Madame Dupin, actuated by another unforeseen 
caprice, begged me to undertake for eight or ten days the charge of 
her son, who was changing his tutor, and was left to himself during 
the interval. I spent these eight days in a state of torture, which noth- 
ing but the pleasure of obeying Madame Dupin could render endur- 
able; for poor Chenonceaux already displayed the evil disposition 
which nearly brought dishonour upon his family, and caused his. 
death in the Isle de Bourbon. As long as I was with him, I prevented 
him from doing harm to himself or others, and that was all; be- 
sides, it was no easy task, and I would not have undertaken it for 
eight days longer, even had Madame offered herself by way of pay- 
ment. 

M. de Francueil conceived a friendship for me: we worked to- 
gether, and began a course of chemistry with Rouelle. In order to be 
near him, I left my Hôtel St. Quentin, and went to lodge at the Ten- 
nis Court in the Rue Verdelet, which adjoins the Rue Platriére, 
where M. Dupin lived. In consequence of a neglected cold, I was at- 
tacked by an inflammation of the lungs, of which I nearly died. Dur- 
ing my youth I frequently suffered from inflammatory diseases, 
pleurisy, and, especially, quinsy, to which I was very subject, and 
others, of which I need not here give a list, which have all brought 
me sufficiently near death to familiarise me with its appearance. 
During the period of convalescence, I had time to reflect upon my 
condition and to lament my timidity, my weakness, gnd my indo- 
lence, which, in spite of the fire by which I felt myself inflamed, left 
me to vegetate in mental idleness at the gate of misery. The day be- 
fore I fell ill, I had gone to see an opera by Royer, which was being: 


COMPOSES AN OPERA 301 


played at the time, the name of which I have forgotten. In spite of 
my prejudice in favour of the talents of others, which has always 
made me so mistrustful of my own, I could not prevent myself from 
thinking the music feeble, cold, and wanting in originality. I even 
sometimes said to myself: It seems to me that I could do better than 
that. But the awe-inspiring idea I had formed of the composition of 
an opera, the importance which I heard specialists attach to such an 
undertaking, immediately discouraged me, and made me blush for 
having ventured to entertain the idea. Besides, where was I to find 
anyone who would be willing to supply me with the words and to 
take the trouble to cast them according to my liking? These ideas of 
music and an opera returned to me during my illness, and in my 
feverish delirium I composed songs, duets, and choruses. I am cer- 
tain that I composed two or three pieces, di prima intenzione,' 
which perhaps would have been worthy of the admiration of the 
masters, if they had heard them performed. If it were only possible 
to keep a record of the dreams of one sick of the fever, what great 
and lofty things would sometimes be seen to result from his de- 
lirium! 

The same subject occupied my attention also during my conva- 
lescence, but I was calmer. After long, and often involuntary, think- 
ing about the matter, I determined to satisfy myself, and to attempt 
to compose an opera, words and music, without any assistance from 
others. This was not altogether my first attempt. At Chambéri I had 
composed a tragic opera, entitled [phis and Anaxarete, which I had 
had the good sense to throw into the fire. At Lyons I had composed 
another, The Discovery of the New World, which, after I had read 
it to M. Bordes, the Abbé de Mably, the Abbé Trublet and others, I 
treated in the same manner, although I had already written the 
music of the prologue and the first act, and David, when he saw the 
music, had told me that it contained passages worthy of Buonon- 


cini.!? 


1 Of-hand, in a moment of inspiration; tout d'une haleine is the interpretas 
tion given to the equivalent French phrase, when used in reference to a musical 


composition. . 
12 There were three famous Italian musicians of this name, a father and his two 


sons. The younger son, who stayed some time in England, had the greatest repu- 


tation. 


302 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


This time, before putting my hand to the work, I gave myself 
time to think over my plan. I sketched an epic ballet, with three dif- 
ferent subjects, in three separate acts, each set to music of a different 
character, and taking for the subject of each the amours of a poet. I 
called the opera Les Muses Galantes. My first act, in the powerful 
style, was Tasso; the second, in the tender style, was Ovid; the third, 
entitled Anacreon, was intended to breathe the gaiety of the dithy- 
ramb. I first tried my skill on the first act, and devoted myself to it 
with a zeal which, for the first time, enabled me to taste the charm 
of enthusiasm in composition. One evening, just as I was going to 
enter the opera-house, I felt myself so overmastered and tormented 
by my ideas, that I put my money back into my pocket, ran home 
and shut myself in. I went to bed, having first drawn the curtains 
close to prevent the daylight entering, and there, entirely abandon- 
ing myself to the poetical and musical inspiration, in seven or eight 
hours I rapidly composed the greater part of the act. I may say that 
my love for the Princess of Ferrara—for I was Tasso for the moment 
—and my noble and haughty feelings in the presence of her unjust 
brother, made me pass a night a hundred times more delightful than 
if I had spent it in the arms of the Princess herself. In the morning, 
only a very small portion of what I had composed remained in my 
head; but this little, almost obliterated by weariness and sleep, never- 
theless bore evidence of the vigour of the whole, of which it only 
represented the remains. 

This time I did not carry on my work to any great extent, as I was 
diverted from it by other matters. While I was attached to the house 
of Dupin, Madame de Beuzenval and Madame de Broglie, whom I 
still saw occasionally, had not forgotten me. The Comte de Mon- 
taigu, a captain in the guards, had just been appointed ambassador 
at Venice. He owed his ambassadorship to Barjac, to whom he as- 
siduously paid court. His brother, the Chevalier de Montaigu, gen- 
tulhomme de la manche”? to the Dauphin, was acquainted with these 
two ladies, and with the Abbé Alary, of the French Academy, whom 
I also saw sometimes. Madame de Broglie, knowing that the ambas- 


13 S 
Gentlshommes de la manche was the name given to noblemen who at- 
tended on the French princes until they had finished their education. 


QUARANTINE AT GENOA 303 


sador was looking out for a secretary, proposed me. We entered into 
negotiations. I asked fitty*ouzs as salary, which was little enough for 
a post in which it was necessary to keep up an appearance. He only 
offered a hundred pistoles,* and I was to pay my own travelling ex- 
penses. The proposal was ridiculous. We were unable to come to 
terms. M. de Francueil, who did his utmost to prevent me from go- 
ing, in the end prevailed. I remained, and M. de Montaigu departed, 
taking with him another secretary, named M. Follau, who had been 
recommended to him at the Foreign Office. No sooner had they ar- 
rived at Venice than they quarrelled. Follau, seeing that he had to 
do with a madman, left him in the lurch; and M. de Montaigu, hav- 
ing no one but a young abbé named de Binis, who wrote under. the 
secretary’s instruction, and was not in a position to fill the place, was 
obliged to have recourse to me again. The chevalier, his brother, a 
man of intelligence, by giving me to understand that there were cer- 
tain privileges connected with the post of secretary, succeeded in in- 
ducing me to accept the thousand francs. I received twenty Jouts for 
my travelling expenses, and set out. 

[1743-1744.|—At Lyons, I should have liked to take the route by 
way of Mont Cenis, in order to pay a passing visit to my poor 
mamma; but I went down the Rhône, and took ship at Geneva for 
Toulon, on account of the war and for the sake of economy, and also 
in order to procure a passport from M. de Mirepoix, at that time 
commander in Provence, to whom I had been directed. M. de Mon- 
taigu, finding himself unable te do without me, wrote me letter 
after letter to hasten my journey. An incident delayed it. 

It was the time of the plague at Messina. The English fleet was 
anchored there, and visited the felucca on which I was. On our ar- 
rival at Genoa, after a long and tedious passage, we were subjected 
to a quarantine of twenty-one days. The passengers were allowed 
the choice of performing it on board or in the lazaretto, where we 
were warned that we should find nothing but the four walls, since 
there had been no time to furnish it. All chose the felucca except my- 
self. The insupportable heat, the confined space, the impossibility of 
taking exercise, and the vermin on board, made me prefer the laza- 


1 A louis was then worth twenty-four francs, a pistole ten. 


304 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


retto at all hazards. I was conducted into a large two-storeyed build- 
ing, absolutely bare, in which I found neither windows, nor table, 
nor bed, nor chair—not even a stool to sit upon, nor a bundle of 
straw to lie on. They brought me my cloak, my travelling bag, and 
my two trunks; the heavy doors with huge locks were shut upon 
me, and I remained at liberty to walk as I pleased, from room to 
room and from storey to storey, finding everywhere the same soli- 
tude and the same bareness. 

In spite of all this, I did not regret having chosen the lazaretto in 
preference to the felucca; and, like a second Robinson Crusoe, I be- 
gan to make the same arrangements for my twenty-one days as I 
should have done for my whole life. At first, I had the amusement 
of hunting the lice which I had picked up in the felucca. When, 
after frequent changes of clothing and linen, I had at length suc- 
ceeded in getting myself clean, I proceeded to furnish the room 
which I had chosen. I made myself a good mattress out of my waist- 
coats and shirts, some sheets out of a number of napkins which I 
sewed together, a blanket out of my dressing-gown, a pillow out of 
my cloak rolled up. I made a seat of one of my trunks laid flat, and 
a table of the other set on end. I took out an inkstand and some 
paper; and arranged about a dozen books which I had by way of a 
library. In short, I made myself so comfortable that, with the excep- 
tion of windows and curtains, I was almost as well lodged in this 
absolutely bare lazaretto as in my Tennis Court in the Rue Verdelet. 
My meals were served with much ceremony. Two grenadiers, with 
fixed bayonets, accompanied them; the staircase was my dining- 
room, the landing did duty for a table, the bottom step for a seat, 
and, as soon as my dinner was served, they retired, after having rung 
a bell, to inform me that I might sit down to table. Between my 
meals, when I was not reading, writing, or working at my furnish- 
ing, I went for a walk in the Protestant cemetery, which served me 
as a courtyard, or I ascended a turret, from which I could see the 
ships entering and leaving the harbour. In this manner I spent four- 
teen days; and I could have spent the whole twenty-one there with- 
out a moment’s weariness, had not M. de Jonville, the French am- 
bassador, to whom I managed to send a letter saturated with vinegar, 
perfumed, and half-burnt, procured me a remission of eight days, 
which I spent at his house, where, I confess, I found myself more 


ARRIVES AT VENICE 305, 


comfortably lodged than at the lazaretto. He treated me with very 
great kindness. Dupont, Iffs secretary, was a good fellow, who intro- 
duced me to several houses, both in Genoa and in the country, where 
we were agreeably entertained. We became very good friends, and 
kept up a correspondence for a long time afterwards. I had a pleas- 
ant journey through Lombardy. I visited Milan, Verona, Brescia, 
and Padua, and at length reached Venice, where the ambassador 
was impatiently expecting me. 

I found heaps of despatches from the Court and the other ambas- 
sadors, of which he had been unable to read the parts written in 
cipher, although he possessed the key. As I had never worked in any 
office, and had never in my life seen a government cipher, I was at 
first afraid of finding myself perplexed; but I found that nothing 
could be more simple, and in less than a week I had deciphered the 
whole, which certainly was not worth the trouble, for the embassy 
at Venice has seldom much to do, and, besides, the government 
would not have cared to intrust the most trifling negotiation to a 
man like M. de Montaigu. Until my arrival he had found himself 
in great difficulties, since he did not know how to dictate or to write 
legibly. I was very useful to him; he was aware of it, and treated me 
well. He had another reason for this. After the departure of his 
predecessor, M. de Fronlay, who had gone out of his mind, the 
French consul, M. le Blond, had taken over the affairs of the em- 
bassy, and eyen after the arrival of M. de Montaigu, continued to 
manage them until he had familiarised the latter with the routine. 
M. de Montaigu, in his jealousy at the performance of his duties by 
another, although he himself was incapable of them, conceived an 
aversion to the consul, and, as soon as I arrived, deprived him of the 
functions of ambassadorial secretary, in order to hand them over to 
me. These functions being inseparable from the title, he told me to 
assume it. As long as I remained with him, he never sent anyone, ex- 
cept myself, under this name to the Senate or persons sent by it to 
confer with him,!® and really, it was very natural that he should 
prefer to have as ambassadorial secretary a person attached to him- 
self than a consul or office-clerk appointed by the Court. 

This made my situation tolerably agreeable and prevented his 


1 Conférent: the dignitary sent by the Senate of the Republic of Venice to 


confer with foreign ambassadors. 


306 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


noblemen, who, like his pages and most of his people, were Italians, 
from disputing precedence with me in the house. I successfully made 
use of the authority attached to it to maintain his droit de liste, that 
is to say, the freedom of his quarter, against the attempts which were 
several times made to infringe it, and which his Venetian officers 
were unwilling or unable to resist. But I never allowed banditti to 
take refuge there, although I might thereby have gained consider- 
able profit, which his Excellency would not have disdained to share. 

He even presumed to lay claim to part of the perquisites of the 
secretaryship, which were called the chancellerie. Although it was 
in time of war, a number of passports had to be made out. For each 
of these passports a sequin!® was paid to the secretary who drew out 
and countersigned them. All my predecessors had been in the habit 
of demanding this sequin from Frenchmen and foreigners alike. 
This practice appeared to me unfair, and, although I was not a 
Frenchman, I abolished it in the case of the French; but I exacted 
my perquisite so rigorously from everyone else that, when the Mar- 
quis Scotti, the brother of the favourite of the Queen of Spain, had 
sent a messenger to me for a passport without my perquisite, I sent 
to ask him for it—a piece of audacity which the revengeful Italian 
did not forget. As soon as the reform which I had introduced in re- 
gard to the taxing of passports became known, nothing but crowds 
of pretended Frenchmen presented themselves in order to procure 
them, who, in a fearful jargon, called themselves Provençals, Picards 
and Burgundians. As I have a tolerably keen ear, I was rarely taken 
in, and I do not believe that a single Italian ever did me out of my se- 
quin, or that a single Frenchman paid it. I was foolish enough to tell 
M. de Montaigu, who knew nothing about anything, of what I had 
done. The word sequin made him open his ears, and, without ex- 
pressing any opinion upon the suppression of the fees for the French, 
he demanded that I should settle with him on account of the others, 
promising me other equivalent advantages in return. Indignant at 
this meanness, rather than influenced by feelings of self-interest, I 
scornfully rejected his proposal. He persisted; I grew warm. “No, 
monsieur,” I said to him in a decided tone, “let your Excellency keep 
what belongs to you, and leave me what is mine; I will never give 


1! Worth from nine to twelve francs. 


STUPIDITY OF M. DE MONTAIGU 307 


up a sou.” When he saw that he could gain nothing by this means, 
he adopted another planyeand had the effrontery to say to me that 
since I drew the perquisites of his chancellerie, it was only fair that I 
should bear the expenses of it. I did not care to squabble about such 
a trifle, and from that time I provided my own ink, paper, sealing- 
wax, candles, ribbon and even the seal, which I had repaired, with- 
out receiving a farthing from him by way of reimbursement. This 
did not prevent me from making over a small share of the fees to the 
Abbé de Binis, who was a good fellow, and never attempted to claim 
it. If he was civil to me, I was equally straightforward with him, and 
we always got on very well together. 

I found the performance of my duties less difficult than I had ex- 
pected, seeing that I had no experience, and was associated with an 
ambassador who was equally inexperienced, whose ignorance and 
obstinacy, in addition, seemed to delight in thwarting everything 
that good sense and some little knowledge suggested to me as likely 
to be useful for the King’s service and his own. His most sensible act 
was to form a connection with the Marquis de Mari, the Spanish am- 
bassador, a clever and shrewd person, who could have led him by 
the nose if he had been so minded, but who, out of consideration for 
the common interests of the two Courts, usually gave him good ad- 
vice, which was rendered useless by M. de Montaigu, who always 
intruded some of his own ideas when carrying it out. The only 
thing they had to do in common was to induce the Venetians to ob- 
serve neutrality. The latter, who continually protested their faithful 
observance of it, nevertheless publicly supplied the Austrian troops 
with ammunition, and even with recruits, under the pretence that 
they were deserters. M. de Montaigu, who, I believe, desired to gain 
the goodwill of the Republic, in spite of my representations, invari- 
ably made me give assurances in all his despatches that there was no 
fear that the Venetians would ever violate the conditions of neutral- 
ity. The obstinacy and stupidity of this poor man made me every 
moment write and commit absurdities, of which I was obliged to be 
the agent since he so desired it, but which sometimes rendered the 
performance of my duties unendurable and even almost impracti- 
cable. For instance, he insisted that most of his despatches to the 
King and the Minister should be written in cipher, although neither 


308 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


the one nor the other contained anything at all which rendered such 
a precaution necessary. I represented to him that, between Friday, 
when the despatches from the Court arrived, and Saturday, when 
our own were sent off, there was not sufficient time for so much 
writing in cipher and the large amount of correspondence which I 
had to get ready for the same courier. He discovered an admirable 
- plan: this was, to begin on Thursday, to write the answers to the des- 
patches which were due on the following day. This idea appeared 
to him so happy that, in spite of all I could say to the impossibility 
and absurdity of carrying it out, I was obliged to resign myself to it. 
For the rest of the time that I remained with him, after having kept 
note of a few words uttered by him at random during the week, and 
of some trifling pieces of information which I picked up here and 
there, provided with these scanty materials, I never failed to bring 
him on Thursday morning the rough draft of the despatches which 
had to be sent off on Saturday, with the exception of a few hurried 
additions or corrections which were rendered necessary by the des- 
patches which arrived on Friday, to which ours were intended to be 
the reply. Another very amusing whim of his, which made his cor- 
respondence indescribably ridiculous, was to send back each item of 
news to its source, instead of making it follow its course. He sent the 
news from the Court to M. Amelot, the news from Paris to M. de 
Maurepas, the news from Sweden to M. d’Havrincourt, the news 
from St. Petersburg to M. de la Chetardie; and sometimes he sent 
back to each of these the news which came from him, after I had 
slightly altered it. As he only glanced through the despatches to the 
Court, out of all that I put before him to sign, and signed those to 
the other ambassadors without reading them, this gave me a little 
more liberty to revise the latter in my own way, and at least I made 
the information cross. But it was impossible for me to give a sensible 
turn to the important despatches. I thought myself lucky when it did 
not occur to him to interlard them with some impromptu lines out of 
his own head, which obliged me to return, in order to transcribe, in 
all haste, the despatch adorned with this new piece of imbecility, 
which was obliged to be honoured with the cipher, otherwise he 
would not have signed it. I was often tempted, out of regard for his 
reputation, to cipher something different from what he had dic- 


= 


ROUSSEAU ACTS.AS AMBASSADOR 309 


tated, but feeling that nothing could justify such a breach of good 
faith, I let him rave at his@wn risk, content with frankly expressing 
my opinion, and, at any rate, fulfilling my duty while I was in his 
service. 

This I always did with an honesty, a zeal, and a courage which de- 
served on his part a different reward from that which I received in 
the end. It was time that I should for once be what Heaven, whe 
had bestowed upon me a happy disposition, and what the education, 
which I had received from the best women, and that which I had 
given myself, had intended me to be, and that I was then. Left to 
myself, without friends, without advisers, without experience, in a 
foreign land, in the service of a foreign nation, surrounded by a 
crowd of rascals, who, for the sake of their own interest and in order 
to remove the stumbling-block of a good example, urged me to imiz 
tate them—in spite of all this, far from doing anything of the kind, 
I faithfully served France, to whom I owed nothing, and, as was only 
right, her ambassador even more faithfully, in all that depended 
upon myself. Irreproachable in a position which was sufficiently 
open to observation, I deserved and obtained the esteem of the Re- 
public and of all the ambassadors with whom we corresponded, and 
the affection of all the French residents in Venice, not even except- 
ing the consul, whom, to my regret, I supplanted in the perform- 
ance of duties which I knew rightly belonged to him, and which 
brought me more trouble than pleasure. 

M. de Montaigu, completely under the control of the Marquis 
Mari, who did not trouble himself about the details of his duty, neg- 
lected his own to such an extent, that the French who lived in Ven- 
ice would never have known that there was a French ambassador 
resident in the city, had it not been for me. Being always dismissed 
without a hearing, whenever they sought his protection, they be- 
came disgusted, and none of them were ever seen in his suite or at 
his table, to which, in fact, he never invited them. I frequently took 
it upon myself to do what he ought to have done: I did all I could 
for the French who applied to him or me. In any other country I 
would have done more, but as, by reason of my official capacity, I 
could not see anyone who held any position, I was frequently obliged 
to refer to the consul, who, being settled in the country with his 


310 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


family, was obliged to be careful, which prevented him from doing 
as much as he, would have liked. Sometimes, however, when he 
hung back and did not venture to speak, I was emboldened to take 
dangerous steps, which generally proved successful. I remember one 
instance which even now makes me laugh. It would hardly be sus- 
pected that it is to me that the theatre-goers of Paris are indebted for 
Coralline and her sister Camille; but nothing is more true. Veronese, 
their father, had accepted an engagement for himself and his chil- 
dren in the Italian company, and, after having received 2,000 francs 
for travelling expenses, instead of starting for France, quietly entered 
into an engagement at the thédtre de Saint-Luc™ in Venice, where 
Coralline, although quite a child, attracted large audiences. M. le 
Due de Gesvres, as lord high chamberlain, wrote to the ambassador 
to claim the father and daughter. M. de Montaigu handed me the 
letter, and simply said “See to this,” without giving me any further 
instructions. I went to M. le Blond, and begged him to speak to the 
patrician to whom the theatre belonged, who was, I believe, a Gius- 
tiniani, and persuaded him to dismiss Veronese, as being engaged in 
the King’s service. Le Blond, who was not very eager to accept the 
commission, performed it badly. Giustiniani had recourse to various 
subterfuges, and Veronese was not discharged. I felt annoyed. It was 
the time of the Carnival. I took a domino and a mask and rowed to 
the palace Giustiniani. All who saw my gondola arrive with the am- 
bassador’s livery were astounded; such a thing had never been seen 
in Venice. I entered, and ordered myself to be announced as “a lady 
in a mask.” As soon as I was introduced, I removed my mask and 
announced myself. The senator turned pale, and stood astounded. 
“Monsieur,” I said to him in Venetian, “I regret to trouble your Ex- 
cellency with this visit, but you have at your theatre a man named 
Veronese, who is engaged in the King’s service, who has been 
claimed from you, but without success. I come to demand him in 
His Majesty’s name.” This brief speech took effect. No sooner had 
I left, than Giustiniani ran to give an account of the incident to the 
State Inquisitors, who reprimanded him severely. Veronese was dis- 


a : : 
I am not sure that it was not Saint-Samuel. I never can remember proper 
names. 


CAPTAIN OLIVET 31I 


missed the same day. I sent him a message that, if he did not start in 
a week, I would have hifi arrested, and he set out without delay. 
On another occasion, by my own efforts and almost without any- 
one’s assistance, I extricated the captain of a merchant ship from a 
difficulty. He was a Marseillais, named Olivet. I have forgotten the . 
name of the ship. A quarrel had broken out between his crew and 
the Slavonians in the service of the Republic. Acts of violence had 
been committed, and the vessel had been placed under such strict 
embargo that no one, with the exception of the captain, was allowed 
to go on board or leave it without permission. He appealed to the 
ambassador, who told him to go to the devil. Next he applied to the 
consul, who told him that it was not a commercial matter, and that 
he could not interfere. At his wits’ end, he came to me. I represented 
to M. de Montaigu, that he ought to allow me to present a note on 
the subject to the Senate. I do not know whether he gave me permis- 
sion, and whether I did so, but I well remember that, as my attempts 
proved ineffectual and the embargo was not removed, I resolved 
upon a course of action which proved successful. I inserted an ac- 
count of the affair in a despatch to M. de Maurepas, although I had 
great difficulty in persuading M. de Montaigu to allow it to stand. I 
knew that our despatches, although they were hardly worth the 
trouble, were opened at Venice. I had proof of this: for I found pas- 
sages from them reproduced word for word in the “Gazette”—a 
breach of faith of which I had vainly endeavoured to induce the 
ambassador to complain. My object, in speaking of this annoying 
circumstance in the despatch, was to make use of the curiosity of the 
Venetians, in order to frighten them and induce them to release the 
vessel; for if it had been necessary to wait for an answer from the 
Court upon the matter, the captain would have been ruined before it 
arrived. I did more. I went on board to question the crew. I took 
with me the Abbé Patizel, chancellor of the consulate, who only ac- 
companied me with reluctance, for all these poor creatures were 
greatly afraid of offending the Senate. Being unable to go on board, 
on account of the prohibition, I remained in my gondola and drew 
up my report, interrogating all the crew in a loud voice, one after the 
other, and framing my questions in such a manner as to obtain re- 


312 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


plies which might be to their advantage. I wanted to induce Patizel 
to put the questions and draw up the report himself, which, in fact, 
was more his business than mine, but he refused. He never said a 
word, and would scarcely consent to sign the report after me. How- 
ever, this somewhat bold course proved successful, and the vessel 
was released long before the minister’s answer arrived. The captain 
wanted to make me a present. Without showing any displeasure, I 
slapped him on the shoulder and said, “Capitaine Olivet, do you 
think that a man who does not demand from the French the fee for 
passports, which he finds established as a right, is likely to sell them 
the protection of the King?” He asked me at least to dine on board. 
I accepted the invitation, and took with me Carrio, the secretary to 
the Spanish embassy, an amiable and talented man, who has since 
held a similar position at Paris, as well as that of chargé d'affaires, 
and with whom I had formed an intimacy, after the manner of our 
ambassadors. 

I should have been happy if, when I was doing all the good I was 
able to do with the most absolute disinterestedness, I had known 
how to introduce sufficient order and accuracy into all my trifling 
affairs, so as to avoid being taken in myself and serving others at my 
own expense! But, in positions such as that which I held, in which 
the slightest mistakes are not without consequences, I exhausted all 
my attention in the effort not to commit any errors detrimental to 
my service. In all that concerned the essential duties of my office, I 
was to the last most regular and exact. With the exception of a few 
errors, which excessive haste caused me to make in ciphering, of 
which M. Amelot’s clerks once complained, neither the ambassador 
nor anyone else had ever to reproach me with carelessness in the per- 
formance of any of my duties, which was remarkable for a man so 
careless and thoughtless as I am: but I was sometimes forgetful and 
careless in the conduct of special commissions which I undertook, 
and my love of justice always made me take the blame upon myself 
of my own accord, before anyone thought of making a complaint. I 
will merely mention one instance, which has reference to my depar- 
p: from Venice, and of which I subsequently felt the effects in 

aris. 


Our cook, named Rousselot, had brought from France an old 


A TROUBLESOME AFFAIR 313 


two-hundred-franc bill, which a wig-maker of his acquaintance had 
received from a Venetian fioble, Zanetto Nani, in payment for some 
wigs supplied. Rousselot brought this bill to me, and begged me to 
see whether anything could be made out of it by arrangement. I 
knew, and he knew, also, that it is the regular practice of Venetian 
nobles never to pay debts contracted in a foreign country when once 
they have returned home; if any attempt is made to compel them to 
do so, they wear out the unhappy creditor with so many delays, and 
put him to such expense, that he becomes disheartened, and finally 
abandons his claim altogether, or accepts the most trifling composi- 
tion. I asked M. le Blond to speak to Zanetto, who acknowledged the 
bill, but refused to pay. After a long struggle he promised to pay 
three sequins. When Le Blond took him the bill, the three sequins 
were not ready, and there was nothing for it but to wait. During the 
interval occurred my quarrel with M. de Montaigu and my retire- 
ment from his service. I left the ambassador’s papers in perfect order, 
but Rousselot’s bill could not be found. M. le Blond assured me that 
he had returned it to me. I knew his honourable character too well 
to doubt his word, but I was utterly unable to recall to mind what 
had become of the bill. As Zanetto had acknowledged the debt, I 
begged Le Blond to try and get the three sequins by giving him a re- 
ceipt, or to induce him to renew the bill in duplicate; but Zanetto, 
when he knew that the bill was lost, refused to do either. I offered 
the three sequins to Rousselot out of my own pocket, in order to dis- 
charge the bill. He refused to take them, and told me to arrange the 
matter with the creditor in Paris, whose address he gave me. But 
the wig-maker, who knew what had happened, demanded his bill or 
payment in full. In my indignation, what would I not have given to 
find the accursed bill! I paid the two hundred francs myself, and 
that at a time when I was greatly pressed for money. Thus, the loss 
of the bill procured for the creditor payment of the debt in full, 
whereas if, unfortunately for him, it had been found, he would have 
experienced a difficulty in getting the ten crowns promised by his 
Excellency Zanetto Nani. 

The capacity for my employment, which I believed I possessed, 
made my work agreeable; and, with the exception of the society of 
my friend Carrio, and the excellent Altuna (of whom I shall speak 


314 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


presently), the very innocent recreations of the theatre and the 
Piazza di San Marco, and a few visits which we nearly always paid 
together, I found my only pleasure in the performance of my duties. 
Although my work was not very laborious, especially as I had the 
assistance of the Abbé de Binis, I was always tolerably busy, since 
our correspondence was very extensive and war was going on. Every 
day I worked for the greater part of the morning, and on post-days 
sometimes until midnight. I devoted the remainder of my time to 
the study of the profession which I was entering upon, and in which 
I hoped, in consequence of my successful début, to be appointed to a 
more lucrative post. In fact, there was only one opinion concerning 
me, beginning with that of the ambassador, who was thoroughly 
satished with my services, and never made a single complaint. His 
subsequent rage arose from the fact that, finding that my complaints 
were not listened to, I demanded my discharge. The ambassadors 
and ministers of the King, with whom we were in correspondence, 
paid him compliments upon the efficiency of his secretary, which 
ought to have been flattering to him, but which produced quite the 
contrary effect in his perverse head. One compliment, in particular, 
which he received on a special occasion, he never forgave me. The 
circumstances deserve explanation. 

He was so little capable of imposing any constraint upon himself, 
that even on Saturday, the day on which nearly all the couriers left, 
he could not wait till the work was finished before going out; and, 
incessantly urging me to finish the despatches for the King and the 
ministers, he hurriedly signed them and ran off I know not whither, 
generally leaving the rest of the letters unsigned. This obliged me, 
when there was nothing but news, to throw them into the form of a 
bulletin; but when it was a question of affairs relating to the service 
of the King, someone was obliged to sign them, and I did so. I did 
this in the case of an important despatch, which we had just received 
from M. Vincent, the King’s chargé d’affaires at Vienna. This was at 
the time when the Prince de Lobkowitz was marching to Naples, 
and the Comte de Gages carried out that memorable retreat, the 
finest military achievement of the century, which attracted too little 
attention in Europe. The information that reached us was, that a 
man, of whom M. Vincent sent us the description, was setting out 


HIS DEVOTION TO DUTY 315 


from Vienna, with the intention of secretly passing by way of Venice 
to the Abruzzi, in order tg bring about a rising of the people in that 
quarter, on the approach of the Austrians. In the absence of M. de 
Montaigu, who took no interest in anything, I sent on to M. le Mar- 
quis de Hopital this information, which was so opportune, that it 
is perhaps to the much-abused Jean Jacques that the house of Bour- 
bon owes the preservation of the kingdom of Naples. 

The Marquis de l’ Hôpital, as was proper, thanked his colleague, 
and spoke to him about his secretary and the service which he had 
just rendered to the common cause. The Comte de Montaigu, who 
had to reproach himself with carelessness in the matter, thought that 
he saw in this a reproof intended for himself, and spoke to me some- 
what angrily about it. I had had occasion to do the same for the 
Comte de Castellane, ambassador at Constantinople, although in a 
less important matter. As there was no other communication with 
Constantinople except the couriers sent by the Senate, from time to 
time, to its Baile,!8 notice of the departure of these couriers was 
given to the French ambassador, in order that he might take the op- 
portunity of writing to his colleague, if he thought fit. This notice 
was usually given a day or two beforehand, but so little was thought 
of M. de Montaigu, that it was considered sufficient to send to him 
an hour or two before the courier’s departure, merely for form’s sake, 
so that I frequently had to write the despatch in his absence. M. de 
` Castellane, in replying, made honourable mention of me. M. de Jon- 
ville, at Genoa, did the same: and each token of their good opinion 
of me became a fresh cause for grievance. 

I confess that I did not try to avoid the opportunity of making 
myself known, but neither did I seek it unbecomingly. It appeared to 
me only fair that I should look for the natural reward of valuable 
services, that is to say, the esteem of those who are in a position to 
estimate and reward them. I do not know whether my assiduity in 
the fulfilment of my duties afforded the ambassador a legitimate 
reason for complaint, but I certainly know that it was the only com- 
plaint that he uttered up to the day of our separation. _ 

His house, which he had never put upon a proper footing, was 
always full of rabble. The French were badly treated; the Italians 


18 The title of the Venetian ambassador at Constantinople. 


316 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


had the upper hand; and, even amongst them, those good servants 
who had long been attached to the embassy were all rudely dis- 
charged, amongst them his first gentleman, who had already held 
that position with the Comte de Fronlay, whose name, I believe, was 
the Comte Peati, or something very like it. The second gentieman, 
whom he had chosen himself, was a bandit from Mantua, by name 
Domenico Vitali, whom the ambassador intrusted with the care of 
his house, and who, by dint of toadying and sordid stinginess, gained 
his confidence and became his favourite, to the detriment of the few 
honest persons who were still around him, and of the secretary who 
was at their head. The honest eye of an upright man always makes 
rogues uneasy. This alone would have been enough to make him 
hate me, but there was yet another reason for his hatred, which ag- 
gravated it considerably. I must state what this reason was, and I am 
willing to be condemned if I was wrong. 

According to long-established custom, the ambassador had a box 
at each of the five theatres. Every day at dinner he named the theatre 
to which he intended to go; I had the next choice, and his gentlemen 
disposed of the other boxes between them. As I went out, I took the 
key of the box which I had chosen. One day, as Vitali was not there, 
I commissioned the lackey who attended upon me to bring me my 
key to a house which I named to him. Vitali, instead of sending me 
the key, said that he had disposed of it. I was the more incensed, as 
the footman gave me an account of his errand before everybody. In 
the evening, Vitali tried to utter a few words of apology, to which I 
refused to listen. “Sir,” said I to him, “you will come to-morrow, at 
a stated time, to the house in which I received the insult, and will 
make your apologies to me in the presence of those who witnessed it; 
otherwise, the day after to-morrow, whatever happens, I declare that 
either you or I will leave this house.” My resolute tone inspired him 
with respect. He came to the house at the appointed time, and apolo- 
gised publicly, in an abject manner worthy of him; but he laid his 
plans at leisure, and, while cringing to me in public, in secret he 
worked so successfully in true Italian fashion, that, although he 
could not persuade the ambassador to dismiss me, he obliged me to 
resign my position myself. 

Such a wretch was certainly not capable of understanding me, but 


A HOUSE OF DISSOLUTENESS 317 


he knew enough of me to serve his own ends. He knew that I was 
good-natured and mild t@ excess in enduring involuntary injustice, 
proud and hasty when insulted with malice aforethought, a lover of 
decency and dignity on proper occasions, and no less exacting in the 
respect that was due to me, than careful in showing to others the 
respect that I owed to them. He resolved to take advantage of this 
to disgust me, and succeeded. He turned the house upside down, and 
banished from it the regularity, subordination, order, and decency, 
which I had endeavoured to maintain there. An establishment with- 
out a woman at its head requires a somewhat severe discipline, in 
order to introduce the rule of decency which is inseparable from dig- 
nity. He soon made ours a house of dissoluteness and debauchery, a 
haunt of rogues and profligates. Having procured the dismissal of 
the second gentleman, he bestowed his place upon another pimp 
like himself, who kept a public brothel at the “Maltese Cross”; and 
these two rascals, who understood each other perfectly, were» as 
shameless as they were insolent. With the exception of the ambas- 
sador’s room, and even that was not in very good order, there was 
not a corner in the house endurable for a respectable man. 

As his Excellency did not take supper, the gentlemen and myself 
had a special meal, of which the Abbé de Binis and the pages also 
partook. In the commonest beershop one would have been served 
with more cleanliness and decency, and provided with cleaner table- 
linen and better food. We had nothing but one small dirty tallow 
candle, pewter plates, and iron forks. I might have endured what 
went on in private; but I was deprived of my gondola. Of all the 
ambassadorial secretaries, I was the only one who was obliged to 
hire one or to go on foot; and I was only attended by his Excellency’s 
servants when I went to the Senate. Besides, all that went on in the 
house was known in the city. All the ambassador’s officials cried out 
loudly. Domenico, who was the sole cause of all, cried the loudest, 
since he knew well that the indecent manner in which we were 
treated affected me more than all the rest. I was the only person in 
the house who said nothing outside, but I complained loudly to the 
ambassador, not only of what went on, but also of himself; and he, 
being secretly urged on by his evil genius, daily put some new affront 
upon me. Being obliged to spend a considerable sum in order to 


318 ‘THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


keep on a level with my colleagues, and to live in a manner befitting 
my position, I could not save a sou out of my salary; and, when I 
asked him for money, he talked to me of his esteem and of his con- 
fidence in me, as if that ought to have been enough to m my purse 
and provide for all my wants. 

These two bandits at length succeeded in completely turning their 
master’s head, which was already weak enough. They ruined him 
by continual dealings in old curiosities, and induced him to conclude 
bargains, in which he was always taken in, but which they per- 
suaded him were marvels of sharpness. They made him rent a pal- 
ace on the Brenta for twice as much as it was worth, and shared the 
surplus with the proprietor. The rooms were inlaid with mosaic, and 
adorned with pillars and columns of beautiful marble, after the fash- 
ion of the country. M. de Montaigu had all this covered with a mag- 
nificent fir panelling, for the simple reason that the rooms in Paris 
are,wainscoted in this manner. For a similar reason, he was the only 
ambassador in Venice who deprived his pages of their swords and 
his footmen of their sticks. Such was the man who, perhaps for the 
same reason, took a dislike to me, solely because I served him faith- 
fully. 

I patiently endured his neglect, his brutality and ill-treatment as 
long as I thought I saw in it i bad temper, and no signs of hatred; 
but as soon as I saw that the design had been formed of diia 
me of the consideration I deserved for my faithful services, I deter- 
mined to resign my post. The first proof of his ill-will which I re- 
ceived was on the occasion of a dinner, which he intended to give to 
the Duke of Modena and his family, who were at Venice, at which 
he informed me that I could not be present. I answered, with some 
annoyance but without anger, that, as I had the honour of dining 
there every day, if the Duke of Modena, when he arrived, required 
that I should not be present, it would be a point of honour for his 
Excellency and a duty for me, not to yield to his request. “What!” 
said he, in a rage, “does my secretary, who is not even a gentleman, 
claim to dine with a Sovereign, when my gentlemen do not?” “Yes, 
sir,” I replied; “the post with which your Excellency has honoured 
me confers such high rank upon me, as long as I hold it, that I even 
take precedence of your gentlemen or those who call themselves 


= 


M. DE MONTAIGU’S CONDUCT 319 


such, and I am admitted where they cannot appear. You are aware 
that, on the day when youemake your public entry, I am required 
by etiquette and immemorial custom to follow you in state robes, 
and have the honour of dining with you in the palace of St. Mark; 
and I do not see why.a man, who is allowed and required to dine in 
public with the Doge and Senate of Venice, should not be allowed 
to dine in private with the Duke of Modena.”. Although my argu 
ment was unanswerable, the ambassador would not give in; but we 
had no occasion to renew the dispute, for the Duke of Modena did 
not come to dinner. 

From that time he never ceased to cause me annoyance, and to 
treat me with injustice, by doing his utmost to deprive me of the 
trifling privileges attached to my post, in order to hand them over 
to his dear Vitali; and I am sure that, if he had dared to send him to 
the Senate in my place, he would have done so. He usually employed 
the Abbé de Binis to write his private letters in his study; he com- 
missioned him to write an account of the affair of Capitaine Olivet 
to M. de Maurepas, in which, without making any mention of me, 
who alone had interfered in the matter, he even deprived me of the 
honour of the report, of which he sent him a duplicate, and gave the 
credit of it to Patizel, who had not said a single word. He wanted to 
annoy me and please his favourite, without, however, getting rid of 
me. He felt that it would not be so easy to find a successor to me as 
to M. Follau, who had already spread abroad what kind of a man he 
was. A secretary who knew Italian was absolutely necessary to him, 
on account of the answers from the Senate; one who was able to 
write all his despatches, and manage all his affairs without his inter- 
ference; who combined with the merit of serving him faithfully the 
meanness of playing the agreeable to his contemptible gentlemen, 
He accordingly desired to keep me and mortify me at the same time, 
by keeping me far from my country and his own, without money to 
return; and he would perhaps have succeeded if he had set about it 
more prudently. But Vitali, who had other views, and wanted to 
force me to make up my mind, succeeded. As soon as I saw that I 
was wasting my trouble, that the ambassador regarded my services 
as crimes, instead of being grateful to me for them, that I had noth- 
ing more to look for, as long as I was with him, but annoyance in the 


320 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


house and injustice outside, and that, amidst the general discredit 
which he had brought upon himself, the harm he attempted to do 
me might injure me more than his good offices could benefit me, I 
made up my mind and asked permission to resign, giving him time, 
however, to provide himself with another secretary. Without saying 
yes or no, he continued to behave as before. Seeing that matters did 
not improve, and that he took no steps to find another secretary, I 
wrote to his brother and, telling him my reasons, begged him to ob- 
tain my dismissal from his Excellency, adding that, in any case, it 
was impossible for me to remain. I waited for some time, but re- 
ceived no answer. I was beginning to feel greatly embarrassed, when 
the ambassador at length received a letter from his brother. It must 
have been very outspoken, for, although he was subject to most vio- 
lent outbreaks of rage, I never saw him so furious before. After a 
torrent of horrible abuse, not knowing what else to say, he accused 
me of having sold the key of his cipher. I began to laugh, and asked 
him, scoffingly, if he thought that there was in all Venice a man 
who would be fool enough to give him a crown for it. This answer 
made him foam with rage. He made a pretence of calling his serv- 
ants, as he said, to throw me out of the window. Until then I had 
been very quiet, but, at this threat, anger and indignation got the 
mastery of me in my turn. I rushed to the door, and, having drawn 
the bolt which fastened it inside, I gravely went up to him and said, 
“No, Monsieur le Comte, your people shall not interfere in this mat- 
ter; be good enough to allow it to be settled between ourselves.” This 
action on my part and my demeanour calmed him at once; his whole 
attitude betrayed surprise and alarm. When I saw that he had recov- 
ered from his frenzy, I bade him adieu in a few words, and then, 
without waiting for him to answer, I opened the door, left the room, 
and walked quietly through the ante-room in the midst of his peo- 
ple, who rose as usual, and who, I really believe, would rather have 
assisted me against him than him against me. Without going up to 
my room again, I immediately went downstairs, and left the palace, 
never to enter it again. 

I went straight to M. le Blond to tell him what had taken place. 
He was not much surprised; he knew the man. He kept me to din- 
ner. The dinner, though impromptu, was splendid. Ali the French 


THE AMUSEMENTS OF VENICE 324 


in Venice who were of any importance were present. There was not 
a single person at the amb&amp;ssador’s. The consul related my case to 
the company. At the recital, all cried out with one voice, but not in 
favour of his Excellency. He had not settled my account, and had 
not given me a sou; and, reduced to a few Jouis which I had in my 
purse, I did not know how I was to pay the expenses of my return. 
Everyone offered me the use of his purse. I borrowed twenty sequins 
from M. le Blond, and the same amount from M. de Saint-Cyr, with 
whom, next after him, I was most intimate. I thanked the others, 
and, until I left, I lodged with the chancellor of the consulate, in 
order to prove to the public, that the nation had no share in the un- 
just behaviour of the ambassador. The latter, enraged at seeing me 
féted in my misfortune, while he, in spite of being an ambassador, 
was neglected, lost his head altogether and behaved like a madman. 
He so far forgot himself as to present a written memorial to the Sen- 
ate demanding my arrest. The Abbé de Binis having given me a hint 
of this, I decided to remain another fortnight, instead of leaving on 
the second day, as I had intended. My conduct had been seen and 
approved. I was universally esteemed. The Seigneurie did not even 
condescend to reply to the ambassador’s extravagant memorial, and 
informed me, through the consul, that I could remain in Venice as 
long as I pleased, without troubling myself about the vagaries of a 
madman. I continued to visit my friends. I went to take leave of the 
Spanish ambassador, who received me very kindly, and of the Comte 
de Finochietti, the Neapolitan minister, whom I did not find at 
home. I wrote to him, however, and received a most courteous reply 
from him. At last I set out, and, in spite of my difficulties, I left no 
other debts than the loans of which I have just spoken, and about 
fifty crowns, which I owed to a merchant named Morandi, which 
Carrio undertook to pay, and which J have never returned to him, 
although we have often seen each other since then. As for the two 
loans, I punctually repaid them as soon as it was in my power to 
do so. 

I must not leave Venice without saying a few words about the 
famous amusements of this city, or, at least, the small share of them 
which I enjoyed during my stay. The reader has seen how little I 
sought after the pleasures of youth, or, at least, those which are so 


322 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


called. My tastes underwent no alteration at Venice, but my occupa- 
tions, which would have prevented me from seeking them, gave a 
greater relish to the simple pleasures which I allowed myself. Fore- 
most and most delightful of these was the company of persons of 
distinction, such as MM. le Blond, de Saint-Cyr, Carrio, Altuna, and 
a Forlan!® gentleman, whose name, to my great regret, I have for- 
gotten, and whose amiability I cannot recall without emotion: of 
all the men whose acquaintance I have ever made, he was the one 
whose heart most resembled my own. We had also become intimate 
with two or three witty and well-educated Englishmen, who were as 
passionately fond of music as ourselves. All these gentlemen had 
their wives or female friends or mistresses; the latter were nearly all 
women of education, at whose houses music and dancing took place. 
A little gambling also went on; but our lively tastes, talents, and 
fondness for the theatre rendered this amusement insipid. Gambling 
is only the resource of those who do not know what to do with 
themselves. I had brought with me from Paris the national prejudice 
against Italian music, but Nature had also endowed me with that 
fine feeling against which such prejudices are powerless. I soon con- 
ceived for this music the passion which it inspires in those who are 
capable of judging it correctly. When I heard the barcarolles,?° I dis- 
covered that I had never heard singing before; and I soon became so 
infatuated with the opera that, tired of chattering, eating, and play- 
ing in the boxes, when I only wanted to listen, I often stole away 
from the company in order to find another seat, where, quite alone, 
shut up in my box, in spite of the length of the performance, I aban- 
doned myself to the pleasure of enjoying it, without being disturbed, 
until it was over. One day, at the theatre of St. Chrysostom, I fell 
asleep more soundly than I could have done in my bed. The noisy 
and brilliant airs failed to wake me; but it would be impossible to 
describe the delightful sensation produced upon me by the sweet 
harmony and angelic music of the air which finally aroused me. 


*° Forlan: from the country of Frioul, part of which is now included in the 
Austrian States and part in the kingdom of Italy. It has given name to a dance 
(forlane). 


2 The gondbliers’ songs. 


THE MUSIC OF THE SCUOLE 323 


What an awaking! what rapture! what ecstasy, when I opened, at 
the same moment, my eyes and my ears! My first idea was to believe 
myself in Paradise. This delightful piece, which I still recollect, and 
which I shall never forget while I live, began as follows: 


“Conservami la bella 
Che si m’ accende il cor.” 


I wanted to have the music. I procured it and kept it for a long time, 
but it was not the same on paper as in my memory. The notes were 
certainly the same, but it was not the same thing. This divine air can 
only be performed in my head, as it was really performed at the 
time when it awoke me. 

The music, which, according to my taste, is far superior to that 
of the opera, and which has not its like, either in Italy or the rest of 
the world, is that of the scuole. The scuole are charitable institutions, 
founded for the education of young girls without means, who are 
subsequently portioned by the Republic either for marriage or for 
the cloister. Amongst the accomplishments cultivated in these young 
girls music holds the first place. Every Sunday, in the church of each 
of these scuole, during Vespers, motets are performed with full 
chorus and full orchestra, composed and conducted by the most 
famous Italian masters, executed in the latticed galleries by young 
girls only, all under twenty years of age. I cannot imagine anything 
so voluptuous, so touching as this music. The abundant art, the ex- 
quisite taste of the singing, the beauty of the voices, the correctness 
of the execution—everything in these delightful concerts contributes 
to produce an impression which is certainly not “good style,” but 
against which I doubt whether any man’s heart is proof. Carrio and 
myself never missed going to Vespers in the Mendicanti, and we 
were not the only ones. The church was always full of amateurs; 
even operatic singers came to form their taste after these excellent 
models. What drove me to despair was the confounded gratings, 
which only allowed the sounds to pass through, and hid from sight 
the angels of beauty, of whom they were worthy. I could talk of 
nothing else. While speaking about it one day, at M. le Blond’s, he 
said, “If you are so curious to see these young girls, it is easy to satisfy 
you. I am one of the directors of the institution. I will take you toa 


324 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


collation?! with them.” I did not give him a moment's peace until 
he kept his word. When we entered the salon which confined these 
longed-for beauties I felt an amorous trembling, which I had never 
before experienced. M. le Blond presented these famous singers to 
me one after the other, whose names and voices were all that I knew 
about them. Come, Sophie . . . she was a horrible fright. Come, 
Cattina . . . she had only one eye. Come, Bettina . . . she was 
disfigured by small-pox. Hardly one of them was without some 
noticeable defect. The cruel wretch laughed at my painful surprise. 
Two or three, however, appeared passable; they only sang in the 
chorus. I was in despair. During the collation we teased them, and 
they became quite lively. Ugliness does not exclude certain graces, 
which I found they possessed. I said to myself, they could not sing 
so delightfully without soul; they must possess one. At last, the feel- 
ing with which I regarded them was so altered that I left the room 
almost in love with all these ugly creatures. I hardly ventured to re- 
turn to their Vespers: I had reason to feel that the danger was over. 
I continued to find their singing delicious, and their voices lent such 
a fictitious charm to their faces that, as long as they were singing, I 
persisted in thinking them beautiful, in spite of my eyes. 

Music in Italy costs so little, that it is not worth while for anyone 
who is fond of it to deprive himself of it. I hired a piano, and for a 
crown I engaged four or five symphonists to come to my rooms, 
with whom, once a week, I practised the pieces which had afforded 
me most pleasure at the opera. I also made them try some syinpho- 
nies from my Muses galantes. Either because they really pleased, or 
because he wanted to flatter me, the ballet-master of St. John Chry- 
sostom asked me for two of them, which I had the pleasure of hear- 
ing performed by this admirable orchestra; they were danced by a 
little Bettina, a pretty and amiable girl, who was kept by one of our 
friends, a Spaniard named Fagoaga, at whose house we often spent 
the evening. 

As for women, it is not in a city like Venice that a man abstains 
from them. Have you no confessions to make on this point? someone 


may ask. Yes, I have something to tell, and I will make this confes- 
sion as frankly as the rest. 


" Goiiter: a light meal between dinner and supper. 


OTHER AMUSEMENTS 325 


I have always disliked common prostitutes; however, at Venice 
. there was nothing else within my reach, since my position excluded 
me from most of the distinguished houses in the city. M. le Blond’s 
daughters were very amiable, but very reserved: besides, I had too 
much respect for their father and mother even to think of desiring 
them. 

A young person named Mademoiselle de Catanéo, daughter of 
the agent of the King of Prussia, would have been more to my taste; 
but Carrio was in love with her—even marriage had been talked of. 
He was well-to-do, while I had nothing; his salary was a hundred 
louis, mine only a hundred pistoles: and, not to mention that I had 
no wish to poach on a friend’s preserves, I knew that a man had no 
right to enter upon affairs of gallantry with a poorly-filled purse, 
wherever he was, especially in Venice. I had not lost the pernicious 
habit of satisfying my wants, and, being too much occupied to feel 
keenly those which the climate causes, I lived nearly a year in Venice 
as chastely as I had lived in Paris, and I left it at the end of eighteen 
months, without having had anything to do with women, except 
twice, in consequence of special opportunities, which I will mention. 

The first was provided for me by that honourable gentleman 
Vitali, some time after the formal apology which I forced him to 
make to me. At table, the conversation turned upon the amusements 
of Venice. The company reproached me for my indifference to the 
most piquant of all, and extolled the graceful manners of the Vene- 
tian women, declaring that they had not their equals in the world. 
Domenico said that I must make the acquaintance of the most ami- 
able of all; he expressed himself ready to introduce me, and assured 
me that I should be delighted with her. I began to laugh at this 
obliging offer, and Count Peati, an old man of high character, said, 
with greater frankness than I should have expected from an Italian, 
that he considered me too sensible to allow myself to be taken to see 
a woman by my enemy. In fact, I had neither the intention nor the 
inclination; but, in spite of this, by one of those inconsistencies which 
I can hardly understand myself, I ended by allowing myself to be 
dragged there, against my inclination, heart and reason, and evem 
against my will, simply from weakness and shame of exhibiting 
mistrust, and, in the language of the country, per non parer troppa 


326 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


coglione2 The padoana, to whose house we went, was good-look- 
ing, even handsome, but her beauty was not of the kind that pleased 
me. Domenico left me with her. I-sent for sorbetti, asked her to sing 
to me, and, at the end of half an hour, I put a ducat on the table, and 
prepared to go. But she was so singularly scrupulous, that she re- 
fused to take it without having earned it, and, with equally singular 
foolishness, I satisfied her scruples. I returned to the palace, feeling 
so convinced that I had caught some complaint, that the first thing 
I did was to send for the physician and ask him to give me some 
medicine. Nothing can equal the feeling of depression from which 
I suffered for three weeks, without any real inconvenience, or the 
appearance of any symptoms to justify it. I could not imagine that it 
was possible to get off unscathed from the embraces of the padoana. 
Even the physician had the greatest trouble imaginable to reassure 
me. He only succeeded by persuading me that I was formed in a 
peculiar manner, which lessened the chance of infection; and, al- 
though I have perhaps exposed myself to this risk less than any other 
man, the fact that I have never suffered in this respect seems to 
prove that the physician was right. However, this belief has never 
made me imprudent; and, if Nature has really bestowed this ad- 
vantage upon me, I can declare that I have never abused it. 

My other adventure, although with a woman also, was of a very 
different kind, both in its origin and consequences. I had mentioned 
that Capitaine Olivet invited me to dinner on board, and that I took 
with me the secretary of the Spanish embassy. I expected a salute of 
cannon. The crew received us, drawn up in line, but not a grain of 
priming was burnt. This mortified me greatly, on account of Carrio, 
who I saw was a little annoyed at it. Certainly, on merchant ships, 
people by no means as important as ourselves were received with a 
salute of cannon, and besides, I thought that I had deserved some 
mark of distinction from the captain. I was unable to conceal my 
feelings, a thing which I have never been able to do; and although 
the dinner was a very good one, and Olivet did the honours admi- 
rably, I began it in an ill-humour, eating little, and speaking still less. 

When the first health was drunk, I expected at least a volley. 
Nothing of the kind! Carrio, who read my thoughts, laughed to see 


2 In order not to appear too great a blockhead. 


JA OR 1G a UN 327 


me sulking like a child. Before the dinner was half over, I saw a 
gondola approaching. “Faith!” said the captain to me, “take care of 
yourself; here comes the enemy.” I asked him what he meant, and 
he answered with a jest. The gondola lay to, and I saw a dazzlingly 
beautiful young woman step out, coquettishly dressed and very 
nimble. In three bounds she was in the cabin and seated at my side, 
before I perceived that a place had been laid for her. She was a 
brunette of twenty years at the most, as charming as she was lively. 
She could only speak Italian. Her accent alone would have been 
enough to turn my head. While eating and chatting, she fixed her 
eyes upon me, and then, exclaiming, “O holy Virgin! O my dear 
Brémond, how long is it since I saw you!” she threw herself into 
my arms, pressed her lips close to mine, and squeezed me almost to 
suffocation. Her large, black, Oriental eyes darted shafts of fire into 
my heart, and although surprise at first caused me some disturbance, 
my amorous feelings so rapidly overcame me that, in spite of the 
spectators, the fair enchantress was herself obliged to restrain me. I 
was intoxicated, or rather delirious. When she saw me worked up 
to the pitch she desired, she moderated her caresses, but not her 
liveliness; and, when she thought fit to explain to us the true or pre- 
tended reason of her forwardness, she told us that I was the very 
image of one M. de Brémond, a director of the Tuscan custom- 
house; that she had been, and still was, madly in love with him; that 
she had left him, because she was a fool; that she took me in his 
place; that she wanted to love me, since it suited her; that, in like 
manner, I must love her as long as it suited her, and, when she left 
me in the lurch, bear it patiently, as her dear Brémond had done. Na 
sooner said than done. She took possession of me as if I had belonged 
to her, gave me her gloves to take care of, her fan, her girdle,”* and 
her headgear. She ordered me to go here and there, to do this and 
that, and I obeyed. She told me to send back her gondola, because 
she wanted to use mine, and I did so. She told me to change places 
with Carrio, because she had something to say to him, and I did so. 
They talked together for a long time in a low voice, and I did not 
disturb them. She called me: I went back to her. “Listen, Zanetto,” 
she said to me; “I do not want to be loved in French fashion; indeed, 


233 Another interpretation suggested is “bouquet.” 


328 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU, 


it would lead to no good. The moment you are tired, go. But do not 
stop half-way, I warn you.” After dinner we went to see the glass 
manufactory at Murano. She bought several little knicknacks, which 
without ceremony she left us to pay for; but she everywhere gave 
away in gratuities much more than we spent altogether. From the 
carelessness with which she threw away her money and allowed 
us to throw away our own, it was easy to see that she attached no 
value to it. When she demanded payment for herself, I believe it was 
more out of vanity than greed. She was flattered by the price men 
put upon her favours. 

In the evening, we escorted her back to her apartments. While 
we were talking, I noticed two pistols on her dressing-table. “Ah!” 
said I, taking one up, “here is a beauty-spot box of new manufacture; 
may I ask what it is used for? I know you have other weapons, which 
fire better than these.” After some pleasantries of the same kind, she 
said, with an ingenuous pride which made her still more charming, 
“When I am good-natured to those for whom I have no affection, I 
make them pay for the weariness which they cause me; nothing can 
be fairer; but, although I endure their caresses, I will not endure 
their insults, and I shall not miss the first man who shall show 
himself wanting in respect to me.” 

When I left her, I made an appointment for the next day. I did 
not keep her waiting. I found her in a more than wanton déshabillé, 
which is only known in southern countries, and which I will not 
amuse myself with describing, although I remember it only too well. 
I will only say that her ruffles and tucker were edged with a silk 
border, ornamented with rose-coloured bows, which appeared to 
me to set off a very beautiful skin. I discovered later that this was 
the fashion at Venice; and the effect is so charming, that I am sur- 
prised that it has never been introduced into France. I had no idea 
of the pleasures which awaited me. I have spoken of Madame de 
Larnage, in the transport which the recollection of her sometimes 
still awakens in me; but how old, ugly, and cold she was, compared 
to my Zulietta! Do not attempt to imagine the charms and graces 
of this bewitching gir!; you would be far from the truth. The young 
virgins of the cloister are not so fresh, the beauties of the harem are 
not so lively, the houris of paradise are not so piquant. Never was 


- ZULIETTA 
F 329 


such sweet enjoyment offered to the heart and senses of mortal man. 
Ah, if I had only known how to taste of it in its full completeness, 
at least, for a single moment! I tasted it, it is true, but without charm; 
I dulled all its delights; I killed them, as it were, intentionally. No! 
Nature has not created me for enjoyment. She has put into my 
wretched head the poison of that ineffable happiness, the desire for 
which he has planted in my heart. 

If there is one circumstance in my life which well describes ny 
character, it is that which I am about to relate. The vividness with 
which at this moment I recall the purpose of my book will, in this 
place, make me. forget the false feeling of delicacy which would 
prevent me from fulfilling it. Whoever you may be, who desire to 
know the inmost heart of a man, have the courage to read the next 
two or three pages; you will become thoroughly acquainted with 
Jean Jacques Rousseau. 

I entered the room of a courtesan as if it had been the sanctuary 
of love and beauty; in her person I thought I beheld its divinity. I 
should never have believed that, without respect and esteem, I could 
have experienced the emotions with which she inspired me. No 
sooner had I recognised, in the preliminary familiarities, the value 
of her charms and caresses than, for fear of losing the fruit of them 
in advance, I was anxious to make haste to pluck it. Suddenly, in 
place of the flame which consumed me, I felt a deathly chill run 
through my veins; my legs trembled under me; and, feeling ready 
to faint, I sat down and cried like a child. 

Who would guess the reason of my tears, and the thoughts that 
passed through my head at that moment? I said to myself: This 
object, which is at my disposal, is the masterpiece of nature and love; 
its mind and body, every part of it perfect; she is as good and gener- 
ous as she is amiable and beautiful. The great ones of the world 
ought to be her slaves; sceptres ought to be laid at her feet. And yet 
she is a miserable street-walker, on sale to everybody; a merchant 
captain has the disposal of her; she comes and throws herself at my 
head, mine, although she knows that I am poor, while my real 
merits, being unknown to her, can have no value in her eyes. In this 
there is something incomprehensible. Either my heart deceives me, 
dazzles my senses, and makes me the dupe of a worthless slut, or 


330 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


some secret defect, with which I am unacquainted, must destroy the 
effect of her charms, and render her repulsive to those who would 
otherwise fight for the possession of her. I began to look for this 
defect with a singular intensity of mind, and it never occurred to me 
that the possible consequences of having anything to do with her 
might possibly have something to do with it. The freshness of her 
skin, her brilliant complexion, her dazzlingly white teeth, the sweet- 
ness of her breath, the general air of cleanliness about her whole 
person, so completely banished this idea from my mind, that, being 
still in doubt as to my condition since my visit to the padoana, I 
rather felt qualms of conscience as to whether I was in sufficiently 
good health for her, and I am quite convinced that I was not de- 
ceived in my confidence. 

These well-timed reflections so agitated me that I shed tears. 
Zulietta, for whom this was certainly quite a novel sight under the 
circumstances, was astounded for a moment; but, after having 
walked round the room and looked in her glass, she understood, and 
my eyes convinced her, that dislike had nothing to do with this 
whimsical melancholy. It was an easy matter for her to drive it away, 
and to efface the slight feeling of shame; but, at the moment when I 
was ready to sink exhausted upon a bosom, which seemed to permit 
for the first time the contact of a man’s hand and mouth, I perceived 
that she had only one nipple. I smote my forehead, looked attentively 
and thought I saw that this nipple was not formed like the other. I 
immediately began to rack my brains for the reason of such a defect, 
and, feeling convinced that it was connected with some remarkable 
natural imperfection, by brooding so long over this idea, I saw, as 
clear as daylight, that, in the place of the most charming person that 
I could picture to myself, I only held in my arms a kind of monster, 
the outcast of nature, of mankind and of love. I pushed my stupidity 
so far as to speak to her about this defect. At first she took it as a 
joke, and said and did things in her frolicsome humour, which were 
enough to make me die of love; but as I was unable to conceal from 
her that I still felt a certain amount of uneasiness, she at last blushed, 
adjusted her dress, got up, and, without saying a word, went and 
seated herself at the window. I wanted to sit by her side, but she 
moved, sat down on a couch, got up immediately afterwards, and, 


LIFTLE ANZOLETTA 331 


walking about the room and fanning herself, said to me in a cold and 
disdainful tone, “Zanetto, lascia le donne, et studia la matematica.” 24 

Before I left, I begged her to grant me another interview on the 
following day. She postponed it till the third day, adding, with an 
ironical smile, that I must want rest. I spent this interval very ill at 
ease, my heart full of her charms and graces, sensible of my folly, 
with which I reproached myself, regretting the moments which I 
had so ill employed, which it had only rested with myself to make 
the sweetest moments of my life, awaiting with the most lively im- 
patience the time when I might repair their loss, but, nevertheless, 
still uneasy, in spite of myself, how I should reconcile the perfections 
of this adorable girl with her unworthy manner of life. I ran—I flew 
to her at the appointed hour. I do not know whether her ardent 
temperament would have been more satisfied with this visit. Her 
pride at least would have been flattered: and I enjoyed in anticipa- 
tion the delight of proving to her, in every respect, that I knew how 
to repair my errors. She spared me the test. The gondolier, whom I 
sent to her apartments on landing, informed me that she had set 
out for Florence on the previous evening. If I had not felt my whole 
love for her when I had her in my arms, I felt it cruelly now, when 
I had lost her. My foolish regret has never left me. Amiable and en- 
chanting as she was in my eyes, I could have consoled myself for the 
loss of her; but I confess that I have never been able to console myself 
for the thought that she only carried away a contemptuous recollec- 
tion of me. 

Such were my two adventures. The eighteen months which I spent 
at Venice have left me no more to tell, with the exception of a merely 
projected amour. Carrio, who was very fond of women, tired of 
always visiting those who belonged to others, took it into his head - 
to keep one himself; and, as we were inseparable, he proposed to me 
an arrangement, common enough in Venice, that we should keep 
one between us. I agreed. The difficulty was to find one with whom 
we should run no risk. He was so industrious in his researches, that 
he unearthed a little girl between eleven and twelve years of age, 
whom her unworthy mother wanted to sell. We went together to 
see her. My compassion was stirred at the sight of this child. She was 


24 Give up the ladies, and study mathematics. 


332 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


fair and gentle as a lamb; no one would have taken her for an Italian. 
Living costs little at Venice. We gave the mother some money, and 
made arrangements for the daughter’s keep. She had a good voice, 
and, in order to provide her with a means of livelihood, we gave her 
a spinet and engaged a singing master for her. All this scarcely cost 
us two sequins a month, and saved more in other expenses; but, as 
we were obliged to wait until she was of a riper age, this was sowing 
a long time before we could reap. However, we were content to pass 
our evenings, to chat and play innocently with this child, and 
amused ourselves perhaps more agreeably than if we had possessed 
her, so true is it that what most attaches us to women is not so much 
sensuality, as a certain pleasure which is caused by living with them. 
My heart became insensibly attached to the little Anzoletta, but this 
attachment was paternal. My senses had so little to do with it that, in 
proportion as it increased, the possibility of allowing them to have 
any influence in like manner diminished. I felt that I should have 
dreaded connection with this child, after she had grown up, as an 
abominable incest. I saw that the worthy Carrio’s feelings, unknown 
to himself, took the same direction. We procured for ourselves, with- 
out thinking of it, pleasures as delightful, though very different 
from those we had originally contemplated; and I am convinced 
that, however beautiful she might have grown, far from being the 
corrupters of her innocence, we should have been its protectors. The 
subsequent change in my affairs, which took place shortly after- 
wards, did not leave me time to take part in this good work, and I 
have nothing for which to commend myself in this matter except 
the inclinations of my heart. Let me now return to my journey. 
My first intention, on leaving M. de Montaigu, was to retire to 
Geneva, until happier circumstances should have removed the obsta- 
cles which prevented me from rejoining my poor mamma. But the 
stir which our quarrel had caused, and the ambassador’s folly in 
writing to the Court about it, made me resolve to go there in person 
to give an account of my own conduct and to lodge a complaint 
against that of a madman. From Venice I communicated my resolu- 
tion to M. du Theil, who, after M. Amelot’s death, had been provi- 
sionally charged with the conduct of foreign affairs. I set out imme- 
diately after my letter, travelling by way of Bergamo, Como, and 


RETURNS TO PARIS 332 
Duomo d’Ossola, and crossing the Simplon. Arrived at Sion, M. de 
Chaignon, the French chargé d'affaires, gave me a most kindly re- 
ception; at Geneva M. de la Closure did the same. I there renewed 
my acquaintance with M. de Gauffecourt, from whom I had to re- 
ceive some money. I had passed through Nyon without seeing my 
father; not that it did not cost me a severe pang, but I had been un- 
able to make up my mind to present myself to my stepmother after 
my ill-luck, feeling sure that she would condemn me unheard. Du- 
villard, an old friend of my father, reproached me severely for this 
neglect. I explained the reason of it, and, in order to repair it without 
exposing myself to the risk of meeting my stepmother, I hired a car- 
riage, and we went to Nyon together and got down at the inn. Du- 
villard went to fetch my poor father, who came in all haste to em- 
brace me. We supped together, and, after having spent a most de- 
lightful evening, I returned on the following morning to Geneva 
with Duvillard, to whom I have always felt grateful for the kind 
ness which he showed me on this occasion. 

My shortest route was not by way of Lyons, but I wanted to pass 
through it, in order to satisfy myself in regard to a very mean trick 
of M. de Montaigu. I had had a small chest sent to me from Paris, 
containing a gold-embroidered waistcoat, some pairs of ruffles, and 
six pairs of white silk stockings; that was all. On his own proposal, 
I ordered this chest, or rather box, to be added to his luggage. In the 
apothecary’s bill, which he wanted to make me take in payment of 
my salary, and which he had written out himself, he had set down 
the weight of this box, which he called a bale, as eleven hundred- 
weight, and had charged the carriage of it to me at an enormous rate. 
Thanks to the exertions of M. Boy de la Tour, to whom I had been 
recommended by his uncle, M. Roguin, it was proved, from the cus- 
tom-house registers of Lyons and Marseilles, that the bale in question 
only weighed forty-five pounds, and that the carriage had been 
charged accordingly. I added this authentic extract to M. de Mon- 
taigu’s bill, and, armed with this and other evidence equally strong, 
I repaired to Paris, full of impatience to make use of it. During the 
whole of this long journey, I had little adventures at Como in Valais, 
and other places. Amongst other things, I saw the Borromean Is- 
lands, which are worth describing; but time presses—I am sur- 


334 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


rounded by spies, and I am obliged to accomplish, inefficiently and 
in haste, a task which would require peace of mind and leisure 
which I do not enjoy. Should Providence ever deign to cast its eyes 
upon me, and at last grant me a less troubled existence, I am deter- 
mined to employ it in recasting this work, if possible, or, at least, in 
adding a supplement, which, I feel, it greatly needs.7&gt; 

The report of my story had preceded me; and, on my arrival, I 
found that everyone, both in the offices and in public, was scandal- 
ised at the ambassador’s follies. But, in spite of this, in spite of the 
public outcry in Venice, in spite of the unanswerable proofs which I 
produced, I was unable to obtain justice. In fact, far from getting 
either satisfaction or reparation, I was even left to the tender mercies 
of the ambassador for my salary, simply because, not being a French- 
man, I had no claim to the protection of the nation, and it was a pri- 
vate matter that concerned only our two selves. Everyone agreed 
with me that I was insulted, injured, and unfortunate; that the am- 
bassador was outrageously foolish, cruel, and unjust, and that the 
whole affair was a lasting disgrace to him. But—he was the ambas- 
sador; I was only the secretary. Good order, or that which is so called, 
required that I should not obtain justice, and I did not obtain it. 
I imagined that, by continued complaints, and by publicly treating 
this fool as he deserved, I should at last make people tell me to hold 
my tongue, which was just what I was waiting for, since I was 
firmly resolved not to obey until I had obtained justice. But at that 
time there was no Minister of Foreign Affairs. Others permitted, 
even encouraged, me to make an outcry, and joined in the chorus; 
but the matter never proceeded further, until at length, tired of being 
always in the right, and never obtaining justice, I became disheart- 
ened, and let it drop. 

The only person who received me coldly, and from whom I should 
least have expected this unfair treatment, was Madame de Beuzen- 
val. With her head full of the privileges conferred by rank and nobil- 
ity, she could not understand that an ambassador could ever be 
wrong in his dealings with his secretary. The manner of her recep- 
tion was in accord with this prejudice. I was so annoyed at it that, 
after leaving her house, I wrote to her one of the strongest and most 


21I have now abandoned this idea. 


THE END OF.M. DE MONTAIGU 335 


violent letters that I have perhaps ever written, and I never went to 
her house again. Father Castel made me more welcome, but, at the 
bottom of his Jesuitical wheedling, I saw that he followed faithfully 
one of the grand principles of his society—always to sacrifice the 
weaker to the stronger. The lively consciousness of the justice of my 
cause and my natural pride did not allow me to endure this partisan- 
ship patiently. I gave up visiting Father Castel, and, consequently, 
the Jesuits, amongst whom I knew no one but himself. Besides, the 
tyrannical and intriguing disposition of his colleagues, so different 
from the amiability of good Father Hemet, caused me to feel such an 
aversicn to their society, that, since then, I have never seen any of 
them except Father Berthier, whom I met two or three times at M. 
Dupin’s, together with whom he was working with all his might at 
the refutation of Montesquieu. 

Let me finish, once for all, what I still have to say concerning M. 
de Montaigu. I had told him, in the course of our disputes, that he 
did not want a secretary, but a lawyer’s clerk. He followed this ad- 
vice, and actually engaged, as my successor, a real attorney, who, in 
less than a year, robbed him of twenty or thirty thousand lures. He 
dismissed him, and had him imprisoned; discharged his gentlemen 
in a. manner that caused great scandal; quarrelled with everyone; 
put up with affronts that a lackey would not have endured; and at 
last, by his repeated acts of folly, succceded in getting himself re- 
called and sent into retirement in the country. Amongst the repri- 
mands which he received from the Court, his affair with me was ap- 
parently not forgotten. At any rate, shortly after his return, he sent 
his maitre d’hétel to me to settle my account and give me some 
money, which I sorely needed at the time, for my debts at Venice— 
debts of honour, if there ever were such—weighed heavily upon my 
mind. I seized the opportunity which was afforded me of discharg- 
ing them, together with Zanetto Nani’s bill. I took what was offered 
to me, paid all my debts, and, although this left me as penniless as 
before, I was relieved from a burden which had become-unendurable 
to me. Since then, I never heard a word about M. de Montaigu until 
his death, which I learned through the newspapers. Heaven rest the 
poor man! He was as fit for the trade of an ambassador as, in my 
youth, I had been for that of an attorney. However, it had only rested 


336 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


with him to have maintained himself honourably with my assist- 
ance, and to have ensured my speedy promotion in the position for 
which the Comte de Gouvon had designed me in my youth, and 
which, by my own exertions at a more advanced age, I had qualified 
myself to fulfil. 

The justice and uselessness of my complaints left in my mind the 
seeds of indignation against our foolish civil institutions, whereby 
the real welfare of the public and true justice are always sacrificed to 
an apparent order, which is in reality subversive of all order, and of 
which the only effect is, to bestow the sanction of public authority 
upon the oppression of the weak and the injustice of the strong. Two 
causes prevented these seeds from developing at that time, as they 
did afterwards. In the first place, it was a matter that concerned my- 
self: and private interest, which has never produced anything great 
or noble, cannot draw from my heart the divine flights which only 
the purest love of the just and the beautiful can produce; in the sec- 
ond place, the charm of friendship moderated and calmed my anger 
by the ascendency of a gentler feeling. At Venice I had made the ac- 
quaintance of a Biscayan, a friend of my friend Carrio, and a person 
who deserved the friendship of every honourable man. This amiable 
young man, endowed with every accomplishment and virtue, had 
just travelled through Italy in order to cultivate a taste for the fine 
arts, and, thinking that he had nothing further to learn, intended to 
return direct to his own country. I told him that the arts were merely 
the recreation of a genius like his, which was made to cultivate the 
sciences; and J advised him, in order to acquire a taste for these, to 
take a journey to Paris and stay there for six months. He believed 
what I said, and, on my arrival at Paris, I found him waiting for 
me. His apartments were too large for him; he offered'to share them 
with me, and I accepted. I found him full of enthusiasm for the 
higher branches of knowledge. Nothing was beyond his powers of 
comprehension; he devoured and digested everything with marvel- 
lous rapidity. How he thanked me for having provided him with 
this nourishment for his mind, which was tormented by a thirst after 
knowledge, without his being aware of it himself! What treasures of 
knowledge and virtue did I find in this vigorous soul! I felt that this 
was the friend I needed; we became intimate. Our tastes were not 


IGNACIO EMMANUEL DE ALTUNA 337 
e 


the same; we were always disputing. Both obstinate, we could never 
agree on a single subject. Notwithstanding, we were unable to sepa- 
rate; and, although we perpetually contradicted each other, neither 
of us would have wished the other to be different. 

Ignacio Emmanuel de Altuna was one of those rare individuals, 
whom Spain alone produces, too seldom for her own glory. He was 
not a man of the violent national passions common to his country- 
men; the idea of revenge was as far from his mind as the desire of 
it from his heart. He was too proud to be vindictive, and I have often 
heard him say, with great sang-froid, that no living man could of- 
fend him. He was gallant without being tender; he played with 
women as if they had been pretty children; he amused himself with 
his friends’ mistresses, but I never knew him to have one himself or 
even to desire it. The flames of the virtue which consumed his heart 
never suffered the passions of desire to become excited. 

After his travels, he married, died young, and left children; and I 
am as convinced as I am of my own conscience, that his wife was the 
first and only woman with whom he enjoyed the pleasures of love. 
Outwardly, he was devout, like a Spaniard; in his heart he had the 
piety of an angel. With the exception of myself, he is the only toler- 
ant person I have ever seen in my life. He never asked anyone what 
his religious views were. It made little difference to him whether his 
friend was a Jew, Protestant, Turk, bigot, or atheist, provided he was 
an honest man. Obstinate and headstrong in matters of little im- 
portance, the moment religion, or even morality, became the subject 
of discussion, he drew back, held his tongue, or simply said, “I have 
only myself to answer for.” It is incredible that so elevated a mind 
could be associated with an attention to detail carried to minuteness. 
He divided and settled in advance the occupations of his day, by 
hours, quarters, and minutes, and he adhered so scrupulously to this 
arrangement, that, if the hour struck while he was in the middle of 
a sentence, he would have shut the book without finishing it. Each 
of these portions of time, thus broken up, was set apart for a different 
occupation; reflection, conversation, divine service, Locke, telling his 
beads, visiting, music, painting; no pleasure, temptation, or desire 
to oblige, was permitted to interrupt this arrangement; only a duty 
to be fulfilled could have done so. When he gave me the list of his 


338 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


distribution of time, in order that I might follow it, I began by 
laughing, and ended with tears of admiration. He never bored 
others, or suffered them to bore him; he was somewhat abrupt with 
those who, out of politeness, attempted to do so. He was hot-tem- 
pered, but not sulky. I have often seen him in a passion, but never 
angry. Nothing could be more cheerful than his disposition. He 
knew how to make and take a joke; he was even brilliant in this 
respect, and had a talent for epigram. When anyone roused him, he 
was loud and noisy, and his voice could be heard at a distance; but, 
whilst he exclaimed loudly, one could see him smile, and, in the 
midst of his excitement, he would utter some pleasantry, which 
made everyone burst out laughing. He had neither the phlegmatic 
disposition nor the complexion of a Spaniard. His skin was white, 
his cheeks ruddy, his hair light brown, almost fair. He was tall and 
well-built; his body was a worthy habitation for his soul. 

This man, wise in heart as in understanding, was a man of the 
world, and was my friend. This is my only answer to those who are 
not. We became so intimate, that we formed the intention of spend- 
ing our lives together. It was agreed that, in a few years, I should go 
and live with him on his estate at Ascoytia. All the details of this 
plan were arranged between us the day before he left. Nothing was 
wanting, except that which does not depend upon men in the best- 
concerted plans. Later events, my misfortunes, his marriage, and, 
lastly, his death, separated us for ever. One would feel inclined to 
say, that only the dark schemes of the wicked succeed; that the in- 
nocent projects of the good are hardly ever fulfilled. 

Having felt the inconvenience of dependence, I firmly resolved 
never to expose myself to it again. Having seen the ambitious proj- 
ects, which circumstances had caused me to form, overthrown 
almost at their birth, discouraged from again entering the career, 
which I had begun so successfully, and from which, notwithstand- 
ing, I had just been driven, I resolved never to attach myself to any- 
one again, but to remain independent, by making the best use of my 
talents, the extent of which I was at last beginning to appreciate, and 
of which I had hitherto entertained too modest an opinion. I re- 
sumed work at my opera, which had been discontinued owing to my 
journey to Venice, and in order to devote myself to it with less inter- 


&lt; 


THEBESE LE VASSEUR 339 


ruption, after Altuna’s departure, I returned to my old lodgings at 
the Hotel St. Quentin, which was situated in an unfrequented 
quarter of the city, close to the Luxembourg, and was better suited: 
for quiet work than the noisy Rue St. Honoré. There, the only real 
consolation, which Heaven has afforded me in my misery, and 
which alone renders it endurable, awaited me. As this is no passing 
acquaintance, I must enter in some detail upon the manner in which 
it was formed. 

We had a new landlady, who came from Orleans. To help her 
with the linen, she had a young girl from her native place, about 
twenty-two or twenty-three years of age, who, like the landlady, took 
her meals with us. This girl, whose name was Thérése le Vasseur, 
was of respectable family, her father being an official at the Orleans 
mint, and her mother engaged in business. The family was a large 
one, and, as the mint stopped working, the father found himself 
without resources, while the mother, who had become bankrupt, 
managed her affairs badly, gave up business, and came to Paris with 
her husband and daughter, who, by her own exertions, supported 
all three. 

The first time I saw this girl appear at table, I was struck by her 
modest behaviour, and, still more, by her lively and gentle looks, 
which, in my eyes, at that time appeared incomparable. The com- 
pany at table, besides M. de Bonnefond, consisted of several Irish 
priests, Gascons, and others of the same description. Our hostess 
herself had led an irregular life. I was the only person who spoke and 
behaved decently. They teased the girl, I took her part, and im- 
mediately their railleries were turned against me: Even if I had not 
felt naturally inclined towards this poor girl, a feeling of compassion, 
even of opposition, would have aroused my sympathy. I have always 
admired decency in words and manners, especially in the opposite 
sex. I openly avowed’ myself her champion. I saw that she was 
touched by my sympathy, and her looks, enlivened by gratitude 
which she dared not express, were thereby rendered more eloquent. 

She was very bashful, and so was I. The intimacy, which this 
similarity of disposition seemed to keep at a distance, was, however, 
very speedily formed. The landlady, who perceived it, became furi- 
ous, and her brutal behaviour gained me greater favour with the 


340 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


little one, who, having no one in the house except myself to help her, 
was grieved to see me go out, and sighed for her protector’s return. 
The relation of our hearts, and the similarity of our disposition, 
soon exercised their usual effect. She thought that she saw in me an 
honourable man, and she was not mistaken. I thought that I saw in 
her a feeling, simple girl, free from coquetry, and I was not de- 
ceived either. I declared to her beforehand that I would never for- 
sake her, but that I would never marry her. Love, esteem, and simple 
sincerity secured my triumph, and it was because her heart was 
tender and virtuous, that I was happy without being too audacious. 

Her fear that it would annoy me not to find in her that which 
she believed I expected, delayed my happiness more than anything 
else. I saw that she was disturbed and confused before she gave 
herself up to me, anxious to make herself understood, and yet afraid 
to explain herself. Far from suspecting the real cause of her em- 
barrassment, I quite wrongly attributed it to another, the idea of 
which was highly insulting to her character. Believing that she in- 
tended me to understand that my health might be endangered, I was 
greatly perplexed, and, although this did not restrain my feelings, 
for several days it poisoned my happiness. As neither of us under- 
stood the other, our conversations on the subject were so many 
riddles and ridiculous misunderstandings. She was inclined to be- 
lieve that I was utterly mad, and I hardly knew what to think of 
her. At last we came to an explanation. She confessed to me with 
tears that she had once misconducted herself in the early years of her 
womanhood, when a cunning seducer had taken advantage of her 
ignorance. As soon as I understood her, I uttered a cry of joy. “Vir- 
ginity!” I cried; “Paris is the right place, twenty is the right age to 
look for it! Ah, my Thérése! I am only too happy to possess you, 
modest and healthy, and not to find what I never looked for.” 

At first I had only sought amusement; I now saw that I had 
found more and gained a companion. A little intimacy with this 
excellent girl, a little reflection upon my situation, made me feel 
that, while thinking only of my pleasures, I had done much to pro- 
mote my happiness. To supply the place of my extinguished ambi- 
tion, I needed a lively sentiment which should take complete pos- 
session of my heart. In a word, I needed a successor to mamma. As 


CHARACTER OF THERESE 341 


I should never live with her again, I wanted someone to live with 
her pupil, in whom I might find the simplicity and docility of heart 
which she had found in me. I felt it necessary that the géntle tran- &lt; 
quillity of private and domestic life should make up to me for the 
loss of the brilliant career which I was renouncing. When I was 
quite alone, I felt a void in my heart, which it only needed another 
heart to fill. Destiny had deprived me of, or, at least in part, alienated 
me from, that heart for which Nature had formed me. From that 
moment J was alone; for with me it has always been everything or 
nothing. I found in Thérése the substitute that I needed. Thanks to 
her, I lived happily, as far as the course of events permitted. At first 
I tried to improve her mind, but my efforts were useless. Her mind 
is what Nature has made it; culture and teaching are without influ- 
ence upon it. I am not ashamed to confess that she has never learnt 
how to read properly, although she can write fairly well. When I 
went to live in the Rue Neuve-des-Petits‘Champs, opposite my win- 
dows, at the Hôtel de Pontchartrain there was a clock. For more 
than a month I did my utmost to teach her how to tell the time by 
it, but, even now, she can hardly do so. She has never been able to 
give the names of the twelve months of the year in correct order, and 
does not know a single figure, in spite of all the trouble I have 
taken to teach her. She can neither count money nor reckon the price 
of anything. The words which she uses in speaking are often the 
very opposite of those which she means. I once made a dictionary of 
the phrases she used, to amuse Madame de Luxembourg, and her 
absurd mistakes have become famous in the society in which I lived. 
But this person, so limited in understanding—so stupid, if you will 
—is a most excellent adviser in cases of difficulty. Frequently, in 
‘Switzerland, in England, and in France, at the time of the misfor- 
tunes which befell me, she saw what I did not see myself, gave me 
the best advice to follow, rescued me from dangers into which I was 
rushing blindly, and, in the presence of ladies of the highest rank, 
of princes and the great ones of the world, her opinions, her good 
sense, her answers, and her behaviour have gained for her the esteem 
of all, and for me, compliments upon her good qualities which I felt 
‘convinced were sincere. 

When we are with those we love, sentiment nourishes the mind 


+ 
342 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


as well as the heart, and we have little need to search for ideas else- 
where. I lived with my Thérèse as pleasantly as with the most bril- 
liant genius in the world. Her mother, who prided herself on having 
been formerly brought up with the Marquise de Monpipeau, tried to 
play the wit, and wanted to undertake the mental guidance of her 
daughter, and, by her craftiness, spoiled the simplicity of our inter- 
course. The annoyance which her importunity caused me made me, 
in some degree, get over the foolish shame, which prevented me 
from venturing to show myself with Thérése in public, and we took 
little walks together in the country, where we had little collations 
which were delightful to me. I saw that she loved me sincerely, and 
this increased my affection for her. This sweet intimacy made up for 
everything. I no longer felt any concern about the future, or, at least, 
I only thought of it as a prolongation of the present. I only desired 
to make sure that it would last. 

This attachment rendered all other recreation superfluous and in- 
sipid. I never went out except to visit Thérèse; her place of abode 
became almost my own. This retired life proved so favourable to my 
work that, in less than three months, my opera, words and music, 
was finished, and nothing remained to be added, except some ac- 
companiments and a few tenor notes.” This drudgery wearied me 
exceedingly. I proposed to Philidor to undertake it in return for a 
share of the profits. He came twice and put in a few notes in the act 
of “Ovid”; but he was unable to tie himself to a task which required 
such unremitting application, on the chance of remote and even 
doubtful profit. He did not come again, and I finished my task my- 
self. ; 

My opera being ready, the next thing was to make some money 
by it, which was a far more difficult task. It is impossible for a man 
who lives a solitary life to succeed in Paris. I thought of making my 
way with the aid of M. de la Popliniére, to whom I had been intro- 
duced by Gauffecourt on my return from Geneva. M. de la Popli- 
nière was the Maecenas of Rameau; Madame de la Popliniére was 
his most humble pupil; Rameau was completely master in that 
house. Supposing that he would be glad to give his support to the 
work of one of his disciples, I wanted to show him mine. He re- 


2 Remplissages: the parts between bass and treble. 


PERFORMANCE OF HIS OPERA 343 


fused to look at it, saying that he could not read scores; it was toa 
fatiguing. La Popliniére suggested that it might be possible to get 
him to listen to it, and offered to get an orchestra together to perform 
selections. I desired nothing better. Rameau grumblingly consented, 
repeating incessantly that the composition of a man, who had not 
been brought up to the profession, and who had learnt music entirely 
by himself, must be something fine. I hastened to copy out in parts 
five or six of the best passages. I had about ten instrumentalists, 
Albert, Bérard, and Mademoiselle Bourdonnais being the vocalists. 
As soon as the overture commenced, Rameau, by his extravagant 
praises, intended to make it understood that the work could not 
be my own composition. He exhibited signs of impatience at every 
passage; but, after a counter-tenor song, the execution of which was 
robust and powerful, and the accompaniment brilliant, he could no 
longer contain himself; he addressed me with a brutality which gave 
universal offence, and declared that part of what he had just heard 
was the work of a consummate master of the art, while the rest was 
by an ignorant fellow, who did not even understand music. It is true 
that my work, uneven and irregular, was sometimes sublime and 
sometimes insipid, as must be the work of everyone who only ele- 
vates himself by flashes of genius, without the support of scientific 
training. Rameau declared that he saw in me only a contemptible 
plagiarist, without talent or taste. The company present, and particu- 
larly the master of the house, thought differently. M. de Richelieu, 
who at that time, as is well known, was a frequent visitor, heard of 
my work and wished to hear the whole of it played, intending, if it 
pleased him, to have it performed at Court. It was performed with 
full chorus and orchestra, at the King’s expense, at the house of M. 
Bonneval, manager of the Court amusements.”” Francceur directed 
the performance, and the effect was surprising. The Duke was never 
tired of loudly expressing his approval; and, at the end of a chorus 
in the act of “Tasso,” he got up from his seat, came over to me, 
shook me cordially by the hand, and said, “M. Rousseau, that is a 
delightful harmony! I have never heard anything finer; I will have 
it performed at Versailles.” Madame de la Popliniére, who was prese 


X Intendant des menus (plaisirs): lit. Manager of the expenses connected with 
Court ceremonies, festivals, and theatrical and other performances. 


344 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ent, did not say a word. Rameau, although invited, had refused to 
come. The next day Madame de la Popliniére received me very un- 
graciously at her toilette, pretended to depreciate my work, and told 
me that, although a little false glitter had dazzled M. de Richelieu at 
first, he had recovered himself, and she advised me not to build any 
hopes upon my opera. The Duke arrived shortly afterwards, and 
spoke to me in quite a different tone, flattered me upon my talents, 
and seemed still disposed to get my work performed before the 
King. “Only the act of “Tasso’ would not be permitted at Court,” 
said he; “you must write another instead of it.” These words alone 
were enough to make me go and shut myself up in my room; and 
in three weeks I had composed another act in place of “Tasso,” the 
theme of which was “Hesiod inspired by one of the Muses.” I 
found means to introduce into the act part of the history of the 
developments of my talents and of the jealousy with which Rameau 
had been pleased to honour them. In the new act, the flight was less 
gigantic and better sustained than in “Tasso.” The music was 
equally grand and the composition far superior, and, if the other 
two acts had been equal to this, the whole piece might have been rep- 
resented with success; but, while I was putting the last touches 
upon it, another undertaking interrupted its execution. 
[1745-1747.]—During the winter after the battle of Fontenoy, 
several fêtes took place at Versailles, and several operas were per- 
formed at the Théatre des Petites-Ecuries. Amongst these was Vol- 
taire’s drama, La Princesse de Navarre, set to music by Rameau, 
which had just been revised and the title changed to Les Fétes de 
Ramire. This change of subject rendered several alterations neces- 
sary in the divertissements, both in the words and music. The 
question was, to find someone capable of performing this two-fold 
task. Voltaire and Rameau being in Lorraine, where they were both 
engaged on the opera of Le Temple de la Gloire, and consequently 
unable to give their attention to it, M. de Richelieu thought of me, 
and proposed to me that I should undertake the task; and, in order 
that I should be better able to judge what there was to be done, 
sent me the poem and the music separately. Before all, I was unwill- 
ing to touch the words without the author’s consent, and I wrote to 


* The incidental songs and dances. 


LETTER FROM VOLTAIRE 345 


him on the subject a very polite and even respectful letter, as was 
only proper, and received the following answer, the original of 
which is to be found in the packet of papers, docketed A, No. 1: 


TE f i “December 15th, 1745. 

Sir,—Two accomplishments, which have hitherto always been 
separate, are united in you. These are two good reasons why I 
should esteem and endeavour to love you. I am sorry, for your own 
sake, that you should employ these accomplishments upon a work 
which is none too worthy of you. Some months ago, M. de Richelieu 
gave me strict orders to compose, at a moment’s notice, a trifling 
and poor sketch of some insipid and unfinished scenes, which were 
to be adapted to divertissements utterly unsuited to them. I obeyed 
most scrupulously. I worked very rapidly and very badly. I sent the 
miserable skit to M. de Richelieu, feeling sure that he would not 
make use of it, or that I should have to correct it. Happily it is in 
your hands; you may do exactly what you please with it; I have 
entirely put it out of my sight. I have no doubt that you have cor- 
rected all the errors which must have occurred in the hasty compo- 
sition of a simple sketch, and that you have filled in all that was 
wanting. 

“I remember that, amongst other stupid blunders, I have forgot- 
ten to explain, in the scenes which connect the divertissements, how 
the Princess Grenadine is suddenly transported from a prison into 
a garden or palace. As it is not a magician, but a Spanish nobleman, 
who gives the festival in her honour, it seems to me that nothing 
ought to take place by enchantment. I beg you, Sir, to look at this 
passage again, of which I have only a confused idea. See if it is neces- 
sary that the prison should open, and our princess be conducted from 
it to a beautiful gilded and varnished palace, already prepared for 
her. I know that all this is very wretched stuff, and that it is beneath 
the dignity of a thinking being to make a serious business of such 
trifles; but, since it is our duty to displease as little as possible, we 
must employ as much reason as we are able, even upon a miserable 
opera divertissement. 

“T entirely depend upon you and M. Ballod, and I trust soon to 
have the honour of thanking you, and of assuring you, Sir, how I 


have the honour to be,” &amp;c. &amp;c. 


There is nothing to cause surprise in the excessive politeness of 
this letter, compared with the almost rude tone of those which I have 


346 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


since then received from him. He thought that I was high in favour 
with M. de Richelieu, and his well-known courtly suppleness obliged 
him to show great politeness towards a newcomer, until he had be- 
come better acquainted with the measure of his importance. 

“Authorised by M. de Voltaire, and relieved from considering 
Rameau at all in the matter, since his only object was to injure me, 
I set to work, and in two months my task was executed. The poetry 
was a mere trifle; my only endeavour was to prevent the difference 
of style being noticed, and I was presumptuous enough to believe 
that I was successful. The music cost me more time and labour; be- 
sides being obliged to compose several introductory pieces, amongst 
others the overture, the whole of the recitative, which devolved 
upon me, presented very great difficulties, since I was obliged to con- 
nect, often in a few lines, and by means of very rapid modulations, 
symphonies and choruses in very different keys; for, in order that 
Rameau might not be able to accuse me of having spoilt his airs, I 
was determined not to alter or transpose a single one. The recitative 
was a success. It was well accented, full of vigour, and above all, ad- 
mirably modulated. The idea of the two great men, with whom I 
had the honour to be thus associated, had elevated my genius, and 
I can say that, in this thankless and inglorious task, of which the 
public could not even be informed, I nearly always kept myself up to 
the level of my models. 

The piece, as revised by me, was rehearsed at the grand theatre 
of the Opera. Of the three authors I alone was present. Voltaire was 
away from Paris, and Rameau either did not come, or kept himself 


hidden. 


The words of the first monologue were very melancholy. It began 
as follows: 


“O mort! viens terminer les malheurs de ma vie.” 


I had been obliged to set it to appropriate music; and yet it was just 
this upon which Madame de la Popliniére founded her criticism, and 
accused me, with considerable bitterness, of having composed a 
funeral anthem. M. de Richelieu judiciously began by inquiring who 
had written the words of the monologue. I showed him the manu- 
rcript which he had sent me, which proved that it was Voltaire. 


JEALOUSY OF RAMEAU 347 


“In that case,” said he, “Voltaire alone is to blame.” During the 
rehearsal, all my work was disapproved of by Madame de la Pop- 
liniére, and defended by M. de Richelieu. But in the end I found the 
opposition too strong, and it was notified to me, that I should have 
to make several alterations in my work, in regard to which it would 
be necessary to consult M. Rameau. Deeply grieved at such a result, 
instead of the praise which I had expected and certainly deserved, I 
returned home heart-broken. Worn out with fatigue, and consumed 
by grief, I fell ill, and for six weeks I was unable to leave my room. 

Rameau, who was commissioned to make the alterations indi- 
cated by Madame de la Popliniére, sent to ask me for the overture 
of my great opera, in order to substitute it for that which I had just 
composed. Luckily, I perceived the trick and refused. As there were 
only four or five days before the representation, he had no time to 
compose a fresh overture, and was obliged to leave mine as it was. 
It was in the Italian style, at that time quite unknown in France. 
Nevertheless, it gave satisfaction and I heard, through M. de Val- 
malette, the King’s maitre d'hôtel, the son-in-law of M. Mussard, a 
relative and friend of mine, that musical enthusiasts had expressed 
themselves well satisfied with my work, and that the general public 
had not been able to distinguish it from Rameau’s. But the latter, in 
concert with Madame de la Popliniére, took measures to prevent 
anyone from knowing that I had anything at all to do with it. On the 
books of the words, which were distributed amongst the spectators, 
and in which the authors’ names are always given, Voltaire alone 
was mentioned. Rameau preferred the suppression of his own name 
to seeing mine associated with it. 

As soon as I was able to go out, I resolved to call upon M. de 
Richelieu. It was too late; he had just set out for Dunkirk, where he 
was to direct the embarkation of the troops for Scotland. When he 
returned, in order to justify my idleness, I said to myself that it was 
too late. As I never saw him again, I lost the honour which my work 
deserved, and the fee which it ought to have brought me; while I 
never received the least return, or rather compensation for my time, 
my trouble, my vexation, my illness, and the expense which it en- 
tailed. Nevertheless, I have always thought that M. de Richelieu 
was himself well-disposed towards me, and entertained a favourable 


348 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


opinion of my abilities; but my iH-luck and Madame de la Popliniére 
combined prevented him from giving effect to his goodwill. 

I was quite unable to understand the dislike with which I was 
regarded by this woman, whom I had done my utmost to please, and 
to whom I paid court regularly. Gauffecourt explained the reasons 
for it. “In the first place,” said he, “her friendship for Rameau, 
whose avowed patroness she is, and who will brook no rival; and, in 
the second place, an original sin, which condemns you in her eyes, 
and which she will never forgive—the fact that you are a Genevese.” 
In regard to this, he told me that the Abbé Hubert, who also came 
from Geneva, and was the sincere friend of M. de la Popliniére, 
had done his utmost to prevent him from marrying this woman, 
whose character he knew well, and that, after the marriage, she had 
sworn implacable hatred against him and all the Genevese as well. 
“Although M. de la Popliniére is well-disposed towards you,” he 
added—“this I know to be a fact—do not reckon upon his support. 
He is very fond of his wife; she hates you; she is mischievous and 
cunning. You will never do any good in that house.” I took the hint. 

The same Gauffecourt also rendered me a very essential service 
about this time. I had just lost my worthy father; he was about sixty 
years of age. I did not feel this loss as keenly as I should have done at 
another time, when. the difficulties of my situation occupied my at- 
tention less. During his lifetime, I had never attempted to claim the 
remainder of my mother’s property, and had allowed him to draw 
the trifling interest it produced. After his death, I no longer felt any 
scruples about the matter, but the want of legal proof of my brother’s 
death caused a difficulty which Gauffecourt undertook to remove, 
and did so, with the aid of the good offices of De Lolme, the advo- 
cate. As I had pressing need of this small addition to my finances, 
and the result was so uncertain, I waited for definite information 
with the liveliest impatience. 

One evening, on entering my lodgings, I found the letter which 
was bound to contain it; I took it up, in order to open it, with an 
impatient trembling, of which I inwardly felt ashamed. “What!” 
said I contemptuously to myself, “shall Jean Jacques suffer himself 
to be overcome by self-interest and curiosity?” I immediately put 
back the letter on the mantelpiece, undressed, went quietly to bed, 


CONDUCT ©F THERESE’S FAMILY 349 


slept better than usual, and got up rather late the next day, without 
thinking any more about my letter. While dressing, I caught sight 
of it, opened it leisurely, and found a bill of exchange inside. Many 
pleasant feelings entered my mind at once; but the liveliest of all was 
the consciousness of my victory over myself. I could mention a num- 
ber of similar instances in the course of my life, but I am too pressed 
for time to relate everything. I sent a little of the money to poor 
mamma, regretting with tears the happy time when I should have 
laid the whole at her feet. All her letters showed signs of her dis- 
tress. She sent me heaps of recipes and secret remedies, which she 
declared would make my fortune and her own. Already the thought 
of her wretchedness contracted her heart and narrowed her mind. 
The small sum which I was able to send her fell into the hands of the 
rascals by whom she was surrounded. She derived no benefit from 
anything. I was disgusted at the idea of sharing what I myself sorely 
needed with these wretches, especially after the fruitless attempts 
which I made to get her out of their hands, as will be afterwards 
related. 

Time slipped away, and the money with it. We were two, even 
four in number, or, to speak more correctly, seven or eight; for, 
although Thérèse was disinterested to a degree almost unexampled, 
her mother was by no means the same. As soon as she found herself 
somewhat improved in circumstances—thanks to my attention—she 
sent for her whole family to share the fruits of it. Sisters, sons, daugh- 
ters, grand-daughters—all came, with the exception of her eldest 
daughter, who was married to the manager of the carriage service at 
Angers. All that I did for Thérése was turned by her mother to the 
benefit of these starvelings. As I had not to do with a covetous per- 
son, and was not under the influence of a foolish passion, I com- 
mitted no follies. Content to keep Thérése decently, but without 
luxury, protected against pressing needs, I consented to her handing 
over to her mother all that she was able to earn by her own exertions, 
nor did I limit myself to that; but, by a fatality which always pur- 
sued me, while mamma was plundered by the rascals who sur- 
rounded her, Thérése was preyed upon by her family, and I could 
render no assistance in either case which benefited her for whom it 
was intended. It was curious that Madame le Vasseur’s youngest 


350 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


child—the only one who had not received a marriage portion—was 
the only one who supported her father and mother, and that, after 
having long endured the blows of her brothers and sisters, and even 
of her nieces, this poor girl was now plundered by them, without 
being able to offer a better resistance to their thefts than formerly 
to their blows. Only one of her nieces, named Goton Leduc, was of a 
tolerably amiable and gentle disposition, although she was spoiled 
by the example and lessons of the others. As I frequently saw them 
together I gave them the names which they gave to each other. I 
called the niece my niece, and the aunt my aunt, and both called me 
uncle. Hence the name of “aunt” by which I continued to call Thé- 
rése, and which my friends sometimes repeated by way of a joke. 

It will easily be understood that, in such a situation, I had not a 
moment to lose before attempting to extricate myself from it. Sup- 
posing that M. de Richelieu had forgotten me, and no longer ex- 
pecting anything from the Court, I made some attempts to get my 
opera accepted in Paris; but I encountered difficulties which it re- 
quired considerable time to overcome, and I became more hard 
pressed every day. I resolved to offer my little comedy of Narcisse to 
the Italian theatre. It was accepted, and I was given a free pass to 
the theatre, which pleased me greatly, but this was all. I could never 
get my piece performed, and at length, tired of paying court to 
comedians, I turned my back upon them. At length I had recourse to 
the last expedient which remained, and the only one which I ought 
to have adopted. While visiting at M. de la Popliniére’s house, I had 
kept away from M. Dupin’s. The two ladies, although related, were 
not on good terms, and never visited. There was no intercourse be- 
tween the two houses—Thieriot alone was at home in both. He was 
commissioned to endeavour to bring me back to M. Dupin. M. de 
Francueil at that time was studying natural history and chemistry. 
and was making a collection. I believe that his ambition was to be 
elected a member of the Academy of Sciences. With this object he 
wanted to write a book, and he thought that I might be useful tc 
him in this undertaking. Madame Dupin, who also contemplated &lt; 
book, had almost similar views in regard to me. They would have 
liked to engage me as a kind of secretary, to be shared betweer 
them; and this was the object of Thieriot’s exhortations. I required 


E ae : 
FAILURE OF “LES MUSES GALANTES”’ 351 
b 


as a preliminary, that M. de Francueil should employ his own and 
Jelyote’s influence to get my piece rehearsed at the opera. He con- 
sented. The Muses galantes was at first rehearsed several times at the 
Magasin,” and afterwards at the Grand Theatre. There was a large 
audience at the general rehearsal, and several pieces were warmly ap- 
plauded. Nevertheless, during the performance—very badly con- 
ducted by Rebel felt myself that the piece would not be accepted, 
and, indeed, that it could not be presented to the public without great 
alterations. Accordingly I withdrew it without saying a word, and 
without exposing myself to the risk of rejection; but I clearly saw, 
from several indications, that, even if the work had been perfect, 
it would not have passed. M. de Francueil had certainly promised 
to get it rehearsed, not to secure its acceptance. He scrupulously kept 
his word. I have always fancied, on this and several other occasions, 
that neither he nor Madame Dupin were particularly anxious that I 
should acquire a certain reputation in the world, perhaps for fear 
that, when their own works appeared, it might be supposed that they 
had grafted their talents upon mine. However, as Madame Dupin 
had always entertained a very moderate idea of my abilities, and 
never employed me except to write at her dictation, or to undertake 
purely learned researches, this reproach, especially as far as she was 
concerned, might have been unjust. 

[1747-1749.|—This last failure completely di dale me. I 
abandoned every prospect of fame and promotion; and, without 
thinking further of my real or fancied talents, which were of such 
little service to me, I devoted my time and trouble to providing for 
the support of myself and my dear Thérése, in a manner which 
might be agreeable to those who undertook to assist me in doing 
so. I accordingly attached myself entirely to Madame Dupin and 
M. de Francueil. This did not place me in a very affluent position, for 
the 800 or goo francs which I received for the first two years was 
hardly sufficient for my most pressing needs, as I was obliged to rent 
a furnished room in their neighbourhood, in a somewhat expensive 
quarter, and to pay for another lodging quite at the other end of 
Paris, at the top of the Rue Saint-Jacques, where I went nearly every 


2 The place where the theatrical decorations, costumes, and accessories were 


kept. 


352 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


evening to supper, whatever the state of the weather might be. I 
soon got into the way of my new occupation, and even began to 
like it. I became interested in chemistry, and went through several 
courses at M. Rouelle’s, together with M. de Francueil, and we pro- 
ceeded, to the best of our ability, to fill quires of paper with our scrib- 
blings upon this science, of which we scarcely knew the elements. 
In 1747 we went to spend the autumn in Touraine, at the Chateau 
of Chenonceaux, a Royal mansion upon the Cher, built by Henri II. 
for Diana of Poitiers, whose monogram may still be seen there, and 
‘which is now in the possession of M. Dupin, a farmer-general. We 
enjoyed ourselves greatly in this beautiful place; we lived well, and I 
became as fat as a monk. We had a good deal of music. I composed 
several trios, full of vigour and harmony, of which I shall perhaps 
speak in my supplement, if I ever write one. We played comedies. 
I wrote one, in three acts, entitled Engagement téméraire, which 
will be found amongst my papers, and has no other merit than that 
of great liveliness. I also composed some other trifles, amongst them 
a piece in verse, called.’ Allée de Sylvie, from a walk in the park, on 
the banks of the Cher. This did not, however, interrupt my chemi- 
cal studies, or the work which I was doing for Madame Dupin. 
While I was growing fat at Chenonceaux, my poor Thérése was 
increasing in size at Paris for another reason; and, on my return, I 
found the work which I had commenced in a more forward condi- 
tion than I had expected. Considering my position, this would have 
thrown me into the greatest embarrassment, had not some table com- 
panions furnished me with the only means of getting out of the dif- 
culty. This is one of those essential pieces of information which I can- 
not give with too much simplicity, because, if I were to offer any 
explanation, I should be obliged either to excuse or to inculpate my- 
self, and in this place I ought not to do either the one or the other. 
During Altuna’s stay at Paris, instead of going to an eating-house, 
we usually took our meals in our neighbourhood, nearly opposite 
the cul-de-sac of the Opera, at the house of one Madame la Selle, a 
tailor’s wife, whose dinners were indifferent, but her table was 
always in request, on account of the good and respectable company 
which resorted there; no one was admitted unless he was known, 
and it was necessary to be introduced by one of the regular guests. 


` 


THE HOUSE OF MADAME LA SELLE 353 


Commandeur de Graville, an old rake, full of wit and politeness, 
but filthy in his language, lodged there, and attracted a jovial and 
brilliant company of young officers in the guards and musketeers; 
Commandeur de Nonant, protector of all the girls employed at the 
Opera, daily brought all the news from that haunt of vice; M. Du- 
plessis, a retired lieutenant-colonel, a good and respectable old man; 
and Ancelet,°° an officer in the musketeers, maintained a certain 
amount of order amongst these young people. The house was also 
frequented by merchants, financiers, and purveyors, but polite and 
honourable men, distinguished in their profession, M. de Besse, M. 
de Forcade, and others whose names I have forgotten. In short, good 
company of all classes was to be met there, with the exception of 
abbés and lawyers, whom I never saw there, and it was agreed that 
members of those professions were never to be introduced. The 
company, fairly numerous, was very gay without being noisy, and 
many broad stories were told, which, however, were free from vul- 
garity. Old de Graville, with all his risky stories, never lost his old- 
fashioned courtly politeness, and no indecency ever escaped his lips 
which was not so witty that any woman would have pardoned it. 
He gave the tone to the whole table; all these young people related 
their adventures of gallantry with equal freedom and grace; and 
there was no lack of stories of girls, as there was a stock of them 
close at hand, since the passage leading to Madame la Selle’s house 
also led to the shop of Madame Duchapt, a famous dressmaker, who 
at the time employed some very pretty girls, with whom our gentle- 
men used to go and chat before or after dinner. I should have 
amused myself like the rest, if I had been bolder. I only needed to 


3 Tt was to this Ancelet that I gave a little comedy of mine, entitled Les Prison- 
niers de Guerre, which I had written after the disasters of the French in Bavaria 
and Bohemia, but which I never ventured to show or acknowledge, for the singu- 
lar reason that the King, France, and the French people have perhaps never been 
more highly or sincerely praised than in this piece; and, avowed Republican and 
censurer of the Government as I was, I did not dare to confess myself the panegy- 
rist of a nation, whose principles were all exactly the opposite of my own. More 
grieved at the misfortunes of France than even the French themselves, I was 
afraid of being taxed with flattery and cowardice, on account of the expressions 
of sincere attachment, the date and origin of which I have mentioned in the first 
part of this work, and which I was ashamed to make public. 


354 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


go in as they did, but I never ventured. As for Madame de la Selle, 
I often went to dine at her house after Altuna had left. I there heard 
a number of amusing anecdotes, and also gradually adopted, thank 
Heaven! not the morals, but the principles which I found established. 
Honourable people. injured, husbands deceived, women seduced, 
secret accouchements, these were the most ordinary topics; and he 
who contributed most to the population of the Foundling Hospital 
was always most applauded. I caught the infection; I formed my 
manner of thinking upon that which I saw prevalent amongst very 
amiable and, in the main, very honourable people. I said to myself, 
“Since it is the custom of the country, one who lives here may follow 
t.” Here was the expedient for which I was looking. I cheerfully 
resolved to adopt it, without the least scruples on my own part; I 
only had to overcome those of Thérèse, with whom I had the great- 
est trouble in the world to persuade her to adopt the only means 
of saving her honour. Her mother, who, in addition, was afraid of 
this new embarrassment in the shape of a number of brats, sup- 
ported me, and Thérèse at last yielded. We chose a discreet and safe 
midwife, one Mademoiselle Gouin, who lived at the Pointe Saint- 
Eustache, to take care of this precious charge; and when the time 
came, Thérése was taken to her house by her mother for her ac- 
couchement. I went to see her several times, and tock her a mono- 
gram, which I had written on two cards, one of which was placed 
‘in the child’s swaddling clothes, after which it was deposited by 
the midwife in the office of the hospital in the usual manner. The 
following year the same inconvenience was remedied by the same 
expedient, with the exception of the monogram, which was forgot- 
ten. On my side there was no more reflection, no greater approval 
on the mother’s; she obeyed with a sigh. Later, all the vicissitudes 
which this fatal conduct produced in my manner of thinking, as well 
as in my destiny, will become apparent; for the present, let us keep 
to this first period. Its consequences, as cruel as they were unfore- 
seen, will force me to return to it only too frequently. 

Here I will mention my first acquaintance with Madame d’Epi- 
nay, whose name will frequently recur in these Memoirs. Her 
maiden name was Mademoiselle d’Esclavelles, and she had gust mar- 
ried M. d’Epinay, son of M. de Lalive de Bellegarde, farmer-general. 


9, 
MADAME D EPINAY 355 


Her husband, like M. de Francueil, was musical. She also was mu- 
sical, and devotion to the art led to a great intimacy between the 
three. M. de Francueil introduced me to Madame d’Epinay, who &lt; 
sometimes invited me to supper. She was amiable, witty, and tal- 
ented, and certainly a very desirable acquaintance. But she had a 
friend, Mademoiselle d’Ette, who was supposed to be very spite- 
ful, and lived with the Chevalier de Valory, who did not enjoy a 
good reputation either. I believe that the society of these two people 
did harm to Madame d’Epinay, who, although of a very exacting 
disposition, was endowed by Nature with qualities admirably 
adapted to regulate or counterbalance its extravagances. M. de Fran- 
cueil partly inspired her with the friendship he himself entertained 
for me, and confessed his relations with her, which, for this reason, 
I would not speak of here, had they not become public property, 
and even reached the ears of M. d’Epinay himself. M. de Francueil 
made singular revelations to me concerning this lady, which she 
never mentioned to me herself, and of which she never thought I had 
been informed. I never opened, and never will open, my lips on the 
subject, to her or anyone else. All these confidential communications 
from one quarter and another rendered my situation very embar- 
rassing, especially with Madame de Francueil, who knew me suffi 
ciently well not to distrust me, although I was intimate with her 
rival. As well as I was able, I consoled this poor lady, whose husband 
certainly did not return the love which she felt for him. I listened 
to these three persons separately, and kept their secrets so faithfully, 
that not one of the three ever extracted from me any of the secrets 
of the other two, while at the same time I did not conceal from either 
of the women my attachment to her rival. Madame de Francueil, 
who wanted to make use of me in several ways, had to put up with a 
formal refusal, and Madame d’Epinay, who on one occasion wanted 
to intrust me with a letter for Francueil, not only met with a similar 
denial, but I plainly declared that, if she wanted to drive me from 
her house for ever, she had only to propose the same thing to me 
again. I must, however, do justice to Madame d’Epinay. Far from 
showing herself displeased with my conduct, she spoke in the highest 
terms of it to Francueil, and made me as welcome as ever. In this 
manner, amidst the stormy relations between these three persons, 


356 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


whom I had to manage most carefully, upon whom I in a manner 
depended, and to whom I was sincerely attached, I retained to the 
end their friendship, their esteem, and their confidence, while I 
behaved with gentleness and complaisance, but always with up- 
rightness and firmness. In spite of my awkwardness and stupidity, 
Madame d’Epinay would take me with her to the gaieties at La 
Chevrette, a château near Saint-Denis belonging to M. de Bellegarde. 
There was a stage there, on which performances were frequently 
given. A part was given to me, which I studied for six months with- 
_ out intermission, but when the piece was performed, I had to be 
prompted in it from beginning to end. After this trial, no more 
parts were offered to me. 

The acquaintance of Madame d’Epinay also procured me that of 
her step-sister, Mademoiselle de Bellegarde, who soon afterwards 
became Comtesse de Houdetot. When I first saw her, it was just 
before her marriage, and she conversed with me for a long time with 
that charming familiarity which is natural to her. I found her very 
amiable; but I was far from foreseeing that this young person would 
one day decide the destiny of my life, and was fated to drag me 
down, although innocently, into the abyss in which I find myself 
to-day. 

Although, since my return from Venice, I have not spoken of 
Diderot, or my friend Roguin, I had not neglected either, and with 
the former especially I had daily grown more and more intimate. 
He had a Nanette, just as I had a Thérèse: this was a further point of 
agreement between us. But the difference was, that my Thérése, who 
was at least as good-looking as his Nanette, was of a gentle disposi- 
tion and an amiable character, calculated to gain the attachment of 
an honourable man, while his Nanette, who was a regular shrew and 
a fish-fag, exhibited no redeeming qualities which could compen- 
sate, in the eyes of others, for her defective education. However, he 
married her, which was very praiseworthy, if he had promised to do 
so. As for myself, having made no promise of the kind, I was in no 
hurry to imitate him. 

I had also become connected with the Abbé de Condillac, who, 
like myself, was unknown in the literary world, but was destined 
to become what he is at the present day. I was, perhaps, the first who 


THE “DICTIONNAIRE ENCYCLOPÉDIQUE” 357 


discovered his abilities, and estimated him at his proper value. He - 
also seemed to have taken fancy to me; and while, shut up in my 
room in the Rue Jean-Saint-Denis, near the Opera, I was composing 
my act of Hestode, he sometimes dined with me #éte-d-téte, and we 
shared the expenses. He was at that time engaged upon his “Essai 
sur l’Origine des Connaissances humaines,” his first work. When 
it was finished, the difficulty was to find a bookseller to take it. The 
booksellers of Paris are always arrogant and hard towards a new 
author, and metaphysics, which was not much in fashion at the 
time, did not offer a very attractive subject. I spoke of Condillac 
and his work to Diderot, and introduced them to each other. They 
were made to suit each other, and did so. Diderot induced Durant 
the bookseller to accept the Abbé’s manuscript, and this great meta- 
physician received for his first book—and that almost as a favour— 
one hundred crowns, and even that he would perhaps not have re- 
ceived but for me. As we lived at a great distance from one another, 
we all three met once a week at the Palais-Royal, and dined together 
at the Hôtel du Panier Fleuri. These little weekly dinners must 
have been exceedingly agreeable to Diderot, for he, who nearly 
always failed to keep his other appointments, never missed one of 
them. On these occasions I drew up the plan of a periodical, to be 
called Le Persifleur, to be written by Diderot and myself alternately. 
I sketched the outlines of the first number, and in this manner be- 
came acquainted with D’Alembert, to whom Diderot had spoken of 
it. However, unforeseen events stopped the way, and the project fell 
into abeyance. 

These two authors had just undertaken the “Dictionnaire Ency- 
clopédique,” which at first was only intended to be a kind of trans- 
lation of Chambers’s, almost like that of James’s “Dictionary of 
Medicine,” which Diderot had just finished. The latter wanted to 
secure my assistance in this second enterprise, and proposed that J 
should undertake the musical part of it. I consented, and completed 
it very hastily and indifferently, in the three months which were 
allowed to myself, and all the other collaborators in the work. But 
I was the only one who was ready at the time appointed. I handed 
him my manuscript, which I had had copied by one of M. de Fran 
cueil’s lackeys, named Dupont, who wrote a very good hand, paying 


358 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


him ten crowns out of my own pocket, for which I have never been 
reimbursed. Diderot, on the part of the booksellers, promised me 
some remuneration, which neither of us ever mentioned again to the 
other. 

The undertaking was interrupted by his imprisonment. His 
“Pensées philosophiques” had brought upon him a certain amount 
of annoyance, which led to no further consequences. It was different 
with his “Lettre sur les Aveugles,” which contained nothing that 
deserved censure except a few personal allusions, at which Madame 
Dupré de Saint-Maur and M. de Réaumur took offence, and for 
which he was confined in the donjon of Vincennes. It is impossible 
to describe the anguish which my friend’s misfortune caused me. 
My melancholy imagination, which always exaggerates misfortune, 
became alarmed. I thought that he would be imprisoned for the 
rest of his life; I nearly went mad at the idea. I wrote to Madame 
de Pompadour, entreating her to procure his release, or to get me 
imprisoned with him. I received no answer to my letter; it was too 
unreasonable to produce any effect, and I cannot flatter myself that 
it contributed to the subsequent alleviation of the hardships of poor 
Diderot’s confinement. Had its severity continued without relaxa- 
tion, I believe that I should have died of despair at the foot of this 
accursed donjon. Besides, even if my letter produced but little effect, 
neither did I myself claim much merit for it, for I only mentioned 
it to one or two people, and never to Diderot himself. 


~e nee ad 


BOOK VIII 


[1749] 


I Have been obliged to pause at the end of the preceding book. With 
the present book commences, in its first origin, the long chain of my 
misfortunes. 

Having lived in two of the most brilliant houses in Paris, I had 
made some acquaintances, in spite of my want of tact; amongst 
others, at Madame Dupin’s, the young hereditary prince of Saxe- 
Gotha and Baron de Thun, his tutor; at M. de la Popliniére’s, M. Se- 
guy, a friend of Baron de Thun, who was known in the literary 
world by his beautiful edition of Rousseau.! The Baron invited M, 
Seguy and myself to spend a day or two at Fontenay-sous-Bois, 
where the Prince had a country house. We accepted the invitation. 
While passing Vincennes, I felt so distressed at the sight of the 
donjon, that the Baron perceived the effects of my emotion on my 
countenance. At supper the Prince spoke of Diderot’s confinement. 
The Baron, in order to make me speak, accused the prisoner of im- 
pudence, which I myself displayed by the impetuosity with which 
I defended him. This excess of zeal was excused in a man who was 
inspired by attachment to an unfortunate friend, and the conversa- 
tion took another turn. Two Germans, belonging to the Prince’s 
suite, were present: M. Kliipfel, a man of great ability, his chaplain, 
who afterwards supplanted the Baron, and became his tutor; and a 
young man named Grimm, who held the post of reader until he 
could find some other place, and whose modest equipment showed 
how urgent was his need for finding something of the kind. From 
that same evening, Klüpfel and myself formed an acquaintance 
which soon ripened into friendship. My acquaintance with M. 
Grimm did not advance so rapidly; he kept himself in the back- 


1 Jean Baptiste Rousseau, the poet. 
359 


360 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ground, and gave no signs of the boastfulness which he afterwards 
displayed when he became prosperous. At dinner the next day the 
conversation turned upon music; he spoke well upon the subject. 
I was delighted when I heard that he was able to accompany on the 
piano. After dinner, some music was sent for, and we amused our- 
selves for the rest of the day on the Prince’s piano. In this manner 
began that friendship, at first so pleasant to me, and in the end so 
fatal, of which, from this time forth, I shall have so much to say. 

On my return to Paris, I received the agreeable news that Diderot 
had been released from the donjon, and confined to the chateau and 
park of Vincennes on parole, with permission to see his friends. 
How painful it was to me not to be able to run to him on the spot! 
But I was detained for two or three days at Madame Dupin’s by 
duties which I could not neglect, and, after what seemed three or 
four centuries of impatience, I few into my friend’s arms. O inde- 
scribable moment! He was not alone; D’Alembert and the treasurer 
of the Sainte-Chapelle were with him. When I entered, I saw no one 
except him. I made a single bound, I uttered a single cry; I pressed 
my face to his; I embraced him closely without an utterance, ex- 
cept that of my tears and sighs; I was choked with tenderness and 
joy. The first thing he did, after leaving my arms, was to turn 
towards the ecclesiastic and say to him: “You see, sir, how my 
friends love me!” Completely overcome by my emotion, I did not at 
that time think of this manner of turning it to advantage; but, 
when occasionally reflecting upon it afterwards, I have always 
thought that this would not have been the first idea that would have 
occurred to me had I been in Diderot’s place. 

I found him greatly affected by his imprisonment. The donjon 
had made a terrible impression upon him, and, although he was 
comfortable at the castle and allowed to walk where he’ pleased in a 
park that was not even surrounded by walls, he needed the society of 
his friends, to avoid giving way to melancholy. As I was certainly 
‘the one who had most sympathy with his sufferings, I believed that I 
‘should also be the one whose presence would be most consoling to 
him, and, in spite of very pressing engagements, I went at least every 
other day, alone or with his wife, to spend the afternoon with him. 

The summer of 1749 was excessively hot. Vincennes is reckoned 


BEGINS HIS ESSAY 361 


to be two leagues distant from Paris. Being unable to afford a con- 
veyance, I set out at two o'clock in the afternoon on foot, when I was 
alone, and walked fast, in order to get there sooner. The trees on 
the road—always lopped after the fashion of the country—hardly 
afforded any shade, and often, exhausted by heat and fatigue, I 
threw myself on the ground, being unable to walk any further. In 
order to moderate my pace, I bethought myself of taking a book 
with me. One day I took the Mercure de France, and, while reading 
as I walked, I came upon the subject proposed by the Academy of 
Dijon as a prize essay for the following year: “Has the progress of 
the arts and sciences contributed more to the corruption or purifi- 
cation of morals?” 

From the moment I read these words, I beheld another world and 
became another man. Although I have a lively recollection of the 
impression which they produced upon me, the details have escaped 
me since I committed them to paper in one of my four letters to M. 
de Malesherbes. This is one of the peculiarities of my memory which 
deserves to be mentioned. It only serves me so long as I am depen- 
dent upon it. As soon as I commit its contents to paper it forsakes me, 
and when I have once written a thing down, I completely forget it. 
This peculiarity follows me even into music. Before I learned it, I 
knew a number of songs by heart. As soon as I was able to sing from 
notes, I could not retain a single one in my memory, and I doubt 
whether I should now be able to repeat, from beginning to end, a 
single one of those which were my greatest favourites. 

What I distinctly remember on this occasion is, that on my ar- 
rival at Vincennes I was in a state of agitation bordering upon mad- 
ness. Diderot perceived it. I told him the reason, and read to him the 
Prosopopoea of Fabricius,” written in pencil, under an oak-tree. He 
encouraged me to allow my ideas to have full play, and to compete 
for the prize. I did so, and from that moment I was lost. The mis- 
fortunes of the remainder of my life were the inevitable result of 
this moment of madness. 

With inconceivable rapidity, my feelings became elevated to the 
tone of my ideas. All my petty passions were stifled by the enthusi- 


2 Prosopopée de Fabricius: a soliloquy. of the famous Roman general, intro- 


duced by Rousseau in his essay. 


362 ' THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


asm of truth, liberty and virtue; and the most astonishing thing is, 
that this fervour continued in my heart for more than four or five 
years, in a higher degree, perhaps, than has ever been the case with 
the heart of any other man. 

I worked at this Essay in a very curious manner, which I have 
adopted in almost all my other works. I devoted to it the hours of the 
night when I was unable to sleep. I meditated in bed with my eyes 
shut, and turned and re-turned my periods in my head with in- 
credible labour. Then, when I was finally satisfied with them, I 
stored them up in my memory until I was able to commit them to 
paper; but the time spent in getting up and dressing myself made 
me forget everything, and when I sat down in front of my paper I 
could recall scarcely anytHing of what I had composed. I conceived 
the idea of making Madame le Vasseur my secretary. I had taken 
lodgings for her, her husband and her daughter, nearer to my own; 
and she, in order to save me the expense of a servant, came every 
morning to light my fire and attend to my little wants. When she 
came, I dictated to her from my bed the result of my labours of the 
preceding night; and this plan, to which I have long adhered, has 
saved me from forgetting much. 

When the Essay was finished I showed it to Diderot, who was 
pleased with it, and suggested a few corrections. This production, 
however, although full of warmth and vigour, is altogether destitute 
of logic and arrangement. Of all the works that have proceeded from 
my pen, it is the weakest in argument and the poorest in harmony 
and proportion; but, however great a man’s natural talents may be, 
the art of writing cannot be learnt all at once. 

I sent off the work without mentioning it to anyone, with the 
exception, I fancy, of Grimm, with whom I began to be on most 
intimate terms after he went to live with the Comte de Friése. He 
had a piano, which formed our meeting- -place, and at which I spent 
in his company all my spare moments, singing Italian airs and bar- 
rarolles, without break or intermission from morning till evening, 
or, rather, from evening till morning; and whenever I was not to be 
found at Madame Dupin’s I was sure to be found at Grimm’s, or, 
at least, in his company, either on the promenade or at the theatre. 
I gave up going to the Comédie Italienne, where I had a free pass, 


+ 


GOES T@ LIVE WITH THERESE 362 


but which he did not care for, and paid to go to the Comédie Fran- 
çaise, of which he was passionately fond. At length I became so pow: 
erfully attracted to this young man, and so inseparable from him, - 
that even poor “aunt” was neglected—that is to say, I saw less of 
her, for my attachment to her has never once wavered during the 
whole course of my life. 

This impossibility of dividing the little spare time I had in ac- 
cordance with my inclinations, renewed more strongly than ever 
the desire, which I had long since entertained, of having only one 
establishment for Thérése and myself; but the obstacle presented by 
her numerous family and, above all, want of money to buy furni- 
ture, had hitherto prevented me. The opportunity of making an 
` effort to provide a home presented itself, and I seized it. M. de Fran- 
cueil and Madame Dupin, feeling that 800 or goo francs a year could 
not be sufficient for me, of their own accord raised my salary to 
fifty Jouis; and, in addition, Madame Dupin, when she heard that I 
wanted to furnish my own rooms, gave me some assistance. With 
the furniture which Thérése already had, we put all together, and, 
having rented some small rooms in the Hôtel de Languedoc, in the 
Rue de Grenelle-Saint-Honoré, kept by very respectable people, we 
settled there as comfortably as we could, and we lived there quietly 
and agreeably for seven years, until I removed to the Hermitage. 

Thérése’s father was a good old man, of a very peaceful disposi- 
tion and terribly afraid of his wife, upon whom he had bestowed 
the name of “Criminal Lieutenant,’ ? which Grimm afterwards 
jestingly transferred to the daughter. Madame le Vasseur was not 
lacking in intelligence, that is to say, in address; she ever prided 
herself on her politeness and distinguished manners; but she had a 
confidential wheedling tone, which was unendurable to me. She 
gave her daughter bad advice, tried to make her dissemble with me, 
and cajoled my friends, separately, at the expense of one another, 
and at my own; in other respects, she was a fairly good mother, be- 
cause she found it worth her while to be, and she concealed her 
daughter’s faults, because she profited by them. This woman, whom. 
I loaded with care, attention, and little presents, and whose affec- 


3 Lieutenant Criminel: a former magistrate of the Châtel (the name of iwo old 


courts, civil and criminal) of Paris. 


364 THE CONFESSIONS. OF ROUSSEAU 


tion I was exceedingly anxious to gain, by reason of my utter in- 
ability to succeed, was the only cause of trouble in my little establish- 
ment; for the rest, I.can say that, during these six or seven years, I 
enjoyed the most perfect domestic happiness that human weakness 
can permit. My Thérése’s heart was that of an angel; intimacy in- 
creased our attachment, and we daily felt more and more how per- 
fectly we were made for each other. If our pleasures could be 
described, their simplicity would appear ridiculous; our walks, téte- 
a-téte, outside the city, where I spent my eight or ten sous magnifi- 
cently in some beer-house; our little suppers at the open window, 
at which we sat opposite each other on two low chairs placed upon 
a trunk which filled up the breadth of the window-niche. In this 
position, the window served us as a table, we breathed the fresh air, 
we could see the surrounding country and the passers-by, and, 
although we were on the fourth storey, we could look down upon 
the street while we ate. Who could describe, who could feel the 
charm of these meals, at which the dishes consisted of nothing more 
than a quartern loaf of coarse bread, a few cherries, a morsel of 
cheese, and half a pint of wine, which we shared between us? 
Friendship, confidence, intimacy, tranquillity of mind, how deli- 
cious are your seasonings! Sometimes we rernained there till mid- 
night, without thinking of it or suspecting how late it was, until 
the old lady informed us. But let us leave these details, which must 
appear insipid or ridiculous. I have always felt and declared, that it 
is impossible to describe true enjoyment. 

At the same time I indulged in a somewhat coarser enjoyment, the 
last of the kind with which I have to reproach myself. I have men- 
tioned that Klüpfel, the minister, was of an amiable disposition; 
my relations with him were nearly as intimate as with Grimm, and 
became equally confidential. They sometimes shared my table. These 
meals, somewhat more than simple, were enlivened by the witty and 
broad jokes of Klipfel and the humorous Germanisms of Grimm, 
who had not yet become a purist. 

Sensuality did not preside at our little orgies; its place was supplied 
by gaiety, and we were so well satisfied with each other that we 
were unable to separate. Kliipfel had furnished a room for a little 
girl, who, notwithstanding, was at everybody’s disposal, since he 


7 


AFFAIR IN THE RUE DES MOINEAUX 365 
Po A 


was unable to keep her by himself. One evening, as we were enter- 
ing the café, we met him coming out to go and sup with her. We 
rallied him; he revenged himself gallantly by taking us to share the 
supper, and then rallied us in turn. The poor creature appeared to | 
me to be of a fairly good disposition, very gentle, and little adapted 

for her profession, for which an old hag, whom she had with her, 

dressed her as well as she was able. The conversation and the wine 

enlivened us to such a degree that we forgot ourselves. The worthy 

Kliipfel did not desire to do the honours of his table by halves, and 

all three of us, in turn, went into the adjoining room with the little 

one, who did not know whether she ought to laugh or cry. Grimm 

has always declared that he never touched her, and that he temained 

so long with her simply in order to amuse himself at our impa- 

tience. If he really did not touch her, it is not likely that he was 

prevented by any scruples, since, before going to live with the 

Comte de Friése, he lived with some girl in the same quarter of 

Saint-Roch. 

I left the Rue des Moineaux, where this girl lived, feeling as 
ashamed as Saint-Preux, when he left the house where he had been 
made drunk, and I had a vivid remembrance of my own story when 
writing his. Thérése perceived, from certain indications, and, above 
all, from my confused air, that I had something to reproach myself 
with; I relieved my conscience of the burden by making a prompt 
and frank confession. In this I did well; for, the next morning, 
Grimm came in triumph to her, to give her an exaggerated account 
of my offence, and since that time he has never failed spitefully to 
remind her of it. This was the more inexcusable in him, since I had 
freely and voluntarily taken him into my confidence and had the 
right to expect from him that he would not give me cause to repent 
it. I never felt so much as on this occasion the goodness of my Thé- 
rése’s heart, for she was more indignant at Grimm’s conduct than 
offended at my unfaithfulness, and I only had to submit to tender 
and touching reproaches on her part, in which I did not detect the 
slightest trace of anger. 

This excellent girl’s good-heartedness was equalled by her sim- 
plicity of mind. Nothing more need be said; however, I may be per- 
mitted to mention an example of it, which I recollect. I had told her. 


366 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


that Kliipfel was preacher and chaplain to the Prince of Saxe-Gotha. 
In her estimation a preacher was so extraordinary a person that, 
oddly confounding two most dissimilar ideas, she got it into her 
head to take Kliipfel for the Pope. I thought she was mad when she 
told me, for the first time, on my return home, that the Pope had 
called to see me. I made her explain herself, and made all haste to 
go and tell the story to Grimm and Kliipfel, whom we ever after- 
wards called Pope, and gave the name of Pope Joan to the girl in 
the Rue des Moineaux. Our laughter was inextinguishable, and 
almost choked us. Those who have made me say, in a letter which 
they have been pleased to attribute to me, that I have only laughed 
twice in my life, were not acquainted with me at that time or in my 
youthful days; otherwise, this idea would certainly never have oc- 
curred to them. 

[1750-1752.|—In the following year (1750) I heard that my 
Essay, of which I had not thought any more, had gained the prize at 
Dijon. This news awoke again all the ideas which had suggested it 
_ to me, animated them with fresh vigour, and stirred up in my heart 
the first leavening of virtue and heroism, which my father, my 
country, and Plutarch had deposited there in my infancy. I consid- 
ered that nothing could be grander or finer than to be free and virtu- 
ous, above considerations of fortune and the opinion of mankind, 
and completely independent. Although false shame and fear of pub- 
lic disapproval at first prevented me from living in accordance with 
my principles, and from openly insulting the maxims of my age, 
from that moment my mind was made up, and I delayed carrying 
out my intention no longer than was necessary for contradiction to 
irritate it and render it victorious. 

While philosophising upon the duties of man, an event occurred 
which made me reflect more seriously upon my own. Thérèse be- 
came pregnant for the third time. Too honest towards myself, too 
proud in my heart to desire to belie my principles by my actions, I 
began to consider the destination of my children and my connection 
with their mother, in the light of the laws of nature, justice, and rea- 
son, and of that religion—pure, holy and eternal, like its author— 
which men have polluted, while pretending to be anxious to purify 
it, and which they have converted, by their formulas, into a mere 


) DISPOSES, OF HIS CHILDREN 367 


religion of words, seeing that it costs men little to prescribe what 
is impossible, when they dispense with carrying it out in practice. 

If I was wrong in my conclusions, nothing can be more remark- 
able than the calmness with which I abandoned myself to them. If 
I had been one of those low-born men, who are deaf to the gentle 
voice of Nature, in whose heart no real sentiment of justice or 
humanity ever springs up, this hardening of my heart would have 
been quite easy to understand. But is it possible that my warm- 
heartedness, lively sensibility, readiness to form attachments, the 
powerful hold which they exercise over me, the cruel heartbreakings 
I experience when forced to break them off, my natural goodwill 
towards all my fellow-creatures, my ardent love of the great, the 
true, the beautiful, and the just; my horror of evil of every kind, 
my utter inability to hate or injure, or even to think of it; the sweet 
and lively emotion which I feel at the sight of all that is virtuous, 
generous, and amiable; is it possible, I ask, that all these can ever 
agree in the same heart with the depravity which, without the least 
scruple, tramples underfoot the sweetest of obligations? No! I feel 
and loudly assert—it is impossible. Never, for a single moment in 
his life, could Jean Jacques have been a man without feeling, without 
compassion, or an unnatural father. I may have been mistaken, 
never hardened. If I were to state my reasons, I should say too much. 
Since they were strong enough to mislead me, they might mislead 
many others, and I do not desire to expose young people, who may 
read my works, to the danger of allowing themselves to be misled by 
the same error. I will content myself with observing, that my error 
was such that, in handing over my children to the State to educate, 
for want of means to bring them up myself, in deciding to fit them 
for becoming workmen and peasants rather than adventurers and 
fortune-hunters, I thought that I was behaving like a citizen and a 
father, and considered myself a member of Plato’s Republic. More 
than once since then, the regrets of my heart have told me that I was 
wrong; but, far from my reason having given me the same informa- 
tion, I have often blessed Heaven for having preserved them from 
their father’s lot, and from the lot which threatened them as soon as 
I should have been obliged to abandon them. If I had left them 
with Madame d’Epinay or Madame de Luxembourg, who, from 


368 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


friendship, generosity, or some other motive, expressed themselves 
willing to take charge of them, would they have been happier, 
would they have been brought up at least as honest men? I do not 
know; but I do know that they would have been brought up to hate, 
perhaps to betray, their parents; it is a hundred times better that they 
have never known them. 

My third child was accordingly taken to the Foundling Hospital, 
like the other two. The two next were disposed of in the same man- 
ner, for I had five altogether. This arrangement appeared to me so 
admirable, so rational, and so legitimate, that, if I did not openly 
boast of it, this was solely out of regard for the mother; but I told all 
who were acquainted with our relations. I told Grimm and Diderot. 
I afterwards informed Madame d’Epinay, and, later, Madame de 
Luxembourg, freely and voluntarily, without being in any way 
obliged to do so, and when I might easily have kept it a secret from 
everybody; for Gouin was an honourable woman, very discreet, and 
a person upon whom I could implicitly rely. The only one of my 
friends to whom I had any interest in unbosoming myself was M. 
Thierry, the physician who attended my poor “aunt” in a dangerous 
confinement. In a word, I made no mystery of what I did, not only 
because I have never known how to keep a secret from my friends, 
but because I really saw no harm in it. All things considered, I chose 
for my children what was best, or, at least, what I believed to be best 
for them. I could have wished, and still wish, that I had been reared 
and brought up as they have been. 

While I was thus making my confessions, Madame le Vasseur on 
her part did the same, but with less disinterested views. I had intro- 
duced her and her daughter to Madame Dupin, who, out of friend- 
ship for me, did them a thousand kindnesses. The mother confided 
her daughter’s secret to her. Madame Dupin, who is good-hearted 
and generous, whom she never told how attentive I was to provide 
for everything, in spite of my moderate means, herself made pro- 
vision for her with a generosity which, by her mother’s instructions, 
the daughter always kept a secret from me during my stay in Paris, 
and only confessed to me at the Hermitage, after several other con- 
fidences. I did not know that Madame Dupin, who never gave me 
the least hint of it, was so well informed. Whether Madame de 


MADAME DE CHENONCEAUX 36% 


Chenonceaux, her daughter-in-law, was equally well informed, I 
do not know; but Madame de Francueil, her step-daughter, was, 
and was unable to hold her tongue. She spoke to me about it the 
following year, after I had left their house. This induced me to ad- 
dress a letter to her on this subject, which will be found in my col- 
lections, in which I have set forth those reasons for my conduct, 
which I was able to give without compromising Madame le Vasseur 
and her family, for the most decisive of them came from that quar- 
ter, and upon them I kept silence. 

I can rely upon the discretion of Madame Dupin and the fiend: 
ship of Madame de Chenonceaux; I felt equally sure in regard to 
Madame de Francueil, who, besides, died long before my secret was 
noised abroad. It could only have been disclosed by those very 
people to whom I had confided it, and, in fact, it was not until after 
I had broken with them, that it was so disclosed. By this single fact 
they are judged. Without desiring to acquit myself of the blame 
which I deserve, I would rather have it upon my shoulders than that 
which their malice deserves. My fault is great, but it was due to 
error; I have neglected my duties, but the desire of doing an injury 
never entered my heart, and the feelings of a father cannot speak 
very eloquently on behalf of children whom he has never seen; but, 
to betray the confidence of friendship, to violate the most sacred 
of all agreements, to disclose secrets poured into our bosoms, de- 
liberately to dishonour the friend whom one has deceived, and wha 
still respects us while leaving us—these are not faults; they are acts 
of meanness and infamy. 

I have promised my confession, not my justification; therefore I 
say no more on this point. It is my duty to be true; the reader’s to be 
just. I shall never ask more from him than that. 

The marriage of M. de Chenonceaux made his mother’s house still 
more pleasant to me, owing to the accomplishments of his young 
wife—a very amiable person, who appeared to take especial notice 
of me amongst M. Dupin’s secretaries. She was the only daughter of 
Madame la Vicomtesse de Rochechouart, a great friend of the Comte 
de Friése, and, consequently, of Grimm, who was attached to him. 
It was I, however, who introduced him to his daughter; but, as their 
dispositions did not agree, the acquaintance did not last long, and 


370 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Grimm, who from that time only had eyes for that which was solid, 
preferred the mother, who belonged to the great world, to the daugh- 
ter, who desired friends on whom she could rely and who were 
agreeable to her, who were neither mixed up in any intrigues nor 
sought to gain credit amongst the great. Madame Dupin, not finding 
in Madame de Chenonceaux all the docility which she expected 
from her, made her house very dull for her, and Madame de Che- 
nonceaux, proud of her own merits, and perhaps also of her birth, 
preferred to renounce the pleasures of society, and to remain almost 
alone in her room, than to bear a yoke for which she felt she was not 
adapted. This species of exile increased my attachment for her, from 
the natural inclination which attracts me towards the unfortunate. 
I found in her a metaphysical and thoughtful mind, although at 
times somewhat sophistical. Her conversation, which was by no 
means that of a young woman just leaving the convent, was very at- 
tractive to me; and yet she was not twenty years of age. Her com- 
plexion was dazzlingly fair. Her figure would have been dignified 
and beautiful, if she had carried herself better. Her hair, which was 
ashen-grey and of rare beauty, reminded me of my dear mamma’s 
in her youth, and caused a lively emotion in my heart. But the strict 
principles which I had just laid down for myself, and which I was 
resolved to act up to at all cost, protected me against her and her 
charm. During the whole summer I spent three or four hours every 
day alone with her, solemnly teaching her arithmetic, and wearying 
her with my everlasting figures, without ever uttering a single word 
of gallantry or casting a glance of admiration upon her. Five or six 
years later, J should have been neither so wise nor so foolish; but 
it was destined that I should only love truly once in my life, and 
that the first and last sighs of my heart should be given to another 
than her. 

Since I had lived at Madame Dupin’s, I had always been satisfied 
with my lot, without showing any desire to see it improved. The in- 
crease in my salary, due to her and M. de Franceuil together, was 
quite voluntary on their part. This year, M. de Francueil, whose 
friendship for me increased daily, wanted to make my position 
somewhat more comfortable and less precarious. He was Receiver- 
General of Finance. M. Dudoyer, his cashier, was old, well to do, 


2 


SERIOUS ILLNESS 371 


and anxious to retire. M. de Francueil offered me his place; and, in 
order to make myself fit to take it, I went for a few weeks to M. 
Dudoyer’s house, to receive the necessary instructions. But, whether 
it was that I had little talent for this occupation, or that Dudoyer, 
who seemed to me to have someone else in his eye as his successor, 
did not instruct me in good faith, my acquisition of the knowledge 
required was slow and unsatisfactory, and I was never able to get 
into my head the state of accounts, which perhaps had been pur- 
posely muddled. However, without having grasped the intricacies of 
the business, I soon acquired sufficient knowledge of its ordinary 
routine to undertake the general management. I even commenced 
its duties. I kept the ledgers and the cash; I paid and received money, 
and gave receipts; and although I had as little inclination as ability 
for such employment, advancing years made me more sensible: I de- 
termined to overcome my dislike, and to devote myself entirely to 
my duties. Unfortunately, just as I was beginning to get used to 
them, M. de Francueil went away on a short journey, during which 
I remained in charge of his cash, which at that time, however, did 
not amount to more than 25,000 or 30,000 francs. The care and anx- 
iety which this deposit caused me convinced me that I was not made 
for a cashier, and I have no doubt that the impatience with which I 
awaited his return contributed to the illness which subsequently at- 
tacked me. 

I have already mentioned, in the first part of this work, that I was 
almost dead when I was born. A defective formation of the bladder 
caused, during my childhood, an almost continual retention of 
urine; and my aunt Suzon, who took care of me, had the greatest 
difficulty in keeping me alive. However, she at length succeeded: 
my robust constitution at length gained the upper hand, and my 
health improved so much during my youth that, with the exception 
of the attack of languor which I have described, and the frequent 
necessity of making water, which the least heating of the blood al- 
ways rendered a matter of difficulty, I reached the age of thirty with- 
out feeling my early infirmity at all. The first touch of it which I had 
was on my arrival at Venice. The fatigue of the journey, and the 
fearful heat which I had suffered, brought on a constant desire to 
make water and an affection of the kidneys, which lasted till the be- 


372 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ginning of the winter. After my visit to the padoana, I looked upon 
myself as a dead man, and yet I never suffered the slightest incon- 
venience from it. After having exHausted myself more in imagina- 
tion than in reality for my Zulietta, I was in better health than ever. 
It was only after Diderot’s confinement that the overheating, caused 
by my journeys to Vincennes during the fearful heat, brought on a 
violent pain in the kidneys, and since that time I have never recov- 
ered my health completely. 

At the time of which I am speaking, having perhaps overtired 
myself with my distasteful work at the confounded office, I became 
worse than before, and was confined to my bed for five or six weeks 
in the most melancholy condition that can be imagined. Madame 
Dupin sent the celebrated Morand to see me, who, in spite of his 
cleverness and delicacy of touch, caused me incredible suffering, and 
could never get to probe me. He advised me to consult Daran, who 
managed to introduce his bougies, which were more flexible, and 
afforded me some relief; but, when giving Madame Dupin an ac- 
count of my condition, he declared that I had less than six months 
to live. 

This verdict, which I afterwards heard, caused me to reflect seri- 
ously upon my condition, and upon the folly of sacrificing the re- 
pose and comfort of my few remaining days to the slavery of an em- 
ployment for which I felt nothing but aversion. Besides, how could 
I reconcile the strict principles which I had just adopted with a situa- 
tion which harmonised so ill with them? Would it not have been 
very bad taste in me, cashier of a Receiver-General of Finance, to 
preach disinterestedness and poverty? These ideas fermented so 
strongly in my head together with the fever, and combined so pow- 
erfully, that from that time nothing could uproot them, and, during 
the period of my recovery, I quietly determined to carry out the 
resolutions which I had made during my delirium. I renounced for 
ever all plans of fortune and promotion. Resolved to pass my few re- 
maining days in poverty and independence, I employed all my 
strength of mind in breaking away from the bonds of the opinion 
of the world, and in courageously carrying out everything which ap- 
peared to me to be right, without troubling myself about what the 


BECOMES A COPYIST OF MUSIC 373 


world might think of it. The obstacles which I had to overcome, the 
efforts which I made to t#iumph over them, are incredible. I suc- 
ceeded as much as was possible, and more than I had myself hoped. 
If I had been as successful in shaking off the yoke of friendship as 
that of public opinion, I should have accomplished my purpose, per- 
haps the greatest, or, at any rate, the most conducive to virtue, that 
a mortal has ever conceived; but, while I trampled underfoot the 
senseless judgments of the common herd of the so-called great and 
wise, I suffered myself to be subjugated and led like a child by so- 
called friends, who, jealous of seeing me strike out a new path by 
myself, thought of nothing but how to make me appear ridiculous, 
and began by doing their utmost to degrade me, in order to raise an 
outcry against me. It was the change in my character, dating from 
this period, rather than my literary celebrity, that drew their jealousy 
upon me; they would perhaps have forgiven me for distinguishing 
myself in the art of writing; but they could not forgive me for setting 
an example in my change of life, which seemed likely to cause them 
inconvenience. I was born for friendship; my easy and gentle dis- 
position found no difficulty in cherishing it. As long as I was un- 
known to the world, I was loved by all who knew me, and had not 
a single enemy; but, as soon as I became known, I had not a single 
friend. This was a great misfortune; it was a still greater one that I 
was surrounded by people who called themselves my friends, and 
who only made use of the privileges which this name allowed them 
to drag me to my ruin. The sequel of these memoirs will reveal this 
odious intrigue; at present I only point out its origin; my readers 
will soon see the first link forged. 

In the state of independence in which I intended to live, it was 
necessary, however, to find means of subsistence. I bethought myself 
of a very simple plan: copying music at so much a page. If a more 
solid employment would have fulfilled the same end, I should have 
adopted it; but as I had taste and ability for this, and as it was the 
only occupation which would provide my daily bread without per- 
sonal dependence, I was satisfied with it. Believing that I no longer 
_had need of foresight, and silencing the voice of vanity, from cashier 
to a financier I became a copyist of music. I thought I had gained 


374 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


greatly by the choice, and I have so little regretted it, that I have 
never abandoned this employment except under compulsion, and 
then only to resume it as soon as I was able. 

The success of my first Essay made it easier for me to carry out 
this resolution. After it had gained the prize, Diderot undertook to 
get it printed. While I was in bed he wrote me a note, informing me 
of its publication and the effect it had produced. “It has gone up 
like a rocket,” he told me; “such a success has never been seen be- 
fore.” This voluntary approval of the public, in the case of an un- 
known author, gave me the first real assurance of my ability, as to 
which, in spite of my inner feelings, I had until then always been 
doubtful. I saw the great advantage I might derive from it in view 
of the resolution which I was on the point of carrying out, and I 
judged that a copyist of some literary celebrity would not be likely to 
suffer from want of work. 

As soon as my resolution was taken and confirmed, I wrote a note 
to M. de Francueil to inform him of it, thanking him and Madame 
Dupin for all their kindness, and asking for their custom. Francueil, 
quite unable to understand the note, and believing that I was still de- 
lirious, came to me in all haste, but he found my mind so firmly 
made up that he was unable to shake my resolution. He went and 
told Madame Dupin and everyone else that I had gone mad. I let 
him do so, and went my way. I commenced my reformation with 
my dress. I gave up my gold lace and white stockings, and put on a 
round wig. I took off my sword and sold my watch, saying to myself 
with incredible delight, “Thank Heaven, I shall not want to know 
the time again!” M. de Francueil was kind enough to wait some 
time before he found a successor to me. At last, when he saw that my 
mind was made up, he gave my post to M. d’Alibard, formerly tutor 
to the young Chenonceaux, known in the botanical world for his 
“Flora Parisiensis.” 4 

In spite of the strictness of my sumptuary reform, I did not at first 
extend it to my linen, which was good, and of which I had a large. 


*I have no doubt that Francueil and his associates now give a totally different 
account of all this, but I appeal to what he said about it at the time, and for a 
long time.afterwards, to all his acquaintances, until the conspiracy was formed. 
Men of good sense and honour cannot have forgotten his words. 


ROBBED BY THERESE’S BROTHER 395 


stock—the remains of my Venetian outfit—and for which I had a 
special fondness. I had considered it so much a matter of cleanliness 
that I ended by making it a matter of luxury, which was certainly 
expensive. Someone was kind enough to deliver me from this servi- 
tude. On Christmas Eve, while the women-folk were at vespers, and 
I was at the “spiritual concert,” the door of a garret in which all our 
linen was hung up after a wash, which was just finished, was broken 
open. Everything was stolen, amongst other things, forty-two fine 
linen shirts belonging to me—the principal part of my linen ward- 
robe. From the description given by the neighbours of a man who 
had been seen to leave the hotel carrying some bundles, Thérése and 
myself suspected her brother, who was known to be a worthless fel- 
low. The mother indignantly repudiated the suspicion, but it was 
confirmed by so many proofs that we could not abandon it, in spite 
of her indignation. I did not venture to make strict inquiries for fear 
of discovering more than I might have liked. The brother never 
showed himself again, and at last disappeared altogether. I deplored 
Thérése’s misfortune and my own in being connected with so mixed 
a family, and I urged her more strongly than ever to shake off a yoke 
so dangerous. This adventure cured me of my passion for fine linen, 
and from that time I have only worn shirts of very common mate- 
rial, more in keeping with the rest of my dress. 

Having thus completed my reforms, my only anxiety was to make 
them solid and lasting, by doing my utmost to root out of my heart 
everything which was still liable to be affected by public opinion; 
everything which, from fear of censure, might turn me aside from 
that which was good and reasonable in itself. In consequence of the 
stir which my Essay created, my resolution also made a sensation 
and brought me employment, so that I commenced my new profes- 
sion with tolerable success. Nevertheless, several causes prevented me 
from succeeding as well as I might have done in other circumstances. 
In the first place, my bad health. My recent attack left after-effects 
which prevented me from ever regaining my former state of health: 
and it is my belief that the physicians, to whose treatment I intrusted — 
myself, did me as much harm as my illness. I consulted, in succes- 


5 At which only religious music was heard, and which, on certain days, was a 
substitute for secular concerts. 


376 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


sion, Morand, Daran, Helvétius, Malouin and Thierry, all very 
learned men, and my personal friends. Each treated me in his own 
way, afforded me no relief, and considerably weakened me. The 
more I submitted to their treatment, the yellower, thinner, and 
weaker I became. My imagination, which they terrified, judged of 
my condition by the effects of their drugs, and only set before my 
eyes a continuous succession of sufferings before my death—reten- 
tion of urine, gravel, and stone. All the remedies which afford relief 
to others—ptisans, baths, and bleeding—only aggravated my suffer- 
ings. Finding that Daran’s bougies, the only ones which had any 
effect, and without which I thought I could not live, only afforded 
me momentary relief, I proceeded, at great expense, to lay in an 
enormous stock of them, su that, in case of Daran’s death, I might 
always have some for use. During the eight or ten years in which I 
made such constant use of them I must have spent at least fifty louts. 
It will be readily imagined that a treatment so expensive, painful, 
and troublesome distracted me from my work, and that a dying man 
is not very eager about earning his daily bread. 

Literary occupations were equally prejudicial to my daily work. 
No sooner had my Essay appeared, than the defenders of literature 
fell upon me as if by common consent. Indignant at the sight of so 
many Messieurs Josse, who did not even understand the question, 
attempting to decide like masters, I took up my pen and treated 
some of them in such a manner that they no longer had the laugh on 
their side. One M. Gautier, from Nancy, the first who fell under my 
lash, was roughly abused in a letter to Grimm. The second was 
King Stanislaus himself, who did not disdain to enter the lists with 
me. The honour which he did me obliged me to change the tone of 
my answer. I adopted one that was more serious, but equally em- 
phatic, and, without failing in respect towards the author, I com- 
pletely refuted his work. I knew that a Jesuit, Father Menou, had 
had a hand in it. I trusted to my judgment to distinguish the work 
of the Prince from that of the monk; and, mercilessly attacking all 


6 ‘ . : 
M. Josse was one of the characters in Moliére’s L’Amour médecin. The say- 
ing, “Vous étes orfévre, Monsieur Josse,” is used to remind a man that he is per- 


sonally interested in the success of anything which he strongly recommends ar 
supports. 


ENMITY OF M. BORDES 377 


the Jesuitical phrases, 1 brought into prominence, as I went along, an 
anachronism which I believed could only have proceeded from the 
pen of his reverence. This composition, which, for some reason or 
other, has made less stir than my other writings, is, in its way, 
unique. In it I seized the opportunity of showing the public, how a 
private individual could defend the cause of truth, even against a 
sovereign. It would be difficult to adopt, at the same time, a more 
dignified and respectful tone than that which I adopted in my an- 
swer to him. I was fortunate enough to have to deal with an adver- 
sary for whom I felt sincere esteem, which I could exhibit without 
servile adulation; this I did with tolerable success, and always in a 
dignified manner. My friends, alarmed on my behalf, thought they 
already saw me in the Bastille. I never once had any such fear, and 
I was right. This worthy Prince, after he had seen my reply, said, “I 
have had enough of it; I will have nothing more to do with it.” Since 
then I have received from him various marks of esteem and kind- 
ness, some of which I shall have to mention presently; and my com- 
position quietly circulated throughout France and Europe, without 
anyone finding anything in it to censure. 

Shertly afterwards, I had another opponent, whom I had not ex- 
pected, the same M. Bordes of Lyons, who, ten years previously, had 
shown me much friendship, and rendered me several services. I had 
not forgotten him, but had neglected him from simple laziness; and 
I had not sent him my writings, since I had had no convenient op- 
portunity of getting them delivered to him. I was wrong; he attacked 
me, certainly with politeness, and I answered in the same tone. He 
made a more decided rejoinder, which drew from me a final answer, 
after which he remained silent. But he became my most violent 
enemy, profited by the time of my misfortunes to write a most fear- 
ful libel against me, and took a journey to London on purpose to do 
me harm there. 

All these polemics took up a great deal of my time, which was 
lost to my copying, without any advantage to the cause of truth, or 
profit to my purse. Pissot, who was my publisher at the time, gave 
me very little for my brochures, and often nothing at all; for in- 
stance, I never received a sou for my first Essay; Diderot gave it to 
him for nothing. I was obliged to wait a long time, and extract the 


378 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


little remuneration which he gave me, sou by sou. In the meantime, 
my copying was a failure. I carried on two trades, which was the way 
to fail in both. 

They were contradictory in another way—the different mode of 
life which they forced me to adopt. The success of my first writings 
had made me the fashion. The position which I had taken up 
aroused curiosity; people were anxious to make the acquaintance of 
the singular man, who sought no one’s society, and whose only anx- 
iety was to live free and happy after his own fashion; this was suff- 
cient to make this an impossibility for him. My room was never free 
from people who, under different pretexts, came to rob me of my 
time. Ladies employed a thousand artifices to get me to dine with 
them. The more I offended people, the more obstinate they became. 
I could not refuse everybody. While I made a thousand enemies by 
my refusals, I was incessantly a slave to my desire to oblige; and, 
however I managed, I never had an hour to myself during the day. 

I then discovered that it is by no means so easy as one imagines to 
be poor and independent. I wanted to live by my profession; the pub- 
lic would not have it. They invented a thousand ways of indemnify- 
ing me for the time which they made me lose. Presents of all kinds 
were always being sent to me. Soon I should have been obliged to 
show myself like Punch, at so much a head. I know no slavery more 
cruel and degrading than that. I saw no remedy for it, except to re- 
fuse all presents, great and small, and to make no exception in favour 
of anyone. The only effect of this was to increase the number of the 
donors, who desired to have the honour of overcoming my resist- 
ance, and of compelling me to be under an obligation to them, in 
spite of myself. Many, who would not have given me a crown if I 
had asked for it, never ceased to importune me with their offers, and 
to avenge themselves when they found them rejected, charged me 
with arrogance and ostentation, in consequence of my refusal. 

It will easily be understood that the resolution which I had taken, 
and the system which I desired to follow, were not at all to the liking 
of Madame le Vasseur. All the daughter’s disinterestedness was un- 
able to prevent her from following the instructions of her mother; 
and the gouverneuses, as Grimm used to call them, were not always 
as firm in their refusal as I was. Although many things were con- 


PARIS BECOMES DISTASTEFUL 379 


cealed from me, I saw enough to convince me that I did not see 
everything, and this tormented me, not so much on account of the 
charge of connivance, which I readily foresaw would be made, as by 
the cruel thought that I could never be master of my own household, 
or even of myself. I begged, entreated, and got angry—all in vain. 
Mamma gave me the reputation of an eternal grumbler and a surly 
boor. Continual whisperings with my friends went on; all was mys- 
tery and secrecy in my household; and, to avoid exposing myself to 
perpetual storms, I no longer ventured to make inquiries about what 
was going on. To deliver myself from all this disturbance would 
have needed a firmness of which I was incapable. I knew how to 
make a noise, but not how to act. They allowed me to speak and 
went their way. 

These continual upsets and the daily importunities to which I was 
subjected at length made my apartments and my stay at Paris very 
unpleasant. When my ill-health permitted me to go out, and I did 
not allow myself to be dragged hither and thither by my acquaint- 
ances, I used to go for a solitary walk, during which, dreaming of 
my grand system, I jotted down some ideas on paper with the aid of 
a pocket-book and pencil, which I always carried about with me. In 
this manner the unforeseen unpleasantnesses of a condition which I 
had chosen for myself threw me entirely into a literary career, by 
way of escaping from them; and this is the reason why, in all my 
early works, I introduced the bitterness and ill-humour which caused 
me to write them. 

Another circumstance contributed to this. Thrown, in spite of 
myself, into the great world, without possessing its manners, and un- 
able to acquire or conform to them, I took it into my head to adopt 
manners of my own, which might enable me to dispense with them. 
Being unable to overcome my foolish and disagreeable shyness, 
which proceeded from the fear of offending against the rules of po- 
lite society, I resolved, in order to give myself courage, to trample 
them underfoot. Shame made me cynical and sarcastic. I affected to 
despise the politeness which I did not know how to practise. It is 
true that this rudeness, in harmony with my new principles, became 
ennobled in my mind and assumed the form of dauntless virtue; and 
on this lofty basis, I venture to assert, it supported itself longer and 


380 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


more successfully than would naturally have been expected from an 
effort so contrary to my disposition. However, in spite of the repu- 
tation for misanthropy, which my outward appearance and some 
happy remarks gained for me in the world, it is certain that, in pri- 
vate, I always sustained my part badly. My friends and acquaint- 
ances led this unsociable bear like a lamb, and, limiting my sarcasms 

to unpalatable but general truths, I was never capable of saying a 
~ single discourteous word to anyone whatsoever. 

The Devin du Village made me quite the fashion, and soon there 
was not a man in Paris more sought after than myself. The history 
of this piece, which was an epoch in my life, is mixed up with that 
of the connections which I had formed at that time. In order that 
the sequel may be rightly understood, I must enter into details. 

I had a tolerably large number of acquaintances, but only two 
chosen friends, Diderot and Grimm. Owing to the desire which I 
always feel, to bring together all who are dear to me, I was so de- 
voted a friend of both, that it was unavoidable that they should soon 
become equally devoted to each other. I brought them together; they 
suited each other, and soon became more intimate with each other 
than with me. Diderot had acquaintances without number; but 
Grimm, being a foreigner and a newcomer, had his to make. I de- 
sired nothing better than to assist him. I had introduced him to 
Diderot; I introduced him to Gauffecourt. I took him to Madame de 
Chenonceaux, to Madame d’Epinay, to the Baron d’Holbach, with 
whom I found myself connected, almost in spite of myself. All my 
friends became his; that was simple enough. But none of his ever be- 
came mine; this was not so intelligible. While he Jived with the 
Comte de Friése, he often invited us to dine with him, but I have 
never received any proof of friendship from the Comte de Friése or 
the Comte de Schomberg, his relative, who was very intimate with 
Grimm, or from any other person, male or female, with whom 
Grimm had any connection through their means. The only exception 
was the Abbé Raynal, who, although his friend, also proved himself 
mine, and, when IJ needed it, placed his purse at my disposal with 
a rare generosity. But I had known the Abbé long before Grimm 
himself, and I had always entertained a great regard for him since 


GRIMM’S CURIOUS ILLNESS 381 


he had behaved to me in a most delicate and honourable manner, in 
a matter certainly of little ¢mportance, but which I never forgot. 

The Abbé Raynal was certainly a warm friend. He gave me a 
proof of this about this time in a matter that concerned Grimm, with 
whom he was very intimate. Grimm, after having long been on very 
friendly terms with Mademoiselle Fel, suddenly took it into his head 
to conceive a violent passion for her, and wanted to supplant Cahu- 
sac. The young lady, priding herself upon her constancy, showed 
her new admirer the door. The latter took the matter in a tragic 
light, and had a fancy that it would be his death. He suddenly began 
to suffer from the strangest illness that has perhaps ever been heard 
of. He passed days and nights in a state of continued lethargy, his 
eyes wide open, his pulse regular, but without speaking, eating, or 
stirring, sometimes seeming to hear, but never answering, even by 
signs; in other respects, he was free from agitation, pain or fever, 
and lay as if he had been dead. The Abbé Raynal and myself took it 
in turns to watch him, the Abbé, being stronger and in better health, 
by night, and myself by day; he was never left alone, and neither of 
us ever quitted him before the other had come to take his place. The 
Comte de Friése, being alarmed about him, brought Senac to see 
him, who, after a careful examination, declared that there was noth- 
ing the matter with the patient, and did not even prescribe for him. 
My anxiety about my friend made me carefully observe the physi- 
cian’s countenance, and I saw him smile as he left the room. Never- 
theless, Grimm remained for several days without moving, without 
taking broth or anything else, except some preserved cherries which 
I laid upon his tongue from time to time, and which he eagerly swal- 
lowed. One fine morning, he got up, dressed himself, and resumed 
his ordinary occupations, without ever saying anything either to me, 
or, as far as I know, to the Abbé, or anyone else, about this singular 
lethargy, or of the attention and care which we had bestowed upon 
him as long as it lasted. 

This adventure, nevertheless, made a considerable stir; and it 
would really have been a wonderful story, if the cruelty of an opera- 
girl had caused a man to die of despair. This violent passion made 
Grimm the rage; he was soon looked upon as a prodigy of love, 


382 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


friendship, and devotion in every respect. This reputation caused 
him to be run after and féted in the great world, which separated 
him from me, who had never been anything to him but a makeshift. 
I saw that he was on the point of being entirely estranged from me. 
This was very distressing to me, for all the lively feelings, of which 

he made such a show, were just those which I entertained for him, 
although I did not make such a noise about it. I was glad that he 
should succeed in the world, but I should have wished him to do so 
without, at the same time, forgetting his friend. I said to him one 
day, “Grimm, you are neglecting me; I forgive you. When the first 
intoxication of noisy success has produced its effect, and you begin 
to perceive its emptiness, I hope that you will come back to me: you 
will always find me the same. For the present, do not put yourself 
out; I leave you to do as you please, and will wait for you.” He told 
me that I was right, made his arrangements accordingly, and went 
his own way so completely, that I only saw him in the company of 
our mutual frieuds. 

Our chief meeting-place, before he became so closely connected 
with Madame d’Epinay, was the Baron d’Holbach’s house. This 
Baron was the son of a self-made man, who possessed an ample for- 
tune, which he used nobly. He received at his house men of letters 
and learning, and, by his own knowledge and accomplishments, 
was well able to hold his own amongst them. Having been long in- 
timate with Diderot, he had sought my acquaintance through him, 
even before my name became known. A natural repugnance for a 
long time prevented me from meeting his advances. One day he 
asked me the reason, and I said to him, “You are too wealthy.” He 
persisted, and finally prevailed. My greatest misfortune has ever 
been inability to resist flattery, and I have always regretted yielding 
to it. 

Another acquaintance, which ripened into friendship as soon as I 
had a reason to claim it, was that of M. Duclos. Several years had 
elapsed since I had seen him, for the first time, at La Chevrette, at 
the house of Madame d’Epinay, with whom he was on intimate 
terms. We only dined together, and he returned the same day; but 
we conversed for a few moments after dinner. Madame d’Epinay 
had spoken to him of me and my opera of Les Muses Galantes. 


MADAME DE CREQUI 384 


Duclos, who was gifted with too great talent himself not to value 
those who possessed it, became prepossessed in my favour, and had 
invited me to go and see him. In spite of my early inclination, which 
was strengthened by acquaintance, my timidity and want of energy 
kept me back as long as I had no other passport to him except his 
courtesy; but, encouraged by my first success and his praises, which 
were repeated to me, I went to call upon him, and he returned my 
call. In this manner commenced the connection between us, which 
will always cause me to regard him with affection, and to which, as 
well as the testimony of my own heart, I owe the knowledge, that 
uprightness and honour may sometimes be combined with literary 
culture. 

Many other connections less lasting, which I here pass over, were 
the result of my early successes, and continued until curiosity was 
satished. I was a man who was so soon understood, that, after the 
first day, there was nothing more to be seen in me. One lady, how- 
ever, who at that time sought my acquaintance, was more constant 
to me than any of the rest. This was Madame la Marquise de Cré- 
qui, niece of the Bailli de Fronlay, the Maltese ambassador, whose: 
brother had preceded M. de Montaigu in the embassy at Venice, and 
whom I had gone to see on my return from that city. Madame de 
Créqui wrote to me; I called upon her, and she conceived a friend- 
ship for me. I sometimes dined at her house, where J met several 
men of letters; amongst others, M. Saurin, the author of “Spartacus,” 
“Barneveldt,” and other works, who afterwards became my bitter- 
est enemy, for no other reason that I can imagine, except that I bear 
the name of a man whom his father had persecuted disgracefully. 

It will be seen that, for a copyist who ought to be occupied with 
his business from morning till evening, I had numerous distractions, 
which prevented my daily work from being very lucrative, and my- 
self from paying sufficient attention to what I had to do, for me to 
do it well. I thus lost more than half the time I had left in erasing or 
scratching out mistakes, or beginning my work again on a fresh 
sheet of paper. This constant interruption made Paris daily more in- 
tolerable to me, and I eagerly seized every opportunity of going into 
the country. I went several times to spend a few days at Marcoussis, 
where Madame le Vasseur knew the vicar, at whose house we so ar- 


384 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ranged matters that he found himself at no disadvantage. Once 
Grimm went with us.’ The vicar had a good voice and sang well; 
and, although not a musician, could learn his part with ease and 
accuracy. We spent the time in singing the trios which I had com- 
posed at Chenonceaux. I also wrote two or three new ones, to the 
words which Grimm and the vicar put together as well as they 
could. I cannot help regretting these trios, which were written and 
sung in moments of pure joy, and which I have left at Wootton 
with all my music. Mademoiselle Davenport has, perhaps, already 
made curl-papers of them; but they were worth preserving, and are 
mostly written in a very good counterpoint. It was after one of these 
little excursions, when I was delighted to see “aunt” at her ease and 
very cheerful, and had also enjoyed myself very much, that I wrote 
to the vicar a letter in verse, hastily dashed off and a very poor com- 
position, which will be found amongst my papers. 

Nearer Paris, I found another place of refuge, very much to my 
taste, with M. Mussard, a countryman, relative, and friend, who had 
made a charming retreat for himself at Passy, where I have spent 
many peaceful moments. M. Mussard was a jeweller, a man of good 
sense, who, after having made a comfortable fortune in his business, 
married his only daughter to M. de Valmalette, the son of an ex- 
change-broker, and maitre d’hétel to the King, and prudently left 
trade and business in his old age, in order to enjoy an interval of re- 
pose and enjoyment between the worries of life and his death. The 
worthy Mussard, a real practical philosopher, lived, free from cares, 
in a very nice house, which he had built for himself, standing in a 
very pretty garden which he had planted with his own hands. While 
digging up the terraces of this garden, he found fossil shells in such 
quantities, that his lively imagination saw nothing but shells in the 
natural world, and he at last sincerely believed that the universe con- 
sisted of nothing but shells, and remains of shells, and that the whole 
earth was nothing but so much shell sand. Thinking of nothing but 


"Since I have here omitted to mention a trifling, but memorable adventure 
which I had with the aforesaid Grimm, one morning when we were to dine at 
the Fountain of Saint-Vandrille, I will not return to it; but, on subsequent re- 
flection, I concluded that, in the bottom of his heart, he was brooding over the 
conspiracy which he afterwards carrted out with such marvellous success. 


* 


M. MUSSARD 385 


this fact and his wonderful discoveries, he became so excited with 
these ideas, that they would soon have turned to a system in his head, 
that is to say, to madness, had not death—fortunately for his reason, 
but unfortunately for his friends, who were much attached to him, 
and found at his house a most agreeable refuge—removed him from 
them by a most strange and painful disease. This was a constantly 
growing tumour in the stomach, which for a long time prevented 
him from eating before the reason was discovered, and which, after 
several years of suffering, caused his death from sheer starvation. I 
can never recall without the greatest anguish the last days of this un- 
fortunate and worthy man, who still heartily welcomed Lenieps and 
myself, the only friends whom the sight of the sufferings which he 
endured did not drive away from him until his last hour, who, as I 
say, was reduced to devouring with his eyes the repast which he 
caused to be set before us, scarcely able to swallow a few drops of 
weak tea, which he was obliged to bring up the next moment. But, 
before these days of suffering, how many agreeable hours did I spend 
at his house with the select circle of his friends! At the head of these 
I place the Abbé Prévost, an amiable and simple person, whose heart 
inspired his writings, which deserved to be immortalised, and who, 
neither in his disposition nor in society, showed any traces of the 
sombre colouring which characterised his works; Procope the physi- 
cian, a little Aesop, who was a great ladies’ man; Boulanger, the 
famous posthumous author of “Le Despotisme Oriental,” and who, 
I believe, extended Mussard’s theories on the age of the world. 
Amongst his lady friends were Madame Denis, Voltaire’s niece, who 
at that time was simple and unaffected, and made no pretence to be 
a wit; Madame Vanloo, who was certainly no beauty, but was 
charming and sang like an angel; and Madame de Valmalette her- 
self, who also sang, and who, although very thin, would have been 
very amiable if she had made less pretence of being so. These made 
up nearly the whole of M. Mussard’s friends; their society would 
have been very agreeable to me, had not his conchylomania been 
even more agreeable; and I can say that for six months or more I 
worked in his study with as much pleasure as himself. 

He had for a long time insisted that the waters of Passy would be 
beneficial to me, and strongly advised me to come to his house and 


386 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


drink them. In order to get away from the noisy crowd of the city 
ror a little while, I at last gave in, and spent eight or ten days at 
Passy, which did me more good because I was in the country, than 
because I took the waters. Mussard played the violoncello, and was 
passionately fond of Italian music. One evening we had a long con- 
versation about it before going to bed, especially about the opera 
buffa, which we had both seen in Italy, and with which we had both 
been delighted. During the night, being unable to sleep, I began to 
ponder how it would be possible to give an idea of this kind of 
drama in France, for the Amours de Ragonde had not the least re- 
semblance to it. In the morning, while walking and drinking the 
waters, I hastily made up a few specimens of verse, and set them to 
the airs which came into my head as I composed them. I scribbled 
down the whole in a kind of vaulted salon at the top of the garden, 
and, at tea, I could not refrain from showing these airs to Mussard 
and Mademoiselle Duvernois, his housekeeper, who was really a 
most excellent and amiable young woman. The three pieces which I 
had sketched were the first monologue, J’ai perdu mon serviteur, the 
air of the Devin du village, L'Amour croit s'il s'inquiète, and the 
last duet, A jamais, Colin, je t'engage, &amp;c. I so little thought that it 
was worth the trouble of going on with it that, had it not been for 
the applause and encouragement of both, I should have thrown my 
scraps of paper into the fire and thought nothing more about it, as I 
had often done with other pieces which were at least as good; but I 
felt so encouraged, that in six days my drama was finished, with the 
exception of a few lines, and all the music sketched out, so that I 
had nothing more to do in Paris except to add a little recitative and 
fill up the tenor parts. I finished the whole so quickly, that in three 
weeks my scenes were copied out fairly and fit for representation. 
The only thing remaining was the divertissement, which was not 
composed until a long time afterwards. 

[1752.]—The composition of this work had so excited me that 
I had a great desire to hear it, and I would have given all I possessed 
to have seen it performed, as I should have liked, with closed doors, 
as Lulli is said to have once had Armide performed before himself 
alone. As it was not possible for me to enjoy this pleasure except in 
company with the public, I was obliged to get my piece accepted at 


HIS “DEVIN DU VILLAGE” 387 


the Opera in order to hear it. Unfortunately, it was in a style en- 
tirely new, to which the egrs of the public were quite unaccustomed; 
and, besides, the failure of the Muses galantes made me expect the 
like for the Devin, if I presented it in my own name. Duclos helped 
me out of the difficulty, and undertook to get the piece tried without 
disclosing the author. To avoid betraying myself, I did not attend 
the rehearsal, and the “little violins” 8 themselves, who conducted, 
were ignorant of the composer’s name, until the general approval 
had attested the excellence of the work. All who heard it were so 
delighted, that, the next day, nothing else was talked of in all circles, 
M. de Cury, manager of Court entertainments, who had been pres- 
ent at the rehearsal, asked for the piece, in order that it might be per- 
formed at Court. Duclos, who knew my intentions, and thought 
that I should have less control over my piece at the Court than in 
Paris, refused to deliver it. Cury demanded it by virtue of his office. 
Duclos persisted in his refusal, and the dispute between them be- 
came so lively that, one day, at the Opera, they would have gone out 
together to fight a duel, unless they had been separated. Cury wanted 
to treat with me. I left the decision with Duclos, and Cury was 
obliged to apply again to him. M. le Duc d’Aumont interfered. At 
length Duclos thought it right to yield to authority, and the piece 
was given up in order to be played at Fontainebleau. 

The part to which I had devoted most attention, and in which I 
had made the greatest departure from the beaten track, was the reci- 
tative. Mine was accented in an entirely new manner and kept time 
with the delivery® of the words. This horrible innovation was not 
allowed to stand, for fear of shocking the ears of those who followed 
each other like a flock of sheep. I consented that Francueil and Jel- 
yotte should compose another recitative, but I refused to have any- 
thing to do with it myself. 

When everything was ready and the day fixed for the perform- 
ance, it was proposed to me that I should take a journey to Fon- 
tainebleau, to be present at the last rehearsal, at any rate. I went with 


8 These were the names given to Rebel and Franceevr, who, from their youth, 
had been in the habit of going from house to house to play the violin. 
® Débit: a term specially applied to the manner in which a recitative is sung. 


388 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Mademoiselle Fel, Grimm, and, I think, the Abbé Raynal, in one of 
the Royal carriages. The rehearsal was tolerable; I was better satis- 
fied with it than I had expected to be. The orchestra was a powerful 
one, consisting of those of the Opera and the Royal band. Jelyotte 
played Colin; Mademoiselle Fel, Colette; Cuvitier, the Devin 
(soothsayer). The choruses were from the Opera. I said little. Jel- 
yotte had arranged everything, and I did not desire to have any con- 
trol over his arrangements; but, in spite of my Roman air, I was as 
bashful as a schoolboy amongst all these people. 

On the following day, when the rehearsal was to take place, I 
went to breakfast at the Café du Grand Commun, which was full of 
people, talking about the rehearsal of the previous evening, and the 
difficulty there had been in getting in. An officer who was present 
said that he had found no difficulty, gave a long account of the pro- 
ceedings, described the author, and related what he had said and 
done; but what astounded me most in his long description, given 
with equal confidence and simplicity, was that there was not a word 
of truth in it. It was perfectly clear to me, that the man who spoke 
so positively about this rehearsal had never been present, since he 
had before his eyes the author, whom he pretended he had observed 
so closely, and did not recognise him. The most remarkable thing 
about this incident was the effect which it produced upon me. This 
man was somewhat advanced in years; there was nothing of the cox- 
comb or swaggerer about him, either in his manner or tone; his 
countenance was intelligent, while his cross of Saint-Louis shower 
that he was an old ane In spite of his unblushing effrontery, in 
spite of myself, he interested me; while he retailed his lies I blushed, 
cast down my eyes, and was on thorns; I sometimes asked myself 
whether it might not be possible to think that he was mistaken, and 
really believed what he said. At last, trembling for fear that some- 
one might recognise me and put him to shame, I hurriedly finished 
my chocolate without saying a word, and, holding my head down as 
I passed him, I left the café as soon as possible, while the company 
were discussing his description of what had taken place. In the 
street, I found that I was bathed in perspiration; and I am certain 
that, if anyone had recognised and addressed me by name before I 
left, I should have exhibited all the shame and embarrassment of a 


- 


PERFORMANCE BEFORE THE KING 389 


guilty person, simply from the feeling of humiliation which the poor 
fellow would have experienced, if his lies had been detected. 

I now come to one of the critical moments of my life, in which it 
is difficult to confine myself to simple narrative, because it is almost 
impossible to prevent even the narrative bearing the stamp of cen- 
sure or apology. However, I will attempt to relate how, and from 
what motives I acted, without adding an expression of praise or 
blame. 

On that day I was dressed in my usual careless style, with a beard 
of some days’ growth and a badly combed wig. Considering this 
want of good manners as a proof of courage, I entered the hall where 
the King, the Queen, the Royal Family, and the whole Court were 
presently to arrive. I proceeded to take my seat in the box to which 
M. de Cury conducted me; it was his own—a large stage box, op- 
posite a smaller and higher one, where the King sat with Madame 
de Pompadour. Surrounded by ladies, and the only man in front of 
the box, I had no doubt that I had been put there on purpose to be 
seen. When the theatre was lighted up, and I found myself, dressed 
in the manner I was, in the midst of people all most elegantly at- 
tired, I began to feel ill at ease. I asked myself whether I was in my 
right place, and whether I was suitably dressed. After a few mo- 
ments of uneasiness, I answered “Yes,” with a boldness which per- 
haps was due rather to the impossibility of drawing back than to the 
force of my arguments. I said to myself: I am in my place, since I 
am going to see my own piece perfornied; because I have been in- 
vited; because I composed it solely for that purpose; because, after 
all, no one has more right than myself to enjoy the fruit of my labour 
and talents. I am dressed as usual, neither better nor worse. If I again 
begin to yield to public opinion in any single thing, I shall soon be- 
come its slave again in everything. To be consistent, I must not be 
ashamed, wherever I may be, to be dressed in accordance with the 
condition of life which I have chosen for myself. My outward ap- 
pearance is simple and careless, but not dirty or slovenly. A beard in 
itself is not so, since it is bestowed upon us by Nature, and, according 
to times and fashions, is sometimes even an ornament. People will 
consider me ridiculous, impertinent. Well, what does it matter to 
me? I must learn how to put up with ridicule and censure, provided 


390 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


they are not deserved. After this little soliloquy, I felt so encouraged 
that I should have behaved with intrepidity, if it had been necessary. 
But, whether it was the effect of the presence of the ruler, or the 
natural disposition of those near me, I saw nothing in the curiosity, 
of which I was the object, except civility and politeness. This so af- 
fected me, that I began to be uneasy again about myself and the fate 
of my piece, and to fear-that I might destroy the favourable impres- 
sions which showed only an inclination to applaud me. I was armed 
against their raillery; but their kindly attitude, which I had not ex- 
pected, so completely overcame me, that I trembled like a child when 
the performance began. 

I soon found I had no reason for uneasiness. The piece was very 
badly acted, but the singing was good, and the music well executed. 
From the first scene, which is really touching in its simplicity, I 
heard in the boxes a murmur of surprise and applause hitherto un- 
heard of at similar performances. The growing excitement soon 
reached such a height, that it communicated itself to the whole audi- 
ence, and, in the words of Montesquieu, “the very effect increased 
the effect.” In the scene between the two good little people, this ef- 
fect reached its highest point. There is never any clapping when the 
King is present: this allowed everything to be heard, and the piece 
and the author were thereby benefited. I heard around me women, 
who seemed to me as beautiful as angels, whispering and saying to 
each other in a low tone, “Charming! delightful! every note speaks 
to the heart!” The pleasure of affecting so many amiable persons 
moved me to tears, which I was unable to restrain during the first 
duet, when I observed that I was not the only one who wept. For a 
moment I felt anxious, when I recalled the concert at M. de Trey- 
torens’s. This reminiscence produced upon me the same effect as the 
slave who held the crown over the head of a Roman general in his 
triumphal procession, but it did not last long, and I soon abandoned 
myself, completely and without reserve, to the delight of tasting the 
sweets of my success. And yet I am sure that at this moment I was 
much more affected by sensual impulse than by the vanity I felt as 

‘an author. If none but men had been present, I am convinced that 
I should not have been consumed, as I was, by the incessant desire of 
catching with my lips the delightful tears which I caused to flow. I 


SUMMONED TO THE CHATEAU 39) 


have seen pieces excite more lively transports of admiration, but 
never so complete, so «delightful, and so moving an intoxication, 
which completely overcame the audience, especially at a first per- 
formance before the Court. Those who saw it on this occasion can 
never have forgotten it, for the effect was unique. 

The same evening, M. le Duc d’Aumont sent word to me to pre- 
sent myself at the chateau on the following day at eleven o’clock, 
when he would present me to the King. M. de Cury, who brought 
me the message, added that he believed that it was a question of a 
pension, the bestowal of which the King desired to announce to me 
in person. 

Will it be believed, that the night which succeeded so brilliant a 
day was for me a night of anguish and perplexity? My first thought, 
after that of this presentation, was a certain necessity, which had 
greatly troubled me on the evening of the performance, and had fre- 
quently obliged me to retire, and might trouble me again on the 
next day, in the gallery or the King’s apartments, amongst all the 
great people, while waiting for His Majesty to pass. This infirmity 
was the chief cause which prevented me from going into society, or 
from staying in a room with ladies when the doors were closed. The 
mere idea of the situation in which this necessity might place me, 
was enough to affect me to such an extent, that it made me feel 
ready to faint, unless I should be willing to create.a scandal, to which 
I should have preferred death. Only those who know what this con- 
dition is, can imagine the horror of running the risk of it. 

I next pictured myself in the King’s presence and presented to His 
Majesty, who condescended to stop and speak to me. On such an 
occasion, tact and presence of mind were indispensable in answer- 
ing. Would my accursed timidity, which embarrasses me in the 
presence of the most ordinary stranger, abandon me when I found 
myself in the presence of the King of France? would it suffer me to 
select, on the spur of the moment, the proper answer? It was my de- 
sire, without abandoning the austerity of tone and manner which I 
had assumed, to show that I was sensible of the honour which so 
great a monarch bestowed upon me. it was necessary that I should 
convey some great and useful truth in words of well-selected and 
well-deserved eulogy. To be able to prepare a happy answer before- 


392 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


hand, it would have been necessary to know exactly what he might 
say to me; and, even had this been possible, I felt perfectly certain 
that I should not be able to recollect in his presence a single word of 
all that I had previously thought over. What would become of me 
at this moment, before the eyes of all the Court, if, in my embarrass- 
ment, some of my usual silly utterances were to escape my lips? This 
danger alarmed, frightened, and made me tremble so violently, that 
I resolved, at all hazards, not to expose myself to it. 

I lost, it is true, the pension, which was in a manner offered to 
me; but, at the same time, I escaped the yoke which it would have 
imposed upon me. Adieu truth, liberty, and courage! How could I, 
from that time forth, have dared to speak of independence and dis- 
interestedness? I could only flatter or keep my mouth closed if I 
accepted this pension; and besides, who would guarantee the pay- 
ment of it? What steps should I have had to take, how many people 
I should have been obliged to solicit! It would have cost me more 
trouble and far more unpleasantness to keep it, than to do without 
it. Consequently, in renouncing all thoughts of it, I believed that I 
was acting in a manner quite consistent with my principles, and 
sacrificing the appearance to the reality. I communicated my resolu- 
tion to Grimm, who had nothing to say against it. To others I al- 
leged my ill-health as an excuse, and I left the same morning. 

My departure caused some stir, and was generally censured. My 
reasons could not be appreciated by everybody; it was much easier 
to accuse me of a foolish pride, and this more readily allayed the 
jealousy of all who felt they would not have acted like myself. The 
following day, Jelyotte wrote me a note, in which he gave me an 
account of the success of my piece and of the great fancy which the 
King himself had conceived for it. “All day long,” he informed me, 
“his Majesty is continually singing, with the most execrable voice in 
his kingdom, and utterly out of tune, J'ai perdu mon serviteur; f'ai 

; perdu tout mon bonheur.” He added that, in a fortnight, a second 
performance of the Devin was to be given, which would establish 
in the eyes of all the public the complete success of the first. 

Two days later,.as I was going to supper-at Madame d’Epinay’s, 
about nine o’clock in the evening, a coach passed me at the door. 
Someone inside made a sign to me to get in. I did so; the person was 


DIDEROT AND GRIMM CONSPIRE 393 


Diderot. He spoke to me about the pension more warmly than I 
should have expected agphilosopher to speak on such a subject. He 
did not regard my unwillingness to be presented to the King as an 
offence; but he considered my indifference about the pension as a 
terrible crime. He said to me that, even if I was disinterested on my 
own account, I had no right to be so in regard to Madame le Vasseur 
and her daughter; that I owed it to them to neglect no honourable 
means, within my reach, of providing for their support; and as, after 
all, it could not be said that I had refused this pension, he insisted 
that, since there appeared a disposition to bestow it upon me, I 
ought to ask for it and obtain it, at any cost. Although I felt touched 
by his zeal, I was unable to approve of his principles, and we had a 
lively discussion on the subject, the first which had ever occurred be- 
tween us. All our subsequent disputes were of the same kind, he dic- 
tating to me what he maintained I ought to do, while I as firmly re- 
fused, because I did not believe it was my duty. 

It was late when we separated. I wanted to take him with me to 
supper at Madame d’Epinay’s, but he would not go; and, in spite of 
the efforts which the desire of bringing together those whom I re- 
gard with affection caused me to make from time to time, to induce 
him to visit her—I even went so far as to take her to his door, which 
he refused to open to us—he always declined to see her, and never 
spoke of her except with great contempt. It was only after my dis- 
agreement with both that they became intimate, and that he began 
to speak of her with respect. 

From that time Diderot and Grimm seemed to make it their ob- 
ject to set the gouverneuses® against me, by giving them to under- 
stand that, if they were not better off, it was entirely my fault, and 
that they would never do any good with me. They tried to induce 
them to leave me, and promised them, through Madame d’Epinay’s 
interest, a license to sell salt, or a tobacconist’s shop, and I know not 
what besides. They even tried to drag Duclos and Holbach into their 
alliance, but the former persistently refused to join them. At the 
time I had some notion of their intrigues, but I only learned them 
clearly a long time afterwards, and I often had reason to lament the 
blind and indiscreet zeal of my friends, who, in endeavouring to re- 


10 A half-contemptuous term for the “women-folk.” 


394 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


duce me, in my ill-health, to a state of most melancholy isolation, 
imagined that they were doing their utmost to make me happy by 
the very means which, beyond all others, were most adapted to make 
me utterly miserable. 

[1753.]—In the following carnival, the Devin was played at 
Paris, and, during the interval, I had time to compose the overture 
and divertissement. The latter, as it was designed and engraved, was 
intended to keep up a sustained and connected action from one end 
of the piece to the other, which, in my judgment, gave opportunities 
for very agreeable tableaux. But, when I proposed this idea at the 
Opera, I was not even listened to, and I was obliged to patch together 
songs and dances in the ordinary manner. The result was that the 
divertissement, although fuli of charming ideas, which certainly did 
not damage the effect of the scenes, only enjoyed a very moderate 
success. I struck out Jelyotte’s recitative and restored my own in its 
original form as it is engraved; and this recitative, somewhat 
Frenchified, I confess—that is to say, drawled out by the actors— 
far from offending anyone, was as successful as the music, and was 
considered, even by the people, equally well composed. I dedicated 
my piece to M. Duclos, who had taken it under his protection, and 
declared that this should be my only dedication. However, I wrote 
a second with his consent; but he must have thought himself still 
more honoured by the exception than if I had written none at all. 

I could relate a number of anecdotes about this piece, but more 
important matters which I must mention do not allow me time to 
dwell upon them here; I may, perhaps, on a future occasion return 
to them in a supplement. One, however, I must mention, which may 
have reference to all that follows. I was one day looking over the 
Baron d’Holbach’s music in his study. After I had looked through a 
number of pieces of different kinds, he showed me a collection of 
pieces for the piano, and said, “These were written especially for 
me; they are very tasteful, and well-suited for singing. No one is ac- 
quainted with them, or shall ever see them, except myself. You 
ought to select one, and introduce it into your divertissement.” As I 
already had in my mind far more subjects for airs and symphonies 
than I could ever make use of, I cared very little about his. How- 
ever, he pressed me so earnestly that, to oblige him, I selected a 


THE FRENCH AND ITALIAN STYLES 395 | 


shepherd’s song, which I abridged and altered into a trio, for the 
entry of Colette’s companions. Some months afterwards, while the 
Devin was still running, on going into Grimm’s rooms, I found a 
number of people round his piano, from which he hastily got up on 
my arrival. Looking mechanically at his music-stand, I saw the iden- 
tical collection of Baron d’Holbach, open exactly at the piece which 
he had pressed me to take, while assuring me that it should never 
leave his hands. Some time afterwards, I saw the same collection 
open on M. d’Epinay’s piano, one day when there was some music 
at his house. Neither Grimm nor anyone else ever spoke to me about 
this air, and I should have said nothing about it myself, if it had not 
been rumoured, some time afterwards, that I was not the author of 
the Devin du Village. As I was never a great instrumentalist, I am 
convinced that, had it not been for my “Dictionary of Music,” it 
would at last have been said that I knew nothing about the subject.4 

Some time before the Devin du Village was performed, some Ital- 
ian comedians had arrived at Paris, and were ordered to play at the 
Opera. The effect which they were destined to produce could not be 
foreseen. Although they were detestable, and the orchestra, at that 
time very ill-trained, mutilated to its heart’s content the pieces which 
they performed, they nevertheless fatally injured the French Opera. 
The comparison of the two kinds of music, heard the same day at 
the same theatre, opened the French ears; none of them could endure 
their drawling music after the lively and pronounced accentuation 
of the Italian; as soon as the comedians had finished, everyone left 
the house. It was found necessary to change the order of representa- 
tion, and to put off the performance of the comedians to the last. 
Eglé, Pygmalion, and Le Sylphe were played; nothing held its 
ground. The Devin du Village alone could bear comparison, and 
was listened to with pleasure, even after the Serva padrona. When 1 
composed my interlude, I had my head full of these pieces, and bor- 
cowed my ideas from them; but I was far from suspecting that my 
piece would be criticised by the side of them. If I had been a plagia- 
rist, how many thefts would then have been detected, and how 
eagerly would they have been pointed out! But nothing of the kind 


uI could not foresee that, in spite of the “Dictionary,” this would really be 


said of me. 


396 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


was discovered; all attempts to find in my music the slightest rem- 
iniscence of any other were in vain; and all my songs, when com- 
pared with the supposed originals, were found to be as new as the 
character of the music which I had created. If Mondonville or 
Rameau had been forced to submit to such a test, they would not 
have escaped without being torn to shreds. The comedians gained 
some very ardent support for Italian music. Paris was divided into 
two parties, more violently opposed than if it had been a matter of 
religion or of an affair of State. One, the more numerous and influen- 
tial, composed of the great, the wealthy, and the ladies, supported 
the French music; the other, more lively, more proud, and more en- 
thusiastic, was composed of real connoisseurs, persons of talent, and 
men of genius. This little group assembled at the Opera, under the 
Queen’s box. The other party filled the rest of the pit and house; but 
its chief meeting-place was under the King’s box. This was the origin 
of these celebrated party names, “King’s corner” and “Queen’s cor- 
ner.” The dispute, as it became more animated, gave rise to several 
brochures. If the “King’s corner” attempted to be witty, it was ridi- 
culed by the “Petit Prophète”; if it attempted to argue, it was crushed 
by the “Lettre sur la musique Française.” These two little pamphlets, 
by Grimm and myself respectively, are all that have survived the 
quarrel; all the rest are already forgotten. 

But the “Petit Prophète,” which, in spite of my denial, was for a 
long time attributed to me, was taken as a joke, and did not bring 
the least annoyance upon its author, whereas the “Lettre sur la mu- 
sique” was taken seriously and roused against me the whole nation, 
which considered itself insulted in its music. A description of the 
incredible effect of this brochure would be worthy of the pen of 
Tacitus. It was the time of the great quarrel between Parliament and 
clergy. The Parliament had just been banished; the ferment was at 
its height; everything pointed to an approaching outburst. From 
the moment the brochure appeared, all other quarrels were at once 
forgotten; nothing was thought of, except the perilous condition of 
French music, and the only outburst was against myself. It was such 
that the nation has never quite recovered from it. At Court, the only 
doubt was whether the Bastille or exile should be the punishment; 
and the Royal warrant of arrest would have been drawn up, had not 


2 


DEPRIVED OF HIS FREE PASS 397 


M. de Voyer shown the ridiculous aspect of the affair. Anyone who 
sees it stated that this braehure possibly prevented a revolution in the 
State will believe that he is dreaming. It is, however, an actual truth, 
which all Paris can still attest, since it is at the present day no more 
than fifteen years since this singular incident took place. 

Although my liberty was not attacked, I was unsparingly insulted, 
and even my life was in danger. The Opera orchestra entered into 
an honourable conspiracy to assassinate me when I left the theatre. 
Being informed of this, I only attended the Opera more frequently 
than before, and it was not until a long time afterwards that I 
learned that M. Ancelet, an officer in the Musketeers, who was 
kindly disposed towards me, had prevented the plot from being 
carried out, by causing me to be protected, unknown to myself, when 
I left the theatre. The city had recently taken over the management 
of the Opera. The first exploit of the Prévét des Marchands was to 
deprive me of my free pass, in the most uncivil manner possible, by 
publicly refusing me admission when I presented myself, so that I 
was obliged to take a ticket for the amphitheatre to avoid the morti- 
fication of going back. The injustice was the more outrageous, as the 
only recompense I had stipulated for, when I gave up my rights in 
the piece, was a free pass for life; for, although this was a privilege 
which all authors enjoyed—and I had thus a double claim to it 
nevertheless expressly stipulated for it in M. Duclos’s presence. It is 
true that fifty Jouis were sent to me through the treasurer of the 
Opera by way of honorarium, which I had not asked for; but, be 
sides that these fifty Jours were not even equal to the amount which 
was due to me according to the regulations, this payment had noth- 
ing to do with the right of admission, which had been formally stip- 
ulated for, and which was entirely independent of it. In this be- 
haviour there was such a combination of injustice and brutality, that 
the public, although at the height of its animosity against me, was 
nevertheless unanimously disgusted at it, and many, who had in- 
sulted me on the previous evening, cried out loudly on the following 
day in the house, that it was a shame to deprive an author in this 
manner of his right of admission, which he had well deserved and 
which he was even entitled to claim for two persons. So true is the 
Italian proverb, Ognun’ ama la giustizia in casa d'altrui. 


398 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Under these circumstances, I had only one course to take—to de- 
mand the return of my work, since the recompense agreed upon 
was withheld. I wrote to that effect to M. d’Argenson, who had con- 
crol of the Opera, adding to my letter an unanswerable memoran- 
dum. Letter and memorandum both remained unanswered, and 
produced no effect. This unjust man’s silence wounded me deeply, 
and did not tend to increase the very moderate opinion which I had 
always entertained of his character and ability. Thus the Opera kept 
my piece and defrauded me of the recompense for which I had sur- 
rendered my rights in it. Between the weak and the strong, this 
would be called robbery; between the strong and the weak, it is 
simply called the appropriation of what belongs to one’s neighbour. 

As for the pecuniary profits of this work, although it did not bring 
me in a quarter of what it would have brought in in the hands of an- 
other, they were, nevertheless, large enough to enable me to live 
upon them for several years, and to make up for the continued ill- 
success of my copying. I received a hundred louis from the King, 
fifty from Madame de Pompadour for the performance at Bellevue, 
at which she herself took the part of Colin, fifty from the Opera, 
and five hundred francs from Pissot for the engraving, so that this 
interlude, which cost me no more than five or six weeks’ work, in 
spite of my ill-luck and stupidity brought me in almost as much as 
my “Emile,” on which I spent twenty years of meditation and three 
years of labour. But I paid dearly for the pecuniary ease which this 
piece procured me by the endless annoyance which it brought upon 
me. It was the germ of the secret jealousies, which did not break 
out until long afterwards. From the time of its success, I no longer 
found in Grimm, Diderot, or, with few exceptions, in any of the 
men of letters with whom I was acquainted, the cordiality, the frank- 
ness, or pleasure in my society, which I believed I had hitherto 
found in them. As soon as I appeared at the Baron’s, the conversa- 
tion ceased to be general. Those present collected in small groups 
and whispered together, so that I was left alone, without knowing 
whom to speak to. For a long time I endured this mortifying neglect, 
and, finding that Madame d’Holbach, who was gentle and amiable, 
always received me kindly, I put up with her husband’s rudeness as 
long as it was possible. One day, however, he attacked me without 


““NARCISSE’’ PERFORMED 399 


reason or excuse, and with such brutality—in the presence of Dide- 
rot, who never said a wor and of Margency, who has often told me 
since then, that he admired the gentleness and moderation of my 
answers—that at last, driven away by this unworthy treatment, I left 
his house, resolved never to enter it again. However, this did not 
prevent me from always speaking respectfully of himself and his 
house; while he never expressed himself in regard to me in other 
than most insulting and contemptuous terms. He never spoke of me 
except as the little cuistre,!? without, however, being able to point 
to a single wrong of any kind which I had ever done to him or any- 
one in whom he took an interest. This was the manner in which he 
fulfilled my predictions and my fears. As for myself, I believe that 
my friends would have forgiven me for writing books—even excel- 
lent books—because such a reputation was attainable by them- 
selves; but they were unable to forgive me for having composed an 
opera, or for its brilliant success, because not one of them was capable 
of following the same career, or aspiring to the same honour. Duclos 
alone, superior to such jealousy, seemed to become even more at- 
tached to me. He introduced me to Mademoiselle Quinault, by 
whom I was treated with as much attention, politeness, and friend- 
liness as I had found wanting at the Baron’s house. 

While the Devin was being played at the Opera, its author was 
also discussed at the Comédie Frangaise, but somewhat less favour- 
ably. Having vainly attempted, during seven or eight years, to get 
my Narcisse performed at the Italian Opera, I became disgusted with 
this theatre, since the actors performed so badly in French pieces, 
and J should have been glad to get my piece accepted at the Comédie 
Frangaise rather than at the Italian Opera. I mentioned my wish to 
La Noue, the comedian, whose acquaintance I had made, and who, 
as is well known, was an author and an accomplished man. He was 
pleased with Narcisse, and undertook to get it performed anony- 
mously; meanwhile, he procured me a pass, which was a great 
pleasure to me, since I have always preferred the Théâtre Français 
to the other two. The piece was received with applause, and per- 
formed without the author’s name being given; but I have reason 
to believe that the actors and many others were not ignorant who it 


® Corresponding somewhat to a “college servitor.” 


400 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


was. Mesdemoiselles Gaussin and Grandval played the love-parts; 
and although in my opinion the performance showed a lack of in- 
telligence generally, it could not be called absolutely bad. However, 
I was surprised and touched by the indulgence of the public, who 
had the patience to listen quietly from beginning to end, and even 
to allow it to be performed a second time, without exhibiting the 
least signs of impatience. As for myself, I was so bored with the first, 
that I could not sit out te the end. I left the theatre and went into the 
Café de Procope, where I found Boissy and others, who had probably 
been as much bored as myself. There I cried peccavi, and, humbly 
or proudly, confessed myself the author of the piece, and spoke of it 
as everyone thought of it. This public confession of the authorship 
of a piece which had failed was much admired, and caused me little 
pain. I even found a certain satisfaction to my amour-propre in the 
courage with which I had made it; and I believe that, on this occa- 
sion, there was more pride in speaking, than there would have been 
false shame in keeping silence. However, as there was no doubt that 
the piece, although spoilt at the performance, would bear reading, 
I had it printed, and, in the preface, which is one of my best produc- 
tions, I began to express my principles a little more freely than I had 
hitherto done. 

I soon had an opportunity to disclose them unreservedly in a work 
of greater importance; for it was, I think, in this year (1753) that 
the “Origin of Inequality amongst Mankind” appeared as the sub- 
ject proposed for discussion by the Academy of Dijon. Struck by 
this great question, I felt surprised that this Academy had ventured 
to propose it; but since it had had the courage to do so, I thought I 
might have the courage to discuss it, and undertook the task. 

In order to consider this great subject at my ease, I went to Saint- 
Germain, on a seven or eight days’ journey, with Thérése, our host- 
ess, who was a good sort of woman, and one of her friends. I count 
this trip as one of the most agreeable in my life. It was very fine 
weather: the good women took all the trouble and expense upon 
themselves, Thérése amused herself with them, while I, relieved 
from all anxiety, joined them at meal-times, and diverted myself 
without having anything to trouble me. The remainder of the day, 
I buried myself in the forest, where I sought and found the picture 


a 


' ESSAY ON INEQUALITY” 401 


of those primitive times, of which I boldly sketched the history. I de- 
molished the pitiful lies of mankind; I dared to expose their nature 
in all its nakedness, to follow the progress of time and of the things 
which have disfigured this nature; and, comparing the man, as man 
has made him, with the natural man, I showed him, in his pre- 
tended perfection, the true source of his misery. My soul, uplifted 
by these sublime considerations, ascended to the Divinity; and, see- 
ing my fellow creatures following blindly the path of their preju- 
dices, their errors, their misfortunes, and their crimes, I cried aloud 
to them with a feeble voice which they could not hear, “Fools, who 
continually complain of Nature, learn that you bring all your mis- 
fortunes upon yourselves.” 

The result of these meditations was the “Essay on Inequality,” a 
work which was more to Diderot’s taste than any of my other writ- 
ings. He gave most useful advice concerning it,!* but it only found 
few readers in Europe who understood it, and none of the latter ever 
chose to speak of it. It was written as a prize competition: I sent it, 
feeling certain beforehand that it would be unsuccessful, as I knew 
well that the prizes of Academies were not intended for works of the 
kind. 

This excursion and occupation were beneficial to my health and 
temper. Several years before, tortured by my retention of urine, I had 
put myself unreservedly into the physicians’ hands, and they, with- 
out alleviating my sufferings, had exhausted my strength and under- 
mined my constitution. After my return from Saint-Germain, I 
found myself stronger and better. I took the hint, and determined to 
recover or die without the assistance of physicians or drugs. I said 


13 At the time when I wrote these words, I had no suspicion of Diderot’s and 
Grimm’s great conspiracy; otherwise I should easily have seen how the former 
abused my confidence, in order to give my writings the harsh tone and air of 
gloominess which ceased to be found in them when he no longer guided me, 
The description of the philosopher who, in the course of an argument, stops up 
his ears, in order to harden himself against the complaints of a man in distress, is 
in his style; and he had supplied me with several others, even still stronger, 
which I could never bring myself to use. But, as I attributed to his confinement 
in the donjon of Vincennes this melancholy tinge, which may be found again, in 
considerable proportions in his “Clairval,” it never occurred to me to suspect any 


evil intention. 


402 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


good-bye to them for ever, and began to live without any fixed rules, 
remaining quiet when I could not walk, and walking as soon as I 
was strong enough to do so. Life in Paris, amongst pretentious peo- 
ple, was little to my taste; the cabals of men of letters, their shameful 
quarrels, their lack of candour as exhibited in their books, the 
haughty airs they gave themselves in society, were all so hateful to 
ine and so antipathetic, I found so little gentleness, open-hearted- 
ness, and frankness, even in the society of my friends, that, disgusted 
with this tumultuous life, I became to long earnestly for residence 
in the country; and, as I saw no prospect of my profession allowing 
me to settle there, I hastened to spend in it at least the few hours 
which I had to spare. For several months, at first after dinner, I used 
to go for a walk by myself in the Bois de Boulogne, to think over 
subjects for future works, and did not return till nightfall. 
[1754-1756.|—-Gauffecourt, with whom I was at that time ex- 
sremely intimate, found himself obliged to make a journey to 
Geneva on business, and proposed to me to accompany him; I con- 
sented. As I was not well enough to be able to dispense with the care 
of the gouverneuse, it was decided that she should go with us, and 
that her mother should look after the house. Having made all our 
arrangements, we alli three set out together on the rst of June, 1754. 
I must mention this journey as the period of the first experience 
which, in the course of a life of forty-two years, gave a shock to the 
confidence of my naturally unsuspicious disposition, to which I had 
always abandoned myself without reserve and without inconven- 
ience. We had a hired carriage, which conveyed us by very short 
daily stages without changing horses. I often got down and walked. 
We had scarcely performed half the journey, when Thérése showed 
the greatest repugnance to remaining alone in the carriage with 
Gauffecourt, and when, in spite of her entreaties, I wanted to get 
down, she did the same, and walked with me. For some time I 
scolded her for this whim, and even opposed it so strongly, that she 
felt obliged to declare the reason for her conduct. I thought that I 
was dreaming, I fell from the clouds, when I heard that my friend 
de Gauffecourt, more than sixty years old, gouty, impotent, and 
worn out by a life of pleasure and dissipation, had been doing his 
utmost, since we had started, to corrupt a person who was no longer 


TRAVELS WITH THERESE 403 


young or beautiful, and who belonged to his friend, and that by the 
lowest and most disgraceful means, even going so far as to offer her 
money, and attempting to excite her passions by reading a disgust- 
ing book to her and showing her the disgraceful pictures of which 
it was full. Thérèse, in a fit of indignation, once threw his villainous 
book out of the carriage; and she told me that, the very first day, 
when I had gone to bed before supper with a very violent headache, 
he had employed all the time, during which he was alone with her, 
in attempts and actions more worthy of a satyr or he-goat than of an 
honourable man, to whom I had confided myself and my compan- 
ion. What a surprise! what an entirely new cause of grief for me! I, 
who had until then believed that friendship was inseparable from 
all the amiable and noble sentiments which constitute all its charm, 
for the first time in my life found myself compelled to couple it with 
contempt, and to withdraw my confidence and esteem from a man 
whom I loved, and by whom I believed myself to be loved! The 
wretch concealed his disgraceful conduct from me; and, to avoid ex- 
posing Thérése, I found myself compelled to conceal my contempt 
from him, and to keep hidden, in the bottom of my heart, feelings 
which he was never to know. Sweet and holy illusion of friendship! 
Gauffecourt was the first to lift thy veil before my eyes. How many 
cruel hands since then have prevented it from covering thy face 
again! 

At Lyons I left Gauffecourt, to take the road through Savoy, as I 
could not bring myself to be so near mamma again, without seeing 
her once more. I saw her again—my God! in what a condition! How 
low had she fallen! What was left of her former virtue? Could it be 
the same Madame de Warens, once so brilliant, to whom M. Pont- 
verre, the curé, had sent me? How my heart was torn! The only 
resource I could see for her was, that she should leave the country. 
I reiterated, earnestly but in vain, the entreaties which I had several 
times addressed to her in my letters, begging her to come and live 
quietly with me, and let me devote my life and Thérése’s to make 
her own happy. Clinging to her pension, from which, although it 
was regularly paid, she had for a long time drawn nothing, she re- 
fused to listen to me. I gave her a small portion of my money, much 
less than I ought to have given, much less than I should have given 


404 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


her, if I had not felt certain, that she would not have spent a sou 
upon herself. During my stay in Geneva, she took a journey to 
Chablais, and came to see me at Grange-Canal. She had no money to 
continue her journey. I had not as much with me as she wanted, and 
sent it to her by Thérése an hour later. Poor mamma! Let me men- 
tion one more proof of her goodness of heart. Her sole remaining 
jewel was a little ring; she took it from her finger and placed it upon 
that of Thérése, who immediately replaced it, at the same time kiss- 
ing and bathing in her tears that noble hand. Ah! then would have 
been the moment to pay my debt! I ought to have left all and fol- 
lowed her, to have never left her until her last hour, to have shared 
her lot, whatever it might have been. I did nothing of the kind. Oc- 
cupied with another attachment, I felt the tie which bound us loos- 
ened, for want of any hope of being able to make it of any use to her. 
I wept over her, but did not follow her. Of all the stings of conscience 
that I have ever felt, this was the sharpest and most lasting. My con- 
duct deserved the terrible punishment which since then has never 
ceased to overwhelm me; I hope it may have atoned for my ingrati- 
tude, which, indeed, showed itself in my conduct, but has wounded 
my heart too deeply for it ever to have been the heart of an ungrate- 
ful man. 

Before I left Paris, I had sketched the dedication of my “Essay 
on Inequality.” I finished it at Chambéri, and dated it from that 
place, thinking it better, in order to avoid all unpleasantness, not 
to date it either from France or Geneva. On my arrival in this city, I 
gave myself up to the republican enthusiasm which had led me 
there. This enthusiasm was increased by the reception I met with. 
Féted and made much of by all classes, I abandoned myself entirely 
to patriotic zeal, and, ashamed of being excluded from my rights as 
a citizen by the profession of a religion different from that of my 
fathers, I resolved publicly to return to the latter. As the Gospel was 
the same for every Christian, and as the essential part of the doctrine 
only differed in the attempts of different people to explain what 
they were unable to understand, I said to myself that, in each coun- 
try, it was the right of the Sovereign alone to define the manner of 
worship and to settle this unintelligible dogma, and that it was con- 
sequently the duty of every good citizen to accept the dogma and to 


ABJURES THE CATHOLIC FAITH 405 


follow the manner of worship prescribed by the law. Constant asso- 
ciation with the encyclopfedists, far from shaking my faith, had 
strengthened it, in consequence of my natural aversion to quarrels 
and schism. The study of man and the universe had everywhere 
shown me the final causes and the intelligence which directed them. 
The reading of the Bible, especially the Gospels, to which I had for 
several years devoted myself, had taught me to despise the low and 
foolish interpretations given to the teaching of Jesus Christ by per- 
sons utterly unworthy of understanding it. In a word, philosophy, 
while firmly attaching me to what was essential in religion, had re- 
leased me from the petty and rubbishy forms with which it has been 
obscured. Believing that, for an intelligent man, there could not be 
two ways of being a Christian, I also believed that all religious form 
and discipline, in each country, came under the jurisdiction of the 
law. From this reasonable, social, and pacific principle, which has 
brought upon me such cruel persecutions, it followed that, if I de- 
sired to become a citizen, I ought to be a Protestant, and to return 
to the religion of my country. I accordingly determined to do so. I 
even submitted to the instructions of the pastor of the parish, in 
which I was staying, which was outside the city. I only desired not 
to be obliged to appear before the consistory. However, the ecclesias- 
tical law was definite in regard to this; but they were kind enough 
to make an exemption in my favour, and a commission of five or six 
members was appointed to receive my profession of faith in private. 
Unfortunately, Perdriau, the minister, a mild and amiable man, 
with whom I was on friendly terms, took it into his head to tell me 
that they were delighted at the idea of hearing me speak in this little 
assembly. The expectation of this so alarmed me, that, after having 
studied, night and day, for three weeks, a little speech which I had 
prepared, I became so confused at the moment when I had to deliver 
it, that I was unable to utter a single word of it, and, at this meeting, 
I behaved like the most stupid schoolboy. The members of the com- 
mission spoke for me; I answered “Yes” and “No” like a fool; after 
which I was admitted to the Communion, and reinstated in my 
rights as a citizen. I was enrolled as such in the list of the civic 
guards, who are paid by the citizens and full burgesses only, and I 
attended an extraordinary general council, to receive the oath from 


406 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


the syndic!# Mussard. I was so touched by the kindness shown to 
me on this occasion by the Council and consistory, and by the cour- 
teous and polite behaviour of all the magistrates, ministers, and 
citizens, that, persuaded by the persistent entreaties of the excellent 
Deluc, and influenced still more by my own inclinations, I decided 
only to return to Paris to break up my establishment, arrange my 
little business matters, find a situation for Madame le Vasseur and 
her husband or provide for their-wants, and then to return with 
Thérése and settle at Geneva for the rest of my life. 

This resolution once taken, I suspended all serious occupations, 
in order to enjoy myself with my friends, until it was time to set out 
for Paris. Of all my amusements, that which pleased me most was 
rowing round the lake with Deluc, his daughter-in-law, his two 
sons, and my Thérése. We spent seven days in this excursion, in the 
most beautiful weather. I preserved the liveliest recollection of the 
spots which had delighted me at the other end of the lake, and which 
I described some years later in the “Nouvelle Héloïse.” 

The principal connections which I formed at Geneva, besides the 
Delucs whom I have mentioned, were: the young minister Vernes, 
whose acquaintance I had already made in Paris, and of whom I had 
a better opinion than he afterwards justified; M. Perdriau, at that 
time a country pastor, now professor of belles-lettres, whose pleasant 
and agreeable society I shall ever regret, although he has since 
thought it the proper thing to break off the acquaintance; M. Jala- 
bert, professor of physics, since then counsellor and syndic, to whom 
I read my “Essay on Inequality” (omitting the dedication), with 
which he appeared delighted; Professor Lullin, with whom I kept up 
a correspondence up to the time of his death, and who even com- 
missioned me to purchase some books for the library; Professor Ver- 
net, who turned his back upon me, like the rest of the world, after 
I had shown him proofs of attachment and friendship, which ought 
to have touched him, if a theologian could be touched by anything; 
Chappuis, clerk and successor to Gauffecourt, whom he desired to 
supplant, and who was soon afterwards supplanted himself; Marcet 
de Méziéres, an old friend of my father, who had also shown him- 
self mine, but who, after having formerly deserved well of his coun- 


™ Syndic: the head of a corporation. 


LEAVES GENEVA FOR PARIS 407 


try, became a dramatic author and candidate for the Two Hundred, 
changed his opinions, and made himself ridiculous before his death. 
But the acquaintance from whom I hoped most was Moultou—a 
young man whose talents and ardent spirit aroused the greatest ex- 
pectations. I have always felt an affection for him, although his con- 
duct towards myself has often been suspicious, and he is on intimate 
terms with my bitterest enemies; but, notwithstanding all this, I can- 
not prevent myself from looking upon him as one day destined to 
become the defender of my memory, and the avenger of his friend. 

In the midst of these amusements, I neither lost the taste for my 
solitary walks, nor discontinued them. I frequently took long 
rambles on the shores of the lake, during which my brain, accus- 
tomed to work, did not remain idle. I worked up the outline of my 
“Institutions Politiques,” of which I shall have to speak presently, I 
projected a “Histoire du Valais” —a tragedy in prose, the subject of 
which was nothing less than Lucretia, by which I hoped to crush the 
scoffers, although I ventured to introduce this unfortunate woman 
on the stage again at a time when she was no longer possible at any 
French theatre. I also tried my hand at Tacitus, and made a transla- 
tion of the first book of the Histories, which will be found amongst 
my papers. 

After four months’ stay at Geneva, I returned to Paris in October, 
avoiding Lyons, so as not to meet Gauffecourt. As I did not intend 
to return to Geneva until the following spring, I resumed, during 
the winter, my usual habits and occupations, the chief of which was 
the correction of the proofs of my “Discourse on Inequality,” which 
was being published in Holland by Rey, whose acquaintance I had 
recently made at Geneva. As this work was dedicated to the Repub- 
lic, and this dedication might be displeasing to the Council, I waited 
to see the effect it produced at Geneva before J returned there. The 
result was not favourable to me; and this dedication, which had 
been dictated solely by the purest patriotism, made enemies for me 
in the Council, and brought upon me the jealousy of some of the 
citizens. M. Chouet, at that time chief syndic, wrote me a polite, but 
cold, letter, which will be found in my collection (Packet A, No. 3). 
From private individuals, amongst others Deluc and Jalabert, I re- 
ceived a few compliments, and that was all; I did not find that a 


408 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


single Genevese really thanked me for the hearty zeal which was to 
be found in the work. This indifference shocked all those who ob- 
served it. I remember that, one day, at Clichy, when I was dining 
with Madame Dupin in company with Crommelin, minister of the 
Republic, and M. de Mairan, the latter openly declared that the 
Council owed me a reward and public honours for this work, and 
that it would disgrace itself if it failed to do its duty. Crommedlin, 
who was a dark and vulgarly spiteful little man, did not venture to 
make any answer in my presence, but he made a frightful grimace, 
which caused Madame Dupin to smile. The only advantage, besides 
the satisfaction it afforded my heart, which I obtained from this 
work, was the title of “citizen,” which was bestowed upon me by 
my friends and afterwards by the public, which I afterwards lost 
from having deserved it too well. 

However, this ill-success would not have kept me from carrying 
out my intention of retiring to Geneva, had not motives, which had 
greater influence over my heart, contributed to this result. M. 
dEpinay, being desirous of adding a wing which was wanting to 
the chateau of La Chevrette, went to extraordinary expense to finish 
it. One day, having gone, in company with Madame d’Epinay, to 
see the works, we continued our walk a quarter of a league further, 
as far as the reservoir of the waters of the park, which adjoined the 
forest of Montmorency, where there was a pretty kitchen-garden, 
attached to which was a small and very dilapidated cottage, called 
the Hermitage. This solitary and agreeable spot had struck my at- 
tention when I saw it for the first time before my journey to Geneva. 
In my transport, I let fall the exclamation, “Ah, madam, what a de- 
lightful place to live in! Here is a refuge ready made for me.” 
Madame d’Epinay did not take much notice of my words at the 
time; but, on this second visit, I was quite surprised to find, in place 
of the old ruins, a little house almost entirely new, very nicely ar- 
ranged, and very habitable for a small establishment of three persons. 
Madame d’Epinay had had the work carried out quietly and at very 
trifling expense, by taking some materials and some of the workmen 
from the chateau. When she saw my surprise, she said, “There, Mr. 
Bear, there is your asylum; you chose it; friendship offers it to you. 
I hope that it will put an end to your cruel idea of separating from 


VOLTAIRE SETTLES AT GENEVA | 409 


me.” I do not believe that I have ever felt more deeply or more de- 
lightfully touched; I bathed with my tears the beneficent hand of my 
friend; and, if I was not vanquished from that moment, I was sorely 
shaken in my resolution. Madame d’Epinay, who was unwilling to 
be beaten, became so pressing, employed so many different means, 
and so many persons, in order to get over me—even enlisting 
Madame le Vasseur and her daughter in her service—that she finally 
triumphed over my resolutions. Abandoning the idea of settling in 
my native country, I decided, and promised, to live in the Hermit- 
age; and, while the building was getting dry, she undertook to see 
after the furniture, so that all was ready for occupation the following 
spring. 

One thing which greatly contributed to confirm my resolution, 
was the fact that Voltaire had settled in the neighbourhood of 
Geneva. I knew that this man would cause a revolution there; that 
I should find again in my own country the tone, the airs, and the 
manners which drove me from Paris; that I should have to maintain 
a perpetual struggle; and that no other choice would be left to me, 
except to behave either as an insufferable pedant, or as a coward and 
a bad citizen. The letter which Voltaire wrote to me about my last 
work caused me to hint at my apprehensions in my reply; the effect 
which it produced confirmed them. From that moment I looked 
upon Geneva as lost, and I was not mistaken. I ought perhaps to 
have defied the storm, if I had felt that I was capable of doing so. 
But what could I, timid, and a poor speaker, have done unaided 
against one who was arrogant, wealthy, supported by the credit of 
the great, brilliantly eloquent, and already the idol of the women 
and young men? I was afraid of exposing my courage uselessly to 
danger; I only listened to the voice of my naturally peaceable dis- 
position, and my love of tranquillity which, if it deceived me then, 
still deceives me at the present day in this particular. By retiring to 
Geneva, I should have spared myself great misfortunes; but I doubt 
whether, with all my ardent and patriotic zeal, I should have done 
anything great or serviceable to my country. 

Tronchin, who, nearly about the same time, settled at Geneva, 
came to Paris some time afterwards to play the quack, and brought 
away some of its treasures. On his arrival, he came to see me with 


410 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


the Chevalier de Jancourt. Madame d’Epinay was very anxious to 
consult him privately, but it was difficult to get through the crowd. 
She had recourse to me, and I induced him to go and see her. Thus, 
under my auspices, they commenced a connection, which, later, they 
strengthened at my expense. Such has ever been my lot; no sooner 
have I brought together separate friends of my own, than they infal- 
libly combined against me. Although, in the conspiracy, which the 
Tronchins from that time entered into, to reduce their country to a 
state of servitude, they must all have felt a mortal hatred towards 
me, the doctor for a long time continued to show me proofs of his 
goodwill. He even wrote to me after his return to Geneva, offering 
me the post of honorary librarian. But my mind was made up, and 
this offer did not shake my resolution. 

At this time I returned to M. d'Holbach. The reason for my visit 
was the death of his wife, which had taken place during my stay at 
Geneva. Madame Francueil had also died during the same interval. 
Diderot, when informing me of the death of Madame d’Holbach, 
spoke of the husband’s deep affliction. His grief touched my heart, 
and I myself regretted this amiable woman. I wrote to M. d'Holbach 
a letter of condolence. The sad event made me forget all his injus- 
tice; and, when I returned from Geneva, and he himself came back 
from a tour through France, which he had made in company with 
Grimm and some other friends to divert his thoughts from his sor- 
row, I went to visit him, and continued to do so until my departure 
for the Hermitage. When it became known in his circle that 
Madame d’Epinay, with whom he was not yet acquainted, was pre- 
paring a dwelling-place for me, sarcasms fell upon me thick as hail; 
it was said that, unable to live without the flattery and amusements 
ef the city, I could not endure to remain even a fortnight in solitude. 
Conscious of my real feelings, I let them say what they pleased, and 
went my way. Nevertheless, M. d’Holbach helped me to find a 
place for good old Le Vasseur;?&gt; who was over eighty years of age, 


* Here is an instance of the tricks which my memory plays me. Long after 
writing this, I have just learnt, while talking with my wife about her good old 
father, that it was not M. d’Holbach, but M. de Chenonceaux, at that time one of 
the Committee of the Hôtel Dieu,* who procured him the place. I had so com- 


VENTURE DE VILLENEUVE 4II 


and whose wife, feeling the burden too heavy for her, continually 
begged me to relieve her of it. He was put into a poorhouse, where 
his great age, and his grief at finding himself separated from his 
family, brought him to the grave almost as soon as he was admitted. 
His wife and children felt but little regret for him, but Thérèse, who 
loved him fondly, has never consoled herself for his loss, and has 
never forgiven herself for allowing him, when so near his end, to 
finish his days at a distance from her. 

About the same time, I received a visit which I little expected, al- 
though from an old acquaintance. I speak of my friend Venture who 
surprised me one fine morning, when he was the last person I was 
thinking of. He had a companion with him. How changed he ap- 
peared to be! Instead of his former graceful manners, I only found 
in him a general air of dissipation, which prevented me from open- 
ing my heart to him. Either my eyes were no longer the same, or 
debauchery had stupefied his intellect, or else all his early brilliancy 
had depended upon the brilliancy of youth, which he no longer 
possessed. I treated him almost with indifference, and we parted 
rather coolly. But, after he had left, the remembrance of our former 
intimacy so vividly recalled the recollections of my own youth, so 
delightfully and so completely devoted to the angelic woman who 
was now no less changed than himself, the little incidents of that 
happy time, the romantic day’s journey to Toune, spent so inno- 
cently and delightfully in the company of the two charming girls 
whose only favour had been a kiss on the hand, which, nevertheless, 
had left behind such lively, touching and lasting regret; all the de- 
lightful transports of a young heart, which I had then felt in all their 
force, and which I thought were gone for ever; all these tender 
reminiscences made me weep for my past youth and its delights, 
henceforth lost for me. Ah! how I should have wept over their tardy 
and melancholy return, if I had foreseen the sorrow they were to 
cost me! 

Before I left Paris, during the winter which preceded my retire- 
pletely forgotten him, and had so lively a recollection of M. d’Holbach, that I 
could have sworn that it had been he. 


* The oldest hospital in Paris—TR. | 


412 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ment, I enjoyed a pleasure quite after my own heart, which I tasted 
in all its purity. Palissot, a member of the Academy of Nancy, who 
was known for some plays which he had written, had just had one 
performed at Lunéville, before the King of Poland. He evidently 
hoped to gain favour by introducing, in this piece, a man who had 
ventured to cross pens with the King. Stanislaus, who was a generous 
man and not fond of satire, was indignant that anyone should ven- 
ture to introduce personalities in his presence. M. le Comte de 
Tressan wrote, by this Prince’s orders, to d Alembert and myself, to 
inform me that it was His Majesty’s intention to procure the expul- 
sion of Palissot from the Academy. In reply, I earnestly entreated M. 
de Tressan to intercede with the King in Palissot’s favour. He was 
pardoned, and M. de Tressan, when informing me of it in the King’s 
name, added that the incident would be inserted in the records of 
the Academy. I replied that this would rather be inflicting a per- 
petual punishment than granting a pardon. At last, by dint of en- 
treaties, I succeeded in obtaining a promise, that the whole affair 
should be kept out of the records, and that no trace of it should ap- 
pear in public. The promise was accompanied, both on the part of 
the King and of M. de Tressan, by protestations of esteem and re- 
gard, which flattered me exceedingly; and I felt on this occasion, 
that the esteem of those, who are so worthy of it themselves, produce 
in the soul a feeling far sweeter and nobler than that of vanity. I have 
inserted in my collection the letters of M. de Tressan, together with 
my replies. The originals will be found in Bundle A, Nos. 9, ro and 
in 

I quite feel that, if these Memoirs ever see the light, I am here 
perpetuating the memory of an incident, all traces of which I desired 
to efface; but I have handed down many other incidents to posterity 
with equal reluctance. The great object of my undertaking, which 
is ever before my eyes, the indispensable duty of carrying it out in its 
fullest extent, will not permit me to be turned aside from my pur- 
pose by unimportant considerations, which would divert me from 
my object. In my singular and unique situation, I owe too much to 
truth to owe anything further to anyone else. In order to know me 
well, one must know me in all my aspects, both good and bad. My 
Confessions are necessarily connected with those of many others. 


HIS SENSE OF PERSECUTION 413 


I make both with equal frankness in all that relates to myself, as I 
do not think that I am bowñd to treat anyone else with greater con- 
sideration than myself, although I should certainly like to do so. I 
desire to be always just and truthful, to say as much good of others 
as I can, only to speak evil when it concerns myself, and when I am 
compelled to do so. Who, in the position in which I have been placed 
by the world, has the right to demand more from me? My Confes- 
sions are not written to appear during my lifetime, or that of the 
persons concerned in them. If I were the master of my own destiny 
and of that of this work, it should not see the light until long after 
my death and their own. But the efforts, which the dread of truth 
causes my powerful oppressors to make, in order to efface all traces 
of it, force me to do all that the most scrupulous fairness and the 
strictest sense of justice allow me, in order to preserve these traces. 
If the remembrance of me were destined to die with me, rather than 
compromise anyone, I would, without a murmur, endure an unjust 
and momentary ignominy; but, since my name is destined to live, it 
is incumbent upon me to endeavour to hand down with it the re- 
membrance of the unfortunate man who bore it—such as he really 
was, not such as his unjust enemies incessantly endeavour to repre: 
sent him. 


nent 


BOOK Ix 


[1756] 


I was so impatient to take up my abode in the Hermitage, that I 
could not wait for the return of fine weather; and, as soon as my 
new home was ready, I hastened to betake myself thither, amidst 
the loud ridicule of the Holbachian clique, who openly predicted 
that I should not be able to endure three months’ solitude, and that 
they would soon see me returning to confess my failure and live in 
Paris as they did. I myself, who had been for fifteen years out of my 
element, and now saw that I was on the point of returning to it, 
took no notice of their raillery. Ever since I had been thrown into 
the world against my will, I had not ceased to regret my dear Char- 
mettes, and the blissful life which I had led there. I felt that I was 
born for the country and retirement; it was impossible for me to 
live happily anywhere else. At Venice, amidst the bustle of public 
business, in the position of a kind of diplomatic representative, in 
my proud hopes and schemes of promotion; at Paris—in the whirl 
of high society, in the sensual enjoyment of suppers, in the brilliant 
spectacles of the theatre, in the cloud of vain-glory which surrounded 
me—the recollection of my groves, brooks, and solitary walks was 
ever present to distract and sadden me, to draw from me sighs of 
longing and regret. All the toil to which I had been able to subject 
myself, all the ambitious schemes which, by fits and starts, had 
roused my zeal, had no other end in view but that of one day enjoy- 
ing the happy country ease, to which at that moment I flattered my- 
self I had attained. Without having acquired the respectable inde- 
pendence which I considered could alone lead me to it, I considered 
that, owing to my peculiar position, I was able to dispense with it, 
and to reach the same end by quite a different road. J had no income 
whatever; but I had a name, I possessed ability. I was temperate and 


414 


THE HERMITAGE 415 


had freed myself from the most expensive wants, which are satisfied 
in obedience to popular offinion. Besides, although indolent, I could 
work hard when I chose; and my indolence was not so much that 
of a confirmed idler as of an independent person, who only cares to 
work when he is in the humour for it. My copying was neither a 
brilliant nor a lucrative employment, but it was certain. The world 
approved of my courage in having chosen it. I could always feel 
sure of work, and, if I worked hard, of earning sufficient to live 
upon. Two thousand francs, the remains of the profits of the Devin 
du Village and my other writings, was a sufficient capital to keep 
me from being pushed for money for some time, and several works 
which I had in hand promised me, without being obliged to draw 
upon the booksellers, a sufficient addition to my funds to enable me 
to work comfortably without over-exerting myself and even to em- 
ploy to advantage the leisure of my walks. My little household, con- 
sisting of three people, who were all usefully employed, was not 
very expensive to keep up. In short, my resources, which corre- 
sponded to my wants and desires, bade fair to promise me lasting 
happiness in the life which my inclination had chosen for me. 

I might have thrown myself entirely into the most lucrative path, 
and, instead of lowering my pen to copying, I might have devoted it 
entirely to writings, which, in the flight which I had taken, and 
which I felt myself capable of continuing, might have enabled me 
to live in opulence, even in luxury, if only I had been disposed to 
combine, in the smallest degree, an author’s tricks with carefulness 
to produce good books. But I felt that writing for bread would soon 
have stifled my genius and destroyed my talents, which were more 
those of the heart than of the pen, and arose solely from a proud 
and elevated manner of thinking, which alone could support them. 
Nothing great, nothing vigorous can proceed from a pen that is 
entirely venal. Necessity, perhaps avarice, might have led me to 
write with greater rapidity than excellence. If the need of success 
had not plunged me into cabals, it might have made me strive to say 
what might please the multitude, rather than what was true and 
useful, and instead of a distinguished author which I might possibly 
become, I should have ended in becoming nothing but a mere scrib- 
bler. No, no! I have always felt that the position of an author is not 


416 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


and cannot be distinguished or respectable, except in so far as it is 
not a profession. It is too difficult to think nobly, when one thinks 
only in order to live. In order to be able and to venture to utter great 
truths, one must not be dependent upon success. I threw my books 
amongst the public with the sure consciousness of having spoken 
for the general good, without caring for anything else. If the work 
was rejected, so much the worse for those who refused to profit by 
it. As for myself, I did not need their approval in order to live; my 
profession would support me, if my books did not sell; and it was 
just this which made them sell. 

It was on the oth of April, 1756, that I left Paris, never to live ina 
city again, for I do not reckon the brief periods for which I after- . 
wards stayed in Paris, London and other cities, only when passing 
through them, or against my will. Madame d’Epinay took us all 
three in her carriage; her farmer took charge of my small amount 
of luggage, and I was installed in my new home the same day. I 
found my little retreat arranged and furnished simply, but neatly 
and even tastefully. The hand which had attended to these arrange- 
ments conferred upon them in my eyes an inestimable value, and I 
found it delightful to be the guest of my friend, in a house of my 
own choice, which she had built on purpose for me. Although it 
was cold, and there was still some snow on the ground, the earth 
was beginning to show signs of vegetation: violets and primroses 
could be seen, the buds were beginning to open on the trees, and the 
night of my arrival was marked by the first song of the nightingale, 
which made itself heard nearly under my window, in a wood ad- 
joining the house. When I awoke, after a light sleep, forgetting my 
change of abode, I thought that I was still in the Rue de Grenelle, 
when suddenly this warbling made me start, and in my delight I 
exclaimed, “At last all my wishes are fulfilled!” My first thought 
was to abandon myself to the impression caused by the rural objects 
by which I was surrounded. Instead of beginning to set things in 
order in my new abode, I began by making arrangements for my 
walks; there was not a path, not a copse, not a thicket, not a corner 
round my dwelling, which I had not explored by the following day. 
The more I examined this charming retreat, the more I felt that it 
was made for me. This spot, solitary rather than wild, transported 


PLANS FOR FUTURE WORK 417 


me in spirit to the end of the world. It possessed those impressive 
_ beauties which are rarely seen in the neighbourhood of cities; no 
one, who had suddenly been transported there, would have believed 
that he was only four leagues from Paris. 

After having devoted some days to my rustic enthusiasm, I began 
to think about putting my papers in order and distributing my oc- 
cupations. I set aside my mornings for copying, as I had always done, 
and my afternoons for walking, armed with my little note-book 
and pencil; for, as I had never been able to write or think freely, ex- 
cept sub divo,' I felt no temptation to change my method, and I 
reckoned that the forest of Montmorency, which was almost at my 
door, would in future be my study. I had several works already be- 
gun, and I went over them again. I was magnificent enough in my 
schemes; but, amidst the bustle of the city, they had hitherto made 
but little progress. I counted upon being able to devote a little more 
attention to them when I should have less to distract me. I think that 
I have fairly fulfilled this expectation; and, for a man who was often 
ill, often at La Chevrette, Epinay, Eaubonne and the Chateau of 
Montmorency, often beset in his own house by curious idlers, and 
always busy half the day in copying, if one counts and considers the 
work which I produced during the six years spent at the Hermitage 
and Montmorency, I am convinced that it will be agreed that, if I 
lost my time during this period, it was at least not wasted in idleness. 

Of the different works which I had on the stocks, the one which 
I had long had in my head, at which I worked with the greatest in- 
clination, to which I wished to devote myself all my life, and which, 
in my own opinion, was to set the seal upon my reputation—was my 
“Institutions Politiques.” Thirteen or fourteen years ago, I had con- 
ceived the idea of it, when, during my stay at Venice, I had had oc- 
casion to observe the faults of its much-vaunted system of govern- 
ment. Since then, my views had become greatly enlarged by the his- 
torical study of morals. I had come to see that everything was radi- 
cally connected with politics, and that, however one proceeded, no 
people would be other than the nature of its government made it; 
thus this great question of the best government possible appeared to 
me to reduce itself to the following: What kind of government is 


1Jn the open air. 


418 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


best adapted to produce the most virtuous, the most enlightened, the 
wisest, and, in short, the best people, taking the word “best” in its 
widest signification? I thought that I perceived that this question 
was very closely connected with another, very nearly, although not 
quite the same. What is the government which, from its nature, al- 
ways keeps closest to the law? This leads to the question, What is 
the law? and to a series of questions equally important. I saw that 
all this led me on to great truths conducive to the happiness of the 
human race, above all, to that of my country, in which I had not 
found, in the journey I had just made thither, sufficiently clear or 
correct notions of liberty and the laws to satisfy me; and I believed 
that this indirect method of communicating them was the best suited 
to spare the pride of those whom it concerned, and to secure my own 
forgiveness for having been able to see a little further than them- 
selves. 

Although I had been already engaged five or six years upon this 
work, it was still in a very backward state. Books of this kind re- 
quire meditation, leisure, and tranquillity. Besides, I worked at it, 
as the saying is, en bonne fortune, without communicating my in- 
tention to anyone, not even to Diderot. I was afraid that it might 
appear too foolhardy, considering the age and country in which I 
wrote, and that the alarm of my friends would embarrass me in its 
execution.’ I was not yet sure whether it would be finished in time, 
and in such a manner as to admit of its being published during my 
lifetime. I wished to be able to devote to my subject, withcut re- 
straint, all the efforts which it demanded of me; for I felt convinced 
that, as I had no satirical vein, and never desired to be personal, I 
should always be free from blame, if fairly judged. I naturally de- 


2 Secretly. 

3It was the prudent strictness of Duclos in particular that inspired me with 
this apprehension. As for Diderot, somehow or other, all my conversations with 
him always tended to make me more satirical and caustic than I was naturally 
inclined to be. This very circumstance hindered me from consulting him in re- 
gard to an undertaking, in which I desired to employ nothing but the force of 
argument, without the least trace of irritation or party-feeling. The tone which I 


adopted in this work may be gathered from that of the “Contrat Social,” which 
is taken from it. 


REFLECTIONS ON HIS BOOKS 419 


sired to employ to the full the right of thin ine: which was mine by 
birth, but always in such 4 manner as to show respect towards the 
government under which I lived, without ever disobeying its laws; 
and, while extremely careful not to violate the law of nations, I by no 
means intended to renounce the advantages it afforded, owing to 
any considerations of fear. I even confess that, as a stranger and 
living in France, I found my position advantageous for speaking the 
truth boldly. I knew well that, if I continued, as I intended, to have 
nothing printed in the State without permission, I was under no 
responsibility to anyone as regarded my principles and their publica- 
tion in any other country. I should have been less independent even 
at Geneva, where the authorities had the right to criticise the con- 
tents of my writings wherever they might have been printed. This 
consideration had greatly contributed to make me yield to the en- 
treaties of Madame d’Epinay, and to abandon my intention of set- 
tling at Geneva. I felt, as I have stated in my “Emile,” that, unless 
a man is a born intriguer, he must by no means compose his books 
in the bosom of his country, if he desires to devote them to its 
welfare. 

What made me feel still happier was, that I was persuaded that 
the Government of France, without perhaps regarding me with a 
very favourable eye, would make it a point of honour, if not to pro- 
tect me, at least to leave me unmolested. This appeared to me a very 
simple, but, nevertheless, very clever stroke of policy—to make a 
merit of tolerating what could not be prevented, since, if I had been 
driven from France, which was all the authorities had a right to do, 
my books would have been written just the same, and perhaps with 
less reserve; whereas, by leaving me undisturbed, they would keep 
the author as surety for his works; and, further, would abolish prej- 
udices deeply rooted in the rest of Europe, by gaining the reputation 
of having an enlightened respect for the rights of nations. 

Those who judge, from the result, that my confidence deceived 
me, may be deceived themselves. In the storm which has over- 
whelmed me my books have served as an excuse, but it was against 
myself personally that the attack was directed. They cared little 
about the author, but were eager to ruin Jean Jacques; and the worst 
thing that could be found in my writings, was the honour which 


420 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


they might possibly pay me. But let us not anticipate the future. I do 
not know whether this mystery—for such it still is to me—will sub- 
sequently be cleared up in the eyes of my readers. I only know that, 
if my publicly-declared principles had deserved to bring upon me 
the treatment I have suffered, I should have become its victim 
sooner, since the treatment of all my writings, in which these prin- 
ciples are unfolded, with the greatest hardihood, not to say audacity, 
appeared to have produced its effect even before my retirement to 
the Hermitage, without it having occurred to anyone, I will not say 
to pick a quarrel with me, but even to hinder the publication of the 
work in France, where it was sold as openly as in Holland. After- 
wards the “Nouvelle Héloïse” appeared with no greater difficulty, 
and, I venture to say, with the same approval; and, what seems al- 
most incredible, the profession of faith of this same Héloïse is 
exactly the same as that of the Savoyard Vicar. All that is outspoken 
in the “Contrat Social” had formerly appeared in the “Discours sur 
VInégalité.” All that is outspoken in “Emile” had formerly appeared 
in “Julie.” But these outspoken passages created no outcry against 
the two earlier works, therefore it could not have been they which 
created it against the latter. 

Another undertaking, much of the same nature, the idea of which 
had occurred to me later, occupied my attention more at this mo- 
ment. This was “Selections” from the works of the Abbé de Saint- 
Pierre, of whom I have hitherto been unable to speak, having been 
carried away by the thread of my narrative. The idea had been sug- 
gested to me, after my return from Geneva, by the Abbé de Mably, 
not directly, but through the intervention of Madame Dupin, who 
had a sort of interest in getting me to take it up. She was one of the 
three or four pretty women of Paris whose spoilt child the old Abbé 
had been; and, if she had not decidedly enjoyed the preference, she 
had at least shared it with Madame d’Aiguillon. She preserved for 
the memory of the good old man a feeling of respect and affection 
which did honour to both, and her vanity would have been flattered 
by seeing the still-born works of her friend brought to life again by 
her secretary. These works themselves, however, contained some ex- 
cellent things, but so badly expressed, that it was a wearisome under- 
taking to read them; and it is astonishing that the Abbé, who re- 


WORKS OF THE ABBE DE SAINT-PIERRE  . 421 


garded his readers merelygas grown-up children, should, neverthe- 
less, have addressed them as men, to judge by the little trouble he 
took to gain a hearing from them. With this idea the task had been 
proposed to me, as useful in itself, and very suitable for a man who 
was an industrious worker, but idle as an originator, who, finding 
the effort of thinking very fatiguing, preferred, in things which were 
to his taste, to elucidate and advance the ideas of another to creating 
ideas of his own. Besides, as I did not confine myself to the part of 
a mere translator, I was not prohibited from sometimes thinking for 
myself; and I was at liberty to give my work such a form, that many 
important truths might find their way into it under the mantle of 
the Abbé de Saint-Pierre with less risk than under my own. In addi- 
tion, the undertaking was no light one; it was a question of nothing 
less than reading, thinking over, and making selections from twenty- 
three volumes, diffuse, confused, full of prolixities, repetitions, and 
narrow or false views, amongst which it was necessary to fish out 
some few that were great and lofty, which gave one the courage to 
endure the painful task. I myself was often on the point of relin- 
quishing it, if I could have drawn back with decency—but, by ac- 
cepting the Abbé’s manuscripts, which were given to me by his 
nephew the Comte de Saint-Pierre, at the entreaty of Saint-Lambert, 
I had in a manner pledged myself to make use of them, and it was 
necessary for me either to return them, or to endeavour to turn them 
to account. It was with the latter intention that I had brought these 
manuscripts to the Hermitage, and it was the first work to which 
I intended to devote my spare time. 

I contemplated a third work, the idea of which was due to certain 
observations which J had made upon myself; and I felt the more en- 
couraged to undertake it, as I had reason to hope that I might pro- 
duce a book really useful to mankind, even one of the most useful 
that could be offered to it, if the execution worthily corresponded to 
the plan which I had sketched for myself. The observation has been 
made, that most men, in the course of their lives, are frequently un- 
like themselves, and seem transformed into quite different men. It 
was not to establish a truth so well known that I desired to write a 
book; I had a newer and even more important object. This was to 
investigate the causes of these changes, confining myself to those 


422 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


which depended on ourselves, in order to show how we might our- 
selves control them, in order to make ourselves better and more cer- 
tain of ourselves. For it is unquestionably more difficult for an hon- 
ourable man to resist desires, already fully formed, which he ought 
to overcome, than it is to prevent, change or modify these same de- 
sires at the fountain-head, supposing him to be in a position to trace 
them back to it. A man resists temptation at one time because he is 
strong; another time, he yields to it because he is weak; if he had 
been the same as before, he would not have yielded. 

While examining myself, and endeavouring to find, in the case 
of others, upon what these different conditions of being depended, I 
discovered that they depended in great part upon the impression 
which external objects had previously made upon us, and that we, 
being continually modified by our senses and our bodily organs, 
exhibited, without perceiving it, the effect of these modifications 
of ourselves, in our ideas, our feelings, and even in our actions. The 
numerous and striking observations whch I had collected were un- 
assailable, and, from their physical principles, seemed to me well 
adapted to furnish an external rule of conduct, which, being altered 
according to circumstances, might place or keep the mind in the 
condition most favourable to virtue. From how many errors would 
the reason be preserved, how many vices would be strangled at 
their birth, if mankind knew how to compel the animal economy to 
support the moral order, which it so frequently disturbs! Different 
climates, seasons, sounds, colours, darkness, light, the elements, food, 
noise, silence, movement, repose—all affect the bodily machine, and 
consequently the mind; all afford us a thousand opportunities, which 
will almost infallibly enable us to govern those feelings in their 
first beginnings, by which we allow ourselves to be dominated. 
Such was the fundamental idea which I had already sketched upon 
paper, and from which I expected, in the case of well-disposed per- 
sons, who, loving virtue sincerely, mistrust their weakness, a surer 
effect, inasmuch as it appeared easy to me to make of it a book as 
agreeable to read as it was to write. However, I have made but little 
progress in the work, the title of which was La Morale Sensitive, 
or Le Matérialisme du Sage. Distractions, the cause of which the 
reader will soon learn, prevented me from giving it attention, and 


HIS “DICTIONARY OF MUSIC” 423 


he will also learn what was the fate of my sketch, which is more 
closely connected with my own than it might appear. 

Besides all this, I had for some time contemplated a system of 
education, to which Madame de Chenonceaux, who trembled for 
her son’s future, as the result of the education which he was receiv- 
ing from his father, had begged me to give attention. The power of 
friendship caused this subject, although less to my taste in itself, to 
claim my attention more than all the rest. For this reason this is the 
only project, amongst all those which I have just mentioned, that I 
have carried out. The object which I proposed to myself in this work 
should, in my opinion, have brought the author a different reward. 
But let us not here anticipate this melancholy topic. I shall have only 
too much reason to speak of it in the sequel. 

All these various projects afforded me material for meditation dur- 
ing my walks, for, as I believe I have already said, I can only think 
while walking: as soon as I stop, I can think no longer; my brain 
can only move with my feet. However, I had taken the precaution 
of providing myself with an indoor task for rainy days. This was 
my “Dictionary of Music”; the scattered, mutilated, and raw ma- 
terials of which made it necessary to rewrite the work almost en- 
tirely. I bought some books which I required for the purpose. I had 
spent two months in making extracts from a number of others which 
I borrowed from the King’s library, and some of which I was even 
allowed to take with me to the Hermitage. These were my materials 
for compiling indoors, when the weather did not allow me to go 
out, or when I was tired of my copying. This arrangement suited 
me so well, that I adhered to it both at the Hermitage and at Mont- 
morency, and even, subsequently, at Motiers, where I finished this 
work while continuing others; and I always found a real relaxation 
in a change of occupation. 

I followed for some time, with tolerable exactness, the distribu- 
tion of time that I had marked out for myself, and was very well 
satisfied with it; but, when the fine weather brought back Madame 
dEpinay more frequently to Epinay or La Chevrette, I found that 
attentions, which at first did not cost me much, but which I had 
not reckoned upon, greatly upset my other arrangements. I have 
already said that Madame d’Epinay had some very amiable qualities; 


424 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


she was very devoted to her friends and served them most zealously; 
and, as she spared neither time nor trouble, she certainly deserved 
that they should show her some attentions in return. Hitherto I had 
fulfilled this duty without feeling that it was one; but at last I dis- 
covered that I had loaded myself with a chain, the weight of which 
only friendship prevented me from feeling: I had made the burden 
heavier by my dislike of crowded rooms. Madame d’Epinay availed 
herself of this to make a proposal, which seemed to suit me well, and 
suited her even better; this was that she should let me know when 
she would be alone, or nearly so. I consented, without foreseeing 
to what I was binding myself. The consequence was, that I no longer 
visited her when it was convenient to me, but when it suited her, so 
that I was never sure of having a whole day at my disposal. This tie 
considerably spoiled the pleasure which my visits to her had for- 
merely afforded me. I found that the freedom which she had so 
often promised me, was only granted to me on condition that I never 
made use of it; and, when once or twice I attempted to do so, it gave 
occasion to so many messages, so many notes and such apprehensions 
concerning my health, that I plainly saw that nothing but being com- 
pletely confined to my bed could excuse me from running to her at 
the first intimation of her wishes. I was obliged to submit to this 
yoke. I submitted, and with tolerably good grace for so bitter an 
enemy of dependence as I was, since my sincere attachment to her 
prevented me in great measure from feeling the chain which accom- 
panied it. She also filled up in this manner, more or less, the void 
which the absence of her usual circle left in her amusements. It was 
for her a very poor stop-gap, but it was better than complete solitude, 
which was unbearable to her. However, she was able to fill it much 
more easily after she began to try her hand at literature, and took 
it into her head to write, no matter how, romances, letters, comedies, 
tales, and such trifles. But what amused her was not so much writing 
as reading them; and if she by chance managed to scribble two or 
three consecutive pages, it was absolutely necessary for her to feel 
sure of having at least two or three favourable hearers, when she had 
completed this enormous task. I rarely had the honour of being one 
of the chosen, except by the favour of another. By myself, I was 
hardly ever considered at all in anything, not only in the society of 


MADAME D’EPINAY 425 
Madame d’Epinay, but i# that of M. d'Holbach, and wherever 


Grimm set the fashion. This complete insignificance suited me per- 
fectly well, except in a téte-d-téte, when I did not know what attitude 
to assume, as I did not venture to talk about literature, of which 
I was not competent to judge, nor about gallantry, since I was too 
bashful, and I feared, more than death itself, the ridiculous appear- 
ance of an old beau. Besides, this idea never occurred to me when 
with Madame d’Epinay, and would perhaps never have occurred 
to me once in my life, even had I spent it altogether in her society; 
not that I had any personal repugnance to her—on the contrary, I 
perhaps loved her too much as a friend, to be able to love her as a 
lover. It gave me pleasure to see her and to talk with her. Her con- 
versation, although agreeable enough in society, was dull in private; 
my own, which was by no means fluent, was not much assistance 
to her. Ashamed of a too lengthy silence, I strained every nerve to 
enliven the interview; and, although it often tired me, it never 
wearied me. I was very glad to show her trifling attentions, to give 
her little brotherly kisses, which did not appear to excite her sensu- 
ality any more than my own, and that was all. She was very thin, 
very pale, her breast was as flat as my hand. This defect alone would 
have been sufficient to chill me; my heart and senses have never been 
able to see a woman in one who has no breasts; and other reasons, 
which it would be useless to mention, always caused me to forget her 
sex. 

Having thus made up my mind to an inevitable servitude, I re- 
signed myself to it without resistance, and found it, at least during 
the first year, less burdensome than I should have expected. Madame 
d’Epinay, who usually spent the whole summer in the country, only 
spent part of the summer of this year there, either because her affairs 
required her to be more at Paris, or because the absence of Grimm 
rendered her stay at La Chevrette less agreeable. I profited by the 
intervals of her absence, or when she had much company, to enjoy 
my solitude with my good Thérése and her mother in a manner 
which made me thoroughly appreciate it. Although for some years 
I had visited the country pretty frequently, I had rarely enjoyed it; 
and those excursions, always taken in the company of pretentious 
persons, and always spoiled by a feeling of restraint, only whetted 


e 


426 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


my appetite for country pleasures, and, the nearer the glimpse I had 
of them, the more I felt the want of them. I was so weary of salons, 
waterfalls, groves, flower-gardens, and their still more wearisome 


exhibitors; I was so tired of stitching, pianos, sorting wool, making 


bows, foolish witticisms, insipid affectations, trifling story-tellers, 
and big suppers that, when I caught a glimpse of a simple thorn- 
bush, a hedge, a barn, or a meadow; when I inhaled, while passing 
through a hamlet, the fragrance of a savoury chervil omelette; 
when I heard from a distance the rustic refrain of the disquiéres,* 
I wished all rouge, furbelows, and ambergris® at the devil; and, 
regretting the good-wife’s homely dinner and the native wine, I 
should have been delighted to slap the face of M. le chef and M. le 
maitre, who forced me to dine at my usual supper-hour, and to sup 
at a time when I am usually asleep; above all, I should have liked 
to slap MM. les laquais, who devoured with their eyes the morsels I 
ate, and, if I was not prepared to die of thirst, sold me their master’s 
adulterated wine at ten times the price I should have paid for wine 
of a better quality at an inn. 

Behold me, then, at last, in my own house, in a pleasant and soli- 
tary retreat, able to spend my days in the independent, even, and 
peaceful life, for which I felt that I was born. Before describing the 
effect of this situation, so new to me, upon my heart, it behoves me 
to recapitulate its secret inclinations, that the progress of these new 
modifications may be better followed up in its origin. 

I have always considered the day which united me to my Thérése 
as that which determined my moral being. I needed an attachment, 
since that which should have sufficed me had been so cruelly broken. 
The thirst for happiness is never quenched in man’s heart. Mamma 
was growing old and degraded. It was clear to me that she could 
never again be happy in this world. Thus, the only thing left for me 
was to seek for a happiness which should be my own, since I had for 
ever lost all hope of sharing hers. I drifted for some time from one 
idea, from one plan, to another. My voyage to Venice would have 
plunged me into public affairs, if the man with whom I was to be 


“Female goatherds. 
5 Used for perfume. 


REFLECTIONS UPON THERESE 427 


connected had been possessed of common sense. I am easily dis- 
couraged, especially i in difficult and long-winded undertakings. My 
ill-success in this disgusted me with all others; and since, in accord- 
ance with my old maxim, I looked upon distant objects as decoys 
for fools, I determined to live henceforth without any fixed plan, as 
I no longer saw anything in life which might have tempted me to 
exert myself. 

It was just at that time that we became acquainted. The gentle 
character of this good girl appeared to me so well suited to my own, 
that I united myself to her by means of an attachment which neither 
time nor wrongs have been able to lessen, and everything which 
ought to have broken it has only increased it. The strength of this 
attachment will be seen in the sequel, when I lay bare the wounds 
and pangs with which she has rent my heart during the height of 
my misery, without a word of complaint to anyone ever escaping 
me, until the moment when I am writing these lines. 

When it becomes known that, after having done all and braved 
everything, to avoid being separated from her, after having lived 
with her for twenty-five years, in spite of destiny and mankind, I 
finally married her in my old age, without any expectation or solici- 
tation on her part, without any engagement or promise on my own, 
it will be believed that a mad love, which turned my head from the 
first day, gradually led me on to the last extravagance; and it will be 
the more readily believed, when the special and weighty reasons, 
which should have prevented me froin ever doing such a thing, also 
become known. What then will the reader think, when I declare to 
him, in all the sincerity which he must now recognise as part of my 
character, that, from the first moment when I saw her up to this 
day, I never felt the least spark of love for her; that I no more de- 
sired her possession than that of Madame de Warens, and that the 
sensual needs, which I satisfied in her person, were only for me these 
of sexual impulse, without being in any way connected with the 
individual? He will perhaps believe that, being constituted differ- 
ently from other men, I was incapable of feeling love, since it did 
not enter into the feelings which attached me to those women who 
have been most dear to me. Patience, reader! the fatal moment is ap- 
proaching, when you will be only too rudely undeceived. 


428 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


I repeat myself; I know it; but it is unavoidable. The first, the 
greatest, the most powerful, the most irrepressible of all my needs 
was entirely in my heart; it was the need of a companionship as inti- 
mate as was possible; it was for that purpose especially that I needed 
a woman rather than a man, a female rather than a male friend. 
This singular want was such, that the most intimate corporal union 
had been unable to satisfy it; I should have wanted two souls in the 
same body; without that, I was always conscious of a void. I thought 
that the moment had come, when I should feel it no longer. This 
young person, amiable by reason of a thousand excellent qualities, 
and, at that time, even by her personal appearance, which was with- 
out a trace of unnaturalness or coquetry, would have confined my 
whole existence in herself, if I had been able to confine hers to me, 
as I had hoped. I had nothing to fear from men; I am certain that 
I am the only man she ever truly loved, and her passions were so 
cool, that she rarely felt the want of other men, even when I had 
reased to be one to her in this respect. I had no family; she had one; 
and this family, the members of which were all of a far different 
character from herself, was not such that I could ever have regarded 
it as my own. This was the first cause of my unhappiness. What 
would I not have given to have been able to make myself her 
mother’s child! I tried all I could to do so, but never succeeded. It was 
useless for me to attempt to unite all our interests; it was impossible. 
She always created interests different from mine, set them in opposi- 
tion to mine, and even to those of her daughter, which were already 
identical with them. She and her other children and grandchildren 
became so many leeches, and the least injury they did to Thérése was 
that of robbing her. The poor girl, who was accustomed to give in, 
even to her nieces, allowed herself to be robbed and ruled without 
saying a word; and it pained me to see that, while I exhausted my 
money and good advice in vain, I could do nothing to assist her. I 
tried to get her away from her mother; but she always opposed it. 
I respected her opposition, and esteemed her the more for it; but 
this refusal was none the less prejudicial to her interests and my own. 
Devoted to her mother and the rest of her family, she belonged more 
to them than to me, even more than to herself. Their greed was not 
so ruinous to her as their advice was pernicious; in short, if, thanks 


REFLECTS ON HIS CONDITION 429 


to her love for me and hes naturally good disposition, she was not 
completely their slave, she was sufficiently so to prevent, in great 
part, the effect of the good principles which I endeavoured to instil 
into her, and to cause us always to remain two, in spite of all my 
efforts to the contrary. 

Thus it came to pass that, notwithstanding a sincere and mutual 
attachment, upon which I had bestowed all the tenderness of my 
heart, the void in this heart was never completely filled. Children, 
who might have effected this, were born to us; but this only made 
matters worse. I shuddered at the thought of handing them over te 
the care of this badly brought up family, to be brought up even 
worse. The risks of bringing up at the Foundling Hospital were far 
less. This reason for the resolution which I took, stronger than all 
those which I stated in my letter to Madame de Francueil, was, how- 
ever, the only one which I did not venture to tell her. I preferred to 
remain not completely cleared from so grave a reproach, in order to 
spare the family of a person whom I loved. But it may be judged, 
from the behaviour of her miserable brother, whether, in spite of 
anything that may be said about it, I should have been justified in 
exposing my children to the risk of receiving a similar education to 
his. 

Being unable to enjoy to the full this intimate intercourse of which 
I felt the need, I sought to supplement it in a manner which, 
although it did not completely fill the void, caused me to feel it less. 
For want of a friend, who should be entirely devoted to me, I needed 
friends whose impulse might overcome my indolence. For this rea- 
son I cultivated and strengthened my relations with Diderot and the 
Abbé de Condillac, entered into fresh and still closer relations with 
Grimm, and, in the end, owing to the unlucky Essay, the history 
of which I have related, I found myself thrown back, without any 
idea of it, upon literature, which I thought I had abandoned for ever. 

My first appearance led me by a new path into another intellec- 
tual world, the simple and lofty economy of which I was unable to 
look upon without enthusiasm. My continued attention to it soon 
convinced me, that there was nothing but error and folly in the doc- 
trine of our philosophers, and misery and oppression in our social 
arrangements. Deluded by my foolish pride, I thought that I was 


430 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


born to destroy all these illusions, and, believing that, in order to 
gain a hearing, it was necessary for my manner of life to harmonize 
with my principles, I adopted the singular course which J have not 
been permitted to continue, in which I set an example for which my 
pretended friends have never forgiven me, which at first made me 
ridiculous, and would have ended by making me respectable, if it 
had been possible for me to persevere in it. 

Hitherto I had been good; from that moment I became virtuous, 
or, at least, intoxicated with virtue. This intoxication had com- 
menced in my head, but had passed on into my heart. The noblest 
pride sprang up therein on the ruins of uprooted vanity. I pretended 
nothing; I became really what I seemed; and, for the four years at 
least, during which this state of effervescence lasted in ail its force, 
there was nothing great or beautiful, which a man’s heart could con- 
tain, of which I was not capable between heaven and myself. This 
was the origin of my sudden eloquence, of the truly celestial fire 
which inflamed me and spread over my first writings, and which for 
forty years had not emitted the least spark, since it was not yet 
kindled. 

I was truly transformed; my friends and acquaintances no longer 
recognised me. I was no longer the shy, bashful rather than modest 
man, who did not venture to show himself or utter a word, whom 
a playful remark disconcerted, whom a woman’s glance caused to 
blush. Audacious, proud, undaunted, I carried with me everywhere 
a confidence, which was firmer in proportion to its simplicity, and 
had its abode rather in my soul than in my outward demeanour. 
The contempt for the manners, principles, and prejudices of my age, 
with which my deep meditations had inspired me, rendered me in- 
sensible to the raillery of those who possessed them, and I pulverised 
their trifling witticisms with my maxims, as I should have crushed 
an insect between my fingers. What a change! All Paris repeated 
the penetrating and biting sarcasms of the man who, two years be- 
fore and ten years afterwards, never knew how to find the thing he 
ought to say, nor the expression he ought to use. Anyone who en- 
deavours to find the condition of all others most contrary to my na- 
ture will find it in this. If he desires to recall one of those brief 
moments in my life during which I ceased to be myself, and became 


HIS TRANSFORMATION _ 431 


another, he will find it agajn in the time of which I speak; but, in- 

stead of lasting six days or six weeks, it lasted nearly six years, and 

would, perhaps, have lasted until now, had it not been for the spe- 

cial circumstances which put an end to it, and restored me to Nature, 
' above which I had attempted to elevate myself. 

This change began as soon as I had left Paris and the sight of the 
vices of the great city ceased to keep up the indignation with which 
it had inspired me. As soon as I lost sight of men, I ceased to despise 
them; as soon as I lost sight of the wicked, I ceased to hate them. 
My heart, little adapted for hatred, only caused me to deplore their 
wretchedness, from which it did not distinguish their wickedness. 
This gentler, but far less lofty, frame of mind soon dulled the burn- 
ing enthusiasm which had so long carried me away, and, without 
anyone perceiving it, even without perceiving it myself, I became 
again shy, courteous, and timid; in a word, the same Jean Jacques 
as I had been before. 

If this revolution had merely restored me to myself, and had gone 
no further, all would have been well; but, unfortunately, it went 
much further, and carried me away rapidly to the other extreme. 
From that time my soul, in a state of agitation, no longer kept its 
centre of gravity, and its oscillations, ever renewed, always destroyed 
it. I must describe at some length this second revolution—the ter- 
rible and fatal epoch of a destiny without example among mankind. 

As we were only a party of three in our retreat, leisure and solitude 
naturally increased the intimacy of our intercourse. This was what 
occurred in the case of Thérése and myself. We spent some delight- 
ful hours together under the shady trees, more delightful than any 
I had ever enjoyed before. She herself appeared to appreciate it more 
than she had hitherto done. She opened her heart to me without re- 
serve, and told me things about her mother and her family, which 
she had been strong-minded enough to conceal from me for a long 
time. Both had received from Madame Dupin a number of presents 
intended for me, which the cunning old woman, to save me annoy- 
ance, had appropriated for herself and her other children, without 
leaving any for Thérése, whom she strictly forbade to say anything 
to me about them—a command which the poor girl obeyed with an 
obedience which is almost incredible. 


432 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


A thing which surprised me still more, was the discovery that, be- 
sides the secret conversations which Diderot and Grimm had fre- 
quently held with both, in order to estrange them from me, but 
which had failed in their object owing to the opposition of Thérèse, 
both of them had since then held frequent secret conferences with 
her mother, without her knowing anything of what was brewing be- 
tween them. She only knew that sundry little presents played a part 
in it; that there were little journeys to and fro, which they at- 
tempted to conceal from her, of the reason of which she was com- 
pletely ignorant. At the time when we left Paris, Madame le Vasseur 
had long been in the habit of calling upon Grimm two or three times 
a month, and spending some time there with him in private conver- 
sation, on which occasions even his servant was always sent out of 
the room. 

I judged that the motive of all this was no other than the same 
scheme into which they had attempted to make the daughter enter, 
by promising to procure for them, through Madame d’Epinay’s in- 
fluence, a licence to retail salt, or a tobacco-shop; in a word, by tempt- 
ing them with the prospect of gain. They had represented to these 
women that, as I was not in a position to do anything for them, I 
could not do anything for myself either, on account of them. As I 
saw nothing in all this but good intentions, I was not. absolutely 
annoyed with them. Only the secrecy revolted me, especially on the 
part of the old woman, who, in addition, daily showed herself more 
toadying and wheedling in her manner towards me, which, how- 
ever, did not prevent her from incessantly reproaching her daughter 
in private with being too fond of me and telling me everything, 
saying that she was a fool, and would find herself taken in in the end. 

This woman possessed in the highest degree the art of killing two 
birds with one stone, of concealing from one what she received 
from another, and from me, what she received from all. I might 
have pardoned her for her avarice, but I could not forgive her dis- 
simulation. What could she have to conceal from me—from me, 
whose happiness she so well knew depended almost entirely upon 
her daughter’s happiness and her own? What I had done for her 
daughter, I had done for myself, but what I had done for her de- 
served some acknowledgment on her part; she at least should have 


MADAME LE VASSEUR 433 


been grateful to her daughter for it, and should have loved me also: 
out of love for her who léved me. I had rescued her from utter 
misery; from me she received the means of existence, to me she owed 
all those acquaintances whom she so well knew how to make use 
of. Thérése had long supported her by her own exertions, and was 
now supporting her with bread supplied by me. She owed ail to 
this daughter, for whom she had done nothing, while her other chil- 
dren, on whom she had bestowed marriage portions, and for whom 
she had ruined herself, far from helping to support her, devoured 
her substance and my own. It seemed that, under these circum: 
stances, she should have regarded me as her only friend, as her most 
reliable protector, and, far from keeping me in the dark as to my 
own affairs, far from joining in a plot against me in my own house, 
should have faithfully informed me of everything that might con- 
cern me when she learned it sooner than I did. In what light, then, 
could I regard her deceitful and mysterious conduct? Above all, 
what was I to think of the sentiments with which she endeavoured 
to inspire her daughter? What monstrous ingratitude must have 
been the mother’s, when she sought to instil it into the daughter! 

All these considerations finally alienated my heart so completely 
from this woman, that I could no longer look upon her without con- 
tempt. However, I never ceased to treat the mother of the partner 
of my life with respect, and to show her in everything almost the 
consideration and esteem of a son; but I must admit that I never 
cared to remain long in her company, and I am ill able to put re- 
straint upon myself. 

This, again, is one of the brief moments of my life, in which I 
have been almost within sight of happiness, without being able to 
attain to it, although through no fault of my own. If this woman 
had been of good character, we should, all three, have been happy 
to the end of our days; the last survivor would alone have deserved 
pity. Instead of this, the reader will see the development of events, 
and be able to judge whether I could have altered it. 

Madame le Vasseur, seeing that I had gained ground in her 
daughter’s heart while she had lost it, endeavoured to recover it; 
and, instead of regaining my esteem through the daughter, at- 
tempted to alienate her from me altogether. One of the means that 


434 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


she employed was to invoke the assistance of her family. I had 
begged Thérése not to invite any of them to the Hermitage, and 
she had promised not to do so. They were invited in my absence, 
without consulting her, and they then made her promise to say 
nothing to me about it. When the first step was taken, the rest was 
easy. When a person once keeps anything secret from one whom he 
loves, he soon feels no scruple about concealing everything from him. 
As soon as I was at La Chevrette, the Hermitage was full of people, 
who enjoyed themselves tolerably well. A mother has always great 
influence over a daughter of good disposition; nevertheless, in spite 
of all her efforts, the old woman could never induce Thérése to enter 
into her views, or persuade her to join the conspiracy against me. As 
for herself, she made up her mind irrevocably. As she saw, on the 
one side, her daughter and myself, at whose house she could live and 
that was all; and, on the other, Diderot, Grimm, d’Holbach, and 
Madame d’Epinay, who promised much and gave something, it 
never entered her head that she could possibly be in the wrong in 
company with a farmer-general’s wife and a Baron. If I had been 
more observant, I should have seen, from that moment, that I was 
nourishing a serpent in my bosom; but my blind confidence, which 
nothing had as yet diminished, was such that it never even occurred 
to me, that anyone could wish to injure a person who deserved to be 
loved. While I saw a thousand conspiracies formed around me, all 
E could complain of was the tyranny of those whoin I called my 
friends, and whose only object, as I imagined, was to force me to 
be happy in their own fashion rather than in my own. 

Although Thérése refused to enter into the conspiracy with her 
mother, she again kept her secret. Her motive was praiseworthy; 
I will not undertake to decide whether she did well or ill. Two 
women who have secrets are fond of chattering together about them. 
This brought them closer together; and Thérése, by dividing her 
attentions, sometimes caused me to feel that I was alone, for I could 
no longer regard as a society the relations between us three. Then it 
was that I felt keenly the mistake which I had committed, at the be- 
ginning of our connection, in not having taken advantage of the 
pliability which was the result of her affection, to improve her mind 
and furnish her with a store of knowledge, which by drawing us 


STRANGE CONDUCT OF THERESE 435 


closer together in our retifément, would have filled up her time 
and my own agreeably, and prevented us from ever noticing the 
length of a téte-d-téte. Not that our conversation ever flagged, or that 
she showed any signs of weariness during our walks; but we had not 
a sufficient number of ideas in common to make a great stock. We 
could no longer speak incessantly of our plans, which henceforth 
were limited to plans of enjoyment. The objects around us inspired 
me with reflections which were beyond her comprehension. An at- 
tachment of twelve years had no longer need of words; we knew 
each other too well to be able to find anything fresh. The only re- 
source left was gossip, scandal, and feeble jokes. It is in solitude espe- 
cially that one feels the advantage of living with someone who 
knows how to think. I had no need of this resource to amuse my- 
self in her society; but she would have needed it, in order to be able 
always to amuse herself in mine. The worst thing was, that we were 
obliged to hold our interviews secretly; her mother, who had become 
a nuisance to me, forced me to look out for opportunities. I felt 
under restraint in my own house—this is saying everything. The at- 
mosphere of love ruined simple friendship. We enjoyed an intimate 
intercourse without living in intimacy. 

As soon as I thought I observed that Thérése sometimes sought 
excuses to avoid the walks which I proposed to her, I ceased to pro- 
pose them, without being annoyed with her for not finding as much 
pleasure in them as myself. Pleasure does not depend upon the will. 
I was sure of her affection, and that was enough for me. As long 
as my pleasures were hers, I enjoyed them with her; when this was 
not the case, I preferred her contentment to my own. 

Thus it happened that, half deceived in my expectation, leading 
a life after my own inclination, in a spot which I had chosen for 
myself, with a person who was dear to me, I nevertheless at length 
found myself almost isotated. What I still lacked prevented me 
from enjoying what I possessed. In the matter of happiness and en- 
joyment, I must have all or nothing. It will afterwards be seen why 
I have considered this explanation necessary. I now resume the 
thread of my narrative. 

I believed that I possessed a veritable treasure in the manuscripts 
which the Comte de Saint-Pierre had given me. On examining them 


436 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


more attentively, I found that they were little more than the col- 
lection of his uncle’s printed works, corrected and annotated by his 
own hand, together with a few trifling fragments which had never 
been published. His writings on moral subjects confirmed me in the 
idea which some letters from him, which Madame de Créqui had 
shown me, had given me, that he possessed much greater talent 
than I had imagined; but, after a thorough examination of his polit- 
ical works, I found nothing but superficial views, or schemes, useful 
indeed, but rendered impracticable by the idea which the author 
could never get rid of, that men acted in accordance with their 
lights rather than their passions. The high opinion of modern 
learning which he entertained had caused him to adopt this false 
principle of wisdom brought to perfection, the foundation of all his 
proposed institutions, and the origin of all his political sophisms. 
This singular man, an honour to his age and his kind—the only 
man perhaps who, since the human race has existed, has had no 
other passion than that of reason—nevertheless wandered from one 
error to another in all his systems, in his desire to make men like 
himself, instead of taking them as they are, and as they will continue 
to be. He laboured only for imaginary beings, while believing that he 
was working for his contemporaries. 

Recognising all this, I found myself somewhat embarrassed as to 
the form I should give to my work. By allowing the author’s vi- 
sionary ideas to remain undisturbed, I should render no service; by 
refuting them rigorously, I should be guilty of discourtesy, since 
the delivery of his manuscripts, which I had accepted and even asked 
for, imposed upon me the obligation of treating their author hon- 
ourably. I finally decided upon the course of action which appeared 
to me most becoming, most judicious, and most useful: this was, to 
present the author’s and my own ideas separately, and, with this 
object, to enter into his views, to elucidate them, to enlarge them, 
and to omit nothing which could secure them full appreciation. 

My work, therefore, was to be composed of two entirely separate 
parts. The one was intended to explain, in the manner I have just in- 
dicated, the different schemes of the author; in the other, which was 
not intended to appear until the first had produced its effect, I should 
have brought my judgment to bear upon these same schemes, which, 


HIS READING 437 


I confess, might certainly have exposed them sometimes to the fate 
of the sonnet of the “Misanthrope.” At the commencement of the 
whole work I intended to give a life of the author, for which I had 
collected a quantity of sufficiently good material, which I flattered 
myself I should be able to make use of without spoiling. I had seen 
the Abbé de Saint-Pierre two or three times in his old age, and the re- 
spect which I had for his memory was a guarantee to me that, upon 
the whole, M. le Comte would not be dissatisfied with the manner 
in which I treated his relation. 

I made my first attempt upon the “Paix perpetuelle,” the most im- 
portant and the most elaborate of all the works which made up the 
coltection; and, before I began my reflections upon it, I had the 
courage to read absolutely everything that the Abbé had written 
upon this fine subject, without once allowing myself to be dis- 
couraged by its prolixity and repetitions. As the public has seen this 
abstract, I have nothing to say about it. The judgment which I passed 
upon it has never been printed, and I do not know if it ever will be; 
but it was written at the same time. I next went on to the “Poly- 
synodie,” or “Plurality of Councils,” a work written in the Regent’s 
time, to support the form of administration which he had intro- 
duced, which led to the expulsion of the Abbé from the French 
Academy, in consequence of certain attacks upon the preceding ad- 
ministration, which irritated the Duchesse de Maine and the Car- 
dinal de Polignac. I finished this work in the same manner as the 
preceding, both abstract and judgment; but I stopped there, as I did 
not intend to finish this undertaking, which I ought never to have 
commenced. 

The consideration which caused me to abandon it presented itself 
naturally, and it is surprising that it never occurred to me before. 
Most of the Abbé’s writings consisted of or contained critical ob- 
servations upon certain aspects of the French system of government, 
and some of them were so outspoken, that he had reason to con- 
gratulate himself upon escaping scot-free. But, in the ministerial 
offices, he had always been looked upon as a sort of preacher rather 
than as a serious politician, and he was allowed to say what he 
pleased, because it was well known that nobody would listen to him. 
If I had succeeded in getting him a hearing, the case would have 

í 


438 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


been different. He was a Frenchman, I was not; and, if I repeated 
his censures, even in his own name, I ran the risk of being asked 
rudely, but with perfect justice, what I was interfering with. Luckily, 
before going too far, I saw the handle I was about to give to others 
against myself, and I speedily withdrew. I knew that, living alone 
in the midst of men, all more powerful than myself, I should never 
be able, in spite of all that I could do, to shelter myself from any 
injury they might choose to inflict upon me. There was only one 
thing that depended upon myself: to make it impossible for them, 
should they desire to injure me, to do so without injustice. This prin- 
ciple, which made me give up the Abbé de Saint-Pierre, has fre- 
quently caused me to renounce far more cherished schemes. Those 
who are always ready to look upon misfortune as a crime, would be 
greatly surprised if they knew the pains I have taken, all my life 
through, to prevent anyone being able to say to me with truth, in 
time of my misfortune: “You have well deserved it.” 

The relinquishment of this work left me for some time undecided 
as to what I should undertake next; and this interval of idleness 
was my ruin, since it gave me time to direct my thoughts towards 
myself, for lack of anything outside to claim my attention. I no 
longer had any schemes for the future to amuse my imagination; 
it was not even possible for me to form any, since my present situa- 
tion was exactly that in which all my desires were united; I could 
imagine no more, and yet my heart was still conscious of a void. 
My condition was the more cruel, as I saw none that could be pre- 
ferred to it. I had centred my tenderest affection upon a person after 
my own heart, who returned it. 

I lived with her without restraint, and, so to say, as I pleased. 
Nevertheless, a secret feeling of oppression never left me, whether 
I was with her or away from her. While possessing her, I felt that 
she was still not mine; and the mere idea that Ý was not all in all to 
her, caused her to seem hardly anything to me. 

Thad friends of both sexes, to whom I was attached by the purest 
friendship and the most perfect esteem. I counted upon the truest 
return of these feelings on their part, and it never even occurred to 
me ever once to doubt their sincerity; yet this friendship was more 
painful to me than agreeable, owing to their obstinacy, even their 


MEMORIES OF LES CHARMETTES 439 


affectation, in opposing al¥ my inclinations, tastes, and manner of 
life. It was enough for me to seem to desire anything which con- 
cerned myself alone, and which did not depend upon them, in 
order to see them all immediately combine to force me to renounce 
it. This obstinate desire to control me absolutely in all my fancies— 
which was the more unjust as, far from attempting to control theirs, 
I did not even take the trouble to make myself acquainted with 
them—became so cruelly burdensome to me, that at last I never re 
ceived a letter from them without feeling, when I opened it, a certain 
alarm, which was only too well justified by the perusal of it. I 
thought that, in the case of people who were all younger than my- 
self, and who all stood in sore need themselves of the good advice 
which they lavished upon me, it was treating me too much like a 
child. “Love me,” said I to them, “as I love you; as for the rest, do 
not interfere with my affairs, any more than I interfere with yours. 
That is all I ask of you.” If they have granted me one of these two 
requests, it has certainly not been the latter. 

I had a retired abode in a charming solitude. Master within my 

own four walls, I could live there in my own fashion, without being 
subjected to anyone’s control. But this abode imposed upon me cer- 
tain duties which were pleasant to fulfil, but indispensable. My lib- 
erty was altogether precarious. In a position of greater subjection 
than if I had been under orders, I could not help being so by inclina- 
tion. When I got up, I could never once say to myself: I will spend 
this day as I please. Besides being dependent upon Madame d’Epi- 
nay’s arrangements, I had still a more importunate claim upon me— 
that of the public and chance visitors. The distance of my residence 
from Paris did not prevent the daily arrival of crowds of idlers, who, 
not knowing what to do with their own time, wasted mine without 
the slightest scruple. When I least expected it, I was mercilessly 
assailed, and I rarely made agreeable plans for spending the day 
without finding them upset by the arrival of some unexpected 
visitor. 
-In short, amidst the blessings which I had most eagerly longed 
for, finding no pure enjoyment, I returned by fits and starts to the 
unclouded days of my youth, and I sometimes cried, with a sigh, 
to myself, “Ah! this is not Les Charmettes!” 


440 . THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


The recollections of the different periods of my life led me to re- 
flect upon the point which I had reached, and I saw myself, already 
in my declining years, a prey to painful evils, and believed that I 
was approaching the end of my career, without having enjoyed in 
its fulness scarcely one single pleasure of those for which my heart 
yearned, without having given scope to the lively feelings which I 
felt it had in reserve, without having tasted or even sipped that in- 
toxicating pleasure which I felt was in my soul in all its force, and 
which, for want of an object, always found itself kept in check, and 
. unable to give itself vent in any other way but through my sighs. 

How came it to pass that I, a man of naturally expansive soul, 
for whom to live was to love, had never yet been able to find a 
friend entirely devoted to myself, a true friend—I, who felt admi- 
rably adapted to be one myself? How came it to pass that, with feel- 
ings so easily set on fire, with a heart full of affection, I had never 
once been inflamed with the love of a definite object? Consumed 
by the desire of loving, without ever having been able to satisfy 
it completely, I saw myself approaching the portals of old age, and 
dying without having lived. 

These melancholy but touching reflections caused me to turn my 
thoughts towards myself with a regret which was not without its 
pleasure. It seened to me that destiny owed me something which it 
had not yet granted me. Why had I been born with delicate faculties, 
if they were to remain unemployed to the end? The consciousness 
of my inner value, while calling forth the feeling of having been 
unfairly depreciated, in some degree compensated for it, and caused 
me to shed tears which it was a pleasure to me to allow to flow. 

I pursued these reflections in the most beautiful season of the year, 
in the month of June, in cool groves, amidst the song of the nightin- 
gale and the purling of brooks. Everything combined to plunge me 
again into that too seductive indolence, to which I was naturally 
inclined, but from which the hard and austere frame of mind, to 
which a long period of inner ferment had brought me, should have 
delivered me once and for all. Unhappily, I went on to recall the 
dinner at the Chateau of Toune, and my meeting with those two 
charming girls at the same season of the year, and in a spot almost 
like that where I was at the moment. This recollection, rendered still 


REFLECTIONS ON HIS CONDITION 441 


more charming by the breath of innocence which pervaded it, 
brought back others of the’same kind. Presently, I saw gathered 
round me all the objects which had touched my heart with emotion 
during my youth—Mademoiselle Galley, Mademoiselle de Graffen- 
ried, Mademoiselle de Breil, Madame Basile, Madame de Larnage, 
my young pupils, even the piquant Zulietta, whom my heart can 
never forget. I saw myself surrounded by a seraglio of houris and 
by my old acquaintances, the liveliest desire for whom was no new 
sensation for me. My blood became heated and inflamed, my head 
swam, in spite of my hairs already growing grey: and the serious 
citizen of Geneva, the austere Jean Jacques, close upon his forty- 
fifth year, suddenly became again the love-sick shepherd. The in- 
toxication which seized me, although so sudden and extravagant, 
was, notwithstanding, so strong and lasting, that nothing less than 
the unforeseen and terrible crisis of the unhappiness into which it 
plunged me would have been able to cure me of it. 

However, this intoxication, to whatever point it was carried, did 
not go so far as to make me forget my age and my position, flatter 
me with the idea that I could still inspire love, or make me attempt 
to communicate this devouring, but barren fire, by which, from 
childhood, I felt my heart in vain consumed. I did not hope, I did 
not even desire it; I knew that the time for love was over; I was too 
keenly conscious of the ridicule heaped upon elderly beaux, to expose 
myself to it, and I was not the man to become presumptuous and 
self-confident in my declining years, after having so rarely displayed 
such qualities during my best days. Besides, as a friend of peace, I 
should have dreaded domestic storms, and I loved Thérése too sin- 
cerely, to expose her to the annoyance of seeing me entertain livelier 
feelings for others than those with which she herself inspired me. 

What did I do on this occasion? The reader must have already 
guessed, if he has hitherto followed me with the least attention. 
The impossibility of grasping realities threw me into the land of 
chimeras, and, seeing nothing in existence which was worthy of my 
enthusiasm, I sought nourishment for it in an ideal world, which my 
fertile imagination soon peopled with beings after my own heart. 
This resource was never so welcome to me or so fruitful. In my con- 
tinued ecstasies, I intoxicated myself with full draughts of the most 


442 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


delightful sensations that have ever entered the heart of man. I en- 
tirely forgot the human race, and created for myself societies of per- 
fect beings, heavenly alike in their beauties and virtues; trusty, ten- 
der, and loyal friends such as I never found in this world below. 
I found such pleasure in soaring into the empyrean, in the midst of 
the charming objects by which I was surrounded, that I passed the 
hours and days in it without taking count of them, and, forgetting 
everything else, no sooner had I hastily eaten a morsel of food, than I 
burned to escape, in order to run to my groves again. When ready 
to set out for my world of enchantment, if I saw some wretched 
mortals arrive who came to keep me back upon earth, J was unable 
to conceal or restrain my annoyance, and, losing control over myself, 
[ gave them so rude a reception, that it might almost have been 
called brutal. This only increased my reputation as a misanthrope, 
whereas it would have gained for me a very different one, if the 
world had read my heart better. 

At the height of my greatest exaltation, I was suddenly pulled back 
like a kite by the string, and restored to my place by Nature, assisted 
by a smart attack of my complaint. I employe? the only remedy 
which afforded me relief, that is to say, the bougies, which put a 
stop to my celestial amours; for, besides that a man is seldom 
amorous when he is suffering, my imagination, which is animated 
in the open air and under the trees, languishes and dies in a room 
and under the rafters of a ceiling. I have often regretted that Dryads 
did not exist; it would most assuredly have been amongst them that 
I should have found the object of my attachment. 

Other domestic disturbances occurred at the same time to in- 
crease my annoyance. Madame le Vasseur, while paying me the most 
effusive compliments, was doing her utmost to alienate her daughter 
from me. I received letters from my old neighbourhood, in which I 
was informed that the worthy old woman, without my knowledge, 
had contracted debts in the name of Thérése, who knew it, but said 
nothing to me about it. That I had to pay them annoyed me much 
less than their having been kept a secret from me. How could she, 
from whom I had never kept a secret, keep one from me? Can one 
conceal anything from those whom one loves? The Holbachian 
clique, finding that I never went to Paris, began to be seriously 


WRITES TO VOLTAIRE 443 


afraid that I was comfortable in the country, and that I should be 
foolish enough to remain there. Then began those intrigues, the ob- 
ject of which was to get me back, indirectly, to the city. Diderot, 
who did not want to show himself so soon, began by detaching 
Deleyre from me, whom I had made acquainted with him, and 
who feceived and handed on to me the impressions which Diderot 
desired to give him, without perceiving their real purpose. 

Everything seemed in league to tear me from my delightful and 
foolish reveries. Before I had recovered from my attack of illness, 
I received a copy of the poem on the destruction of Lisbon, which 
I supposed was sent to me by the author. This put me under the 
obligation of writing to him, and saying something about his compo- 
sition. This I did in a letter which was printed a long time after- 
wards without my consent, as will be mentioned later. 

Surprised to hear this poor man, overwhelmed, so to speak, by 
fame and prosperity, declaim bitterly against the miseries of this 
life, and declare everything to be bad, I formed the senseless plan 
of bringing him to himself again, and proving to him that every- 
thing was good. Voltaire, while always appearing to believe in God, 
has never really believed in anything but the Devil, since his pre- 
tended God is nothing but a malicious being, who, according to 
him, finds no pleasure except in doing*injury. The absurdity of 
this doctrine, which is obvious, is particularly revolting in a man 
loaded with blessings of every kind, who, from the bosom of hap- 
piness, endeavours to reduce his fellows to despair by the fearful and 
cruel picture of all the calamities from which he is himself exempt. 
I, who had a better right to count and weigh the evils of human life, 
examined them impartially, and proved to him that Providence is 
acquitted of responsibility in regard to every single one, and that 
they all have their origin in man’s abuse of his faculties, rather 
than in the nature of things themselves. I treated him in this letter 
with all possible regard, consideration, delicacy, and, I venture to 
say, respect. But, as I knew how easily his self-love was irritated, I 
did not send the letter to himself, but to Dr. Tronchin, his physi- 
cian and friend, with full authority to deliver or suppress it, which- 
ever he thought best. Tronchin gave him the letter. Voltaire, in 
reply, wrote me a few lines to the effect that, as he was ill and also 


444 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


nurse to someone else, he would defer his answer to another occa- 
sian, and said not a word about the subject. Tronchin, who sent this 
letter to me, enclosed it in one from himself, in which he expressed 
little esteem for the person who had handed it to him. 

I have never published, or even shown, these two letters, since I 
-am not fond of making a show of such petty triumphs; the originals 
will be found in my collection (Bundle A, Nos. 20 and.21). Since 
then, Voltaire has published the answer which he promised me, but 
never sent. It is no other than the romance of “Candide,” of which 
I cannot speak, because I have not read it. 

All these distractions ought to have cured me completely of my 
fantastic amours, and they were perhaps a means offered me by 
Heaven to prevent their fatal consequences; but my unlucky star 
was in the ascendant, and I had scarcely begun to go out again, when 
my heart, my head, and my feet again took the same paths. I say 
the same, in certain respects; for my ideas, a little less exalted, this 
time remained upon earth, but made so dainty a selection of every- 
thing amiable that could be found, that this selection was hardly 
less chimerical than the imaginary world, which I had abandoned. 

I represented to myself love and friendship, the two idols of my 
heart, under the most enchanting forms. I took delight in adorning 
them with all the charms of the sex which I had always adored. I 
imagined two female friends, rather than two of my own sex, be- 
cause if an instance of such friendship is rarer, it is at the same 
time more amiable. I bestowed upon them two analogous, but dif- 
ferent, characters; two faces, not perfect, but after my taste, lighted 
up by kindliness and sensibility. I made one dark, the other fair; 
one lively, the other gentle; one prudent, the other weak, but with 
so touching a weakness, that virtue seemed to gain by it. I gave to 
one a lover, whose tender friend the other was, and even something 
more; but I admitted no rivalry, no quarrelling, no jealousy, be- 
cause it is difficult for me to imagine painful feelings, and I did not 
wish to mar this charming picture by anything which degraded 
Nature. Smitten by my two charming models, I identified myself 
with the lover and the friend as far as it was possible for me; but 
I made him young and amiable, bestowing upon him, in addition, 
the virtues and defects which I was consctous of in myself. 


“REVERIES 445 


In order to place my chagacters in the midst of suitable surround- 
ings, I successively passed in review the most beautiful spots that I 
had seen in the course of my travels. But I found no woodland sufh- 
ciently delightful, no landscape sufficiently moving, to satisfy my 
taste. The valleys of Thessaly might have satisfied me, if I had seen 
them; but my imagination, tired of inventing, wanted some actual 
spot which might serve as a foundation, and create for me an illu- 
sion as to the reality of the inhabitants whom I intended to place 
there. For a long time I thought of the Borromean Islands,’ the 
charming aspect of which had delighted me; but I found too much 
ornament and artificiality there. However, a lake was absolutely 
necessary, and I ended by choosing that one, on the shores of which 
my heart has never ceased to wander. I fixed upon that part of the 
shore, where my wishes had long placed my residence, in the imagi- 
nary happiness to which my destiny has limited me. The birthplace 
of my poor mamma still possessed a special charm for me. The con- 
trast of natural situations, the richness and variety of the landscape, 
the magnificence, the majesty of the whole, which enchants the 
senses, moves the heart, and elevates the soul, finally decided me, 
and I established my young protégés at Vévai. This was all I imag- 
ined at the moment; the remainder was not added until later. 

For a long time I confined myself to this indefinite plan, because 
it was sufficient to fil! my fancy with agreeable objects, and my heart 
with feelings, upon which it loves to feed itself. These fictions, by , 
their constant recurrence, at length assumed greater consistency, and 
fixed themselves in my brain under a definite shape. It was then that 
it occurred to me to give expression upon paper to some of the situa- 
tions which they offered me, and, recalling all the feelings of my 
youth, to give play, to a certain extent, to the desire of loving, which 
I had never been able to satisfy, and by which I felt myself devoured. 

At first, I scribbled upon paper a few scattered letters, without 
sequence or connection; and when I wanted to put them together, I 
was often greatly embarrassed. What seems almost incredible, but 
is nevertheless perfectly true, is that the first two parts were written 
almost entirely in this manner, without my having formed any defi- 
nite plan, and without my foreseeing that I should one day be 


In the Lago Maggiore. 


446 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


tempted to make a regular work of it. Thus it will be seen, that these 
two parts, composed too late of materials which were not shaped 
for the place which they occupy, are full of wordy padding, which is 
not found in the others. 

In the height of my reveries, I received a visit from Madame 
d'Houdetot, the first she had ever paid me in her life, but which, 
unfortunately, was not the last, as will be seen later. The Comtesse 
d’Houdetot was the daughter of the late M. de Bellegarde, farmer- 
general, and sister of M. d’Epinay and MM. de Lalive and de la 
Briche, both of whom were afterwards introducers of ambassadors." 
I have mentioned how I became acquainted with her before she was 
married. Since then, I never saw her except at the festivities at La 
Chevrette, at Madame d’Epinay’s, her sister-in-law. Having fre- 
quently. spent several days with her, both at Epinay and at La 
Chevrette, I not only found her always very amiable, but I fancied 
that I perceived that she was favourably disposed towards myself. 
She was fond of walking with me; we were both of us good walkers, 
and our conversation never flagged. However, I never visited her in 
Paris, although she asked, and even pressed me to do so. Her connec- 
tion with M. de Saint-Lambert, with whom I was becoming inti- 
mate, rendered her still more interesting to me; and it was in order 
to bring me news of this friend, who at the time was, I believe, at 
Manon, that she came to the Hermitage. 

This visit somewhat resembled the commencement of a romance. 
She lost her way. Her coachman had left the road at a place where 
it turned off, and tried to cross straight from the mill at Clairvaux 
to the Hermitage; her carriage stuck in the mud at the bottom of 
the valley; she decided to get out and finish the journey on foot. 
Her thin shoes were soon wet through; she sank in the mire; her 
servants had the greatest trouble imaginable to extricate her, and at 
last she reached the Hermitage in a pair of boots, making the air 
ring with shouts of laughter, in which I joined when I saw her 
arrive. She was obliged to change all her clothes; Thérése provided 
for her wants, and I persuaded her to put aside her dignity, and 
join us in-a rustic collation, at which she greatly enjoyed herself. 


"Certain persons whose duty it was to conduct ambassadors and foreign 
princes to an audience with the Sovereign or head of the State. 


ROUSSEAU AND THE GARDENER 447 


It was late, and she remaified only a short time; but the meeting 
was so cheerful that she was delighted, and seemed disposed to come 
again. However, she did not carry out her intention until the fol- 
lowing year; but alas! this delay was not of the least avail to protect 
me. 

I spent the autumn in an occupation which no one would suspect 
—that of protecting M. d’Epinay’s fruit. The Hermitage was the 
reservoir for the park of La Chevrette; there was a garden enclosed 
by walls, planted with espaliers and other trees, which supplied 
M. d’Epinay with more fruit than his kitchen-garden at La Chev- 
rette, although three-quarters of it was stolen. Not to be an entirely 
useless guest, I undertook the management of the garden and the 
superintendence of the gardener. All went well until the fruit sea- 
son; but, in proportion as it ripened, I found that it disappeared, 
without knowing what became of it. The gardener assured me that 
the dormice ate it all. I accordingly waged war upon the dormice, 
and destroyed a large number of them; but the fruit disappeared 
all the same. I kept watch so carefully, that at length I discovered 
that the gardener himself was the chief dormouse. He lived at Mont- 
morency, and used to come from there in the evening, with his wife 
and children, to take away the stores of fruit which he had put aside 
during the day, and which he offered for sale in the Paris market as 
openly as if he had had a garden of his own. This wretch, whom I 
loaded with kindnesses, whose children Thérèse clothed, and whose 
father, who went out begging, I almost supported, robbed us with 
equal ease and effrontery, since not one of us three was sufficiently 
watchful to put a stop to it; and, in a single night, he succeeded in 
emptying my cellar, which I found completely stripped on the fol- 
lowing morning. As long as he only seemed to devote his attention 
to me, I bore it all; but, as I wished to render an account of the fruit, 
I was obliged to denounce the thief. Madame d’Epinay asked me to 
pay him, discharge him, and look out for another gardener, which I 
did. As this rascal prowled round the Hermitage every night, armed 
with a large iron-tipped stick like a club, and accompanied by other 
vagabonds of his own sort, in order to reassure the women-folk, who 
were terribly alarmed at him, I made his successor sleep at the Her- 
mitage; and, as even this failed to quiet their fears, I sent to ask. 


448 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Madame d’Epinay for a gun, which I gave to the gardener to keep 
in his room, with instructions only to make use of it in case of neces- 
sity, if an attempt was made to break open the door or scale the gar- 
den wall, and only to fire a discharge of powder, simply to frighten 
the thieves. These were assuredly the least measures of precaution 
which a man in ill-health, who had to pass the winter in the midst 
of the forest, alone with two nervous women, could have taken for 
the common safety. Lastly, I procured a little dog to serve as sen- 
tinel. When Deleyre came to see me during that time, I told him my 
story, and joined him in laughing at my military preparations. On 
his return to Paris, he tried in his turn to amuse Diderot with an 
account of them; and this was how the Holbachian clique learned 
that I seriously intended to pass the winter at the Hermitage. This 
consistency on my part, which they could never have imagined, 
quite disconcerted them; and, in the meantime, until they could 
think of some other annoyance to render my stay unpleasant,® they 
separated from me, through Diderot, this same Deleyre, who at first 
considered my precautions quite natural, and ended by calling them 
contrary to my principles and worse than ridiculous, in some letters 
sn which he overwhelmed me with sarcasms, sufficiently biting to 
offend me, if I had been in the humour. But at that time, steeped in 
affectionate and tender sentiments, and susceptible of no others, I 
vegarded his bitter sarcasms as nothing but a joke, and looked upon 
him as merely silly, when anyone else would have considered him a 
madman. Thus those who prompted him lost their trouble on this 
occasion, and I passed the winter without being in the least dis- 
vurbed. 

By dint of care and watchfulness, I succeeded so well in protect- 
ing the garden that, although the yield of fruit was almost entirely 
a failure this year, the result was triple that of the preceding year. I 


* At the present moment, I marvel at my stupidity in not having seen, when 
1 was writing this, that the annoyance, which the Holbachians felt when they 
saw me go to stay in the country, was chiefly due to the fact that they no longer 
liad Madame le Vasseur at hand, in order to guide them in their system of in- 
trigues at fixed places and times. This idea, which occurs to me too late, com- 


pletely explains the strangeness of their conduct, which is inexplicable under any 
uther supposition. 


&gt; REVERIES 449 


certainly spared no pains to preserve it. I even accompanied the con- 
signments which I sent to La Chevrette and Epinay, and carried 
some baskets myself. I remember that “aunt” and myself once car- 
ried one that was so heavy that, to avoid succumbing under the load, 
we were obliged to rest every dozen steps, and arrived bathed in 
perspiration. 

[1757.]—When the bad weather began again, and I was confined 
to the house, I tried to resume my stay-at-home occupations, but 
found it impossible. I saw everywhere nothing but my two charming 
friends, their friend, their surroundings, the country in which they 
lived, the objects which my fancy created or embellished for them. I 
no longer belonged to myself for a single moment. My delirium 
never left me. After several fruitless attempts to banish all these 
imaginary creations from my mind, I became at last completely se- 
duced by them, and all my efforts were thenceforth devoted to re- 
ducing them to some sort of order and coherence, in order to work 
them up into a kind of romance. 

I was chiefly embarrassed by the shame which I felt at contradict- 
ing myself so openly and so boldly. After the strict principles which 
I had just laid down with so much noise, after the austere maxims 
which I had preached so strongly, after the biting invectives which 
I had launched against the effeminate books which breathed noth- 
ing but love and tenderness, could anything more unexpected or 
more shocking be imagined, than to see me, all at once, enrol my- 
self with my own hand amongst the authors of those books which I 
had so strongly censured? J felt this inconsistency in all its force. I 
reproached myself with it, I blushed for it, I was vexed with myself 
for it; but all this was unable to bring me back to reason. Completely 
enthralled, I was forced to submit to the yoke at all risks, and to 
make up my mind to brave public opinion, except in regard to con- 
sidering later, whether I should decide to show my work or not: for 
I did not as yet suppose that I should ever determine to publish it. 

Having taken this resolution, I threw myself heartily into my 
reveries, and, after repeatedly turning them over and over in my 
head, I at last sketched the kind of plan, with the execution of 
which the public is acquainted. This was certainly the best advan- 
tage that could be derived from my follies: the love of the good, 


450 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


which has never left my heart, turned them naturally towards use- 
ful objects, which might have been productive of moral advantage. 
My voluptuous pictures would have lost all their grace, if the gentle 
colouring of innocence had been wanting in them. A weak girl is an 
object of pity, which may be rendered interesting by love, and which 
is frequently not less amiable; but who can endure without indigna- 
tion the sight of fashionable manners? What can be more revolting 
than the pride of an unfaithful wife, who, openly trampling under 
foot all her duties, nevertheless claims that her husband should be 
deeply grateful for the favour which she grants him—of being kind 
enough not to allow herself to be caught in the act? Perfect beings 
do not exist; the lessons which they give are too far remote from 
us. But—that a young person, born with a heart equally tender and 
virtuous, while still unwedded, should allow herself to be overcome 
by love, and, when wedded, should find strength to overcome it in 
her turn and become virtuous again—if anyone should tell you that 
this picture is, on the whole, scandalous and unprofitable, he is a 
liar and a hypocrite: do not listen to him. 

Besides morality and conjugal fidelity, which are radically con- 
nected with all social order, I had another and deeper object in view 
—harmony and public peace, an. object greater and perhaps more 
important in itself, and certainly so at the moment. The storm 
. aroused by the “Encyclopédie,” far from subsiding, was at that time 
at its height. The two parties, let loose against each other with des- 
perate frenzy, were more like mad wolves ready to tear each other 
to pieces in their rage, than Christians and philosophers desirous of 
mutually enlightening, convincing, and leading each other back 
into the way of truth. It may almost be said that nothing was want- 
ing on either side but active leaders of sufficient importance, for the 
quarrel to degenerate into civil war; and God only knows what 
would have been the result of a civil war waged on behalf of re- 
ligion, in which the most cruel intolerance was in the main the same 
on both sides. A born enemy of all party spirit, I had frankly told 
some hard truths to both parties, to which they had paid no atten- 
tion. I bethought myself of another expedient, which, in my sim- 
plicity, I considered admirable: this was to soften their mutual ha- 
tred by destroying their prejudices, and to point out to each party 


«sé 99 
JULIE 451 


the merits and virtues of the other as worthy of public esteem and 
the respect of all mankind. This by no means sensible scheme, which 
assumed good faith amongst men, and which led me into the mis- 
take with which I reproached the Abbé de Saint-Pierre, met with 
the success which it deserved: it entirely failed to reconcile the two 
parties, and only brought them together again in order to over- 
whelm me. Meanwhile, until experience had shown me my folly, I 
devoted myself to it, I venture to say, with a zeal worthy of the mo- 
tive which inspired me, and I sketched the two characters of Wol- 
mar and Julie in a state of rapture, which made me hope that I 
should succeed in making both amiable, and, what is more, by 
means of each other. 

Satisfied with having roughly sketched my plan, I returned to the 
situations of detail which I had marked out. The result of the form, 
in which I arranged them was the two first parts of Julie, which I 
wrote and made a fair copy of during the winter months with in- 
describable pleasure, using the finest gilt-edged paper, blue and sil- 
ver writing-sand to dry the ink, and blue ribbon to fasten my manu- 
script; in short, nothing was sufficiently elegant or refined for the 
charming girls, with whom, like another Pygmalion, I was infatu 
ated. Every evening, by the fireside, I read and read again these two 
parts to the women-folk. The daughter, without saying a word, and 
moved to tenderness, joined her sobs to mine; the mother, finding no 
compliments in it, understood nothing of it, remained quiet, and 
contented herself with repeating to me, during the intervals of si- 
lence, “That is very fine, sir.” 

Madame d’Epinay, uneasy at knowing that I was alone in winter, 
in the middle of the forest, in a lonely house, frequently sent to in- 
quire after me. I had never received such genuine proofs of her 
friendship, and my own feelings towards her never responded to 
them with greater warmth. Amongst these proofs, I should be 
wrong to omit to state that she sent me her portrait, and asked me 
to tell her how she could procure mine, which had been painted by 
Latour, and exhibited at the Salon. Nor ought I to omit another 
mark of her attention, which will appear laughable, but is a feature 
in the history of my character, by reason of the impression which it 
produced upon me. One day, when it was freezing very hard, I 


452 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


opened a parcel which she had sent, containing several things which 
she had undertaken to procure for me, and found in it a little under- 
petticoat of English flannel, which she informed me she had worn, 
out of which she desired me to make myself a waistcoat. The stvle 
of her note was charming, full of tenderness and simplicity. This 
mark of attention, which was more than friendly, appeared to me so 
tender, as if she had stripped herself to clothe me, that, in my emo- 
tion, I kissed the note and the petticoat with tears. Thérése thought 
that I had gone mad. It is singular that, of all the marks of friend- 
ship lavished upon me by Madame d’Epinay, not one has ever 
moved me so much, and, even since the rupture between us, I have 
never thought of it without emotion. I kept her little note for a long 
time, and I should still have it in my possession, if it had not shared 
the fate of all my other letters of that period. 

Although the difficulty I had in making water gave me little rest 
during the winter, and, for part of the time, I was obliged to use 
probes, yet, on the whole, it was the mdst enjoyable and most quiet 
time that I had spent since my arrival in France. For the four or five 
months, during which the bad weather secured me still further from 
the interruptions of unexpected visitors, I enjoyed, more than I ever 
had or have done before or since, this independent, even, and simple 
life, the enjoyment of which only increased its value, without any 
other society than that of the two women in reality, and that of the 
two cousins in idea. It was at that time, especially, that I congratu- 
lated myself more and more every day upon the resolution which I 
had had the good sense to take, without paying heed to the outcries 
of my friends, who were annoyed to see me delivered from their 
tyranny; and, when I heard of the attempt of a madman,® when 
Deleyre and Madame d’Epinay informed me in their letters of the 
disturbance and agitation prevailing in Paris, I heartily thanked 
Heaven for having kept me at a distance from those spectacles of 
horror and crime, which would only have fed and sharpened the 
hilious temperament, which the sight of public disturbances stirred 
up within me; whereas now, seeing myself surrounded by nothing 
but smiling and peaceful objects in my retreat, my heart was entirely 
ziven up to amiable feelings. I here record with satisfaction the 


? The attempt made by Damiens to assassinate Louis XV. 


¥ 


DIDEROT AND THE ‘‘FILS NATUREL °- 453 
Lai 


course of the last peaceful moments which I have been permitted to 
enjoy. The spring which followed this calm winter saw the germs of 
the misfortunes which I have still to describe burst forth, in the 
series of which will be found no similar intervals, in which I have 
had time to take breath. 

I think, however, that I remember that, during this interval of 
peace, and even in the depths of my solitude, I did not remain alto- 
gether undisturbed by the Holbachians. Diderot stirred up some an- 
noyances against me, and, unless I am very much mistaken, it was 
during this winter that the “Fils Naturel” appeared, of which I shall 
have to speak presently. Not to mention that, for reasons which wil] 
subsequently appear, very few trustworthy records of that period 
have been preserved, even those which I have been permitted ta 
keep are very inaccurate in regard to dates. Diderot never dated his 
letters. Madame d’Epinay and Madame d’Houdetot only put the - 
day of the week, and Deleyre usually did the same. When I wanted 
to arrange these letters in order, I was obliged to grope in the dark 
and to supply the omissions by uncertain dates, upon which I can. 
not rely. Therefore, as I am unable to fix with certainty the date of 
the commencement of these quarrels, I prefer to relate afterwards, 
in a single section, all that I can recollect about them. 

The return of spring had redoubled my tender frenzies, and in my 
erotic transports I had composed for the last parts of Julie several 
letters which have a flavour of the rapturous frame of mind in which 
I wrote them. I may mention, amongst others, that which deals with 
the Elysium and the walk along the shores of the lake, which, if I 
rightly recollect, are at the end of the fourth part. If anyone can read 
these two letters, without feeling his heart softened and melted by 
the same emotion which dictated them to me, he had better shut the 
book; he is incapable of judging of matters of sentiment. 

Exactly at the same time, I had a second unexpected visit from, 
Madame d’Houdetot. In the absence of her husband, who was a 
captain in the Gendarmerie, and of her lover, who was also in the 
service, she had come to Eaubonne, in the midst of the valley of 
Montmorency, where she had taken a very nice house. It was from, 
there that she made a second excursion to the Hermitage. On this 
occasion, she came on horseback, dressed in men’s clothes. Although 


454 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


{ am not fond of such masquerades, I was charmed with the air of 
romance in this particular case, and this time—it was love. As it was 
the first and only time in my life, and its consequences have stamped 
it indelibly upon my recollection with terrible force, I must be per- 
mitted to enter with some detail into the matter. 

Madame la Comtesse d’Houdetot was approaching her thirtieth 
year, and was by no means handsome. Her face was pitted with 
small-pox, her complexion was coarse, she was short-sighted, and her 
eyes were rather too round, but, notwithstanding, she looked young, 
and her features, at once lively and gentle, were attractive. She had 
an abundance of luxuriant black hair, which curled naturally, and 
reached down to her knees. Her figure was neat, and all her move- 
ments were marked by awkwardness and grace combined. Her wit 
was both natural and agreeable; gaiety, lightheartedness, and sim- 
plicity were happily united in it. She overflowed with delightful sal- 
lies of wit, which were perfectly spontaneous, and which often fell 
from her lips involuntarily. She possessed several agreeable accom- 
plishments, played the piano, danced well, and composed very pretty 
verses. As for her character, it was angelic; gentleness of soul was 
the foundation of it; and, with the exception of prudence and 
strength, all the virtues were combined in it. Above all, she was so 
completely to be trusted in her intercourse, and was so loyal to those 
with whom she associated, that even her enemies had no need to 
conceal themselves from her. By her enemies, I mean those men, or, 
rather, those women who hated her; for, as for herself, her heart 
was incapable of hatred, and I believe that this similarity of disposi- 
tion greatly contributed to inspire me with passion for her. In the 
confidences of the most intimate friendship, I have never heard her 
speak ill of the absent, not even of her sister-in-law. She was unable 
either to disguise her thoughts from anyone, or to repress any of her 
feelings: and I am quite convinced that she spoke of her lover even 
to her husband, as she spoke of him to her friends, acquaintances, 
and everybody, without distinction, Lastly, what proves unquestion- 
ably the purity and sincerity of her excellent disposition is, that, be- 
ing subject to fits of most remarkable absence of mind, she was often 
guilty of the most ridiculous indiscretions, which were in the high- 


MADAME D’HOUDETOT 
2 455 


est degree imprudent, as far as she was herself concerned, but which 
were never offensive to others. 

She had been married very young and against her inclinations to 
the Comte d'Houdetot, a man of position and a gallant soldier, but 
a gambler and a shuffler, and a person of but few amiable qualities, 
whom she had never loved. She found in M. de Saint-Lambert all 
the good qualities of her husband, together with others that were 
more agreeable—intellect, virtue, and talent. If one can excuse any- 
thing in the manners of the age, it is undoubtedly an attachment, 
which is refined by its duration, honoured by its effects, and only 
cemented by mutual esteem. 

As far as I have been able to judge, she came to see me a little 
from her own inclination, but more from a desire to please Saint- 
Lambert, who had exhorted her to do so, and was right in believing 
that the friendship, which was beginning to be formed between us, 
would make this society agreeable to all three. She knew that I was 
aware of their relations, and, being able to speak of him to me with- 
out restraint, it was natural that she should find my society agree- 
able. She came; I saw her. I was intoxicated with love without an 
object. This intoxication enchanted my eyes; this object became cen- 
tred in her. I saw my Julie in Madame d’Houdetot, and soon I saw 
only Madame d’Houdetot, but invested with all the perfections with 
which I had just adorned the idol of my heart. To complete my in- 
toxication, she spoke to me of Saint-Lambert in the language of pas- 
sionate love. O contagious power of love! When I listened to her, 
when I found myself near her, I was seized with a delightful shiver- 
ing, which I have never felt when with anyone else. When she spoke, 
I felt myself overcome by emotion. I imagined that I was interesting 
myself only in her feelings, when my own were similar. I swallowed 
in deep draughts the contents of the poisoned cup, of which as yet I 
only tasted the sweetness. At last, without either of us perceiving it, 
she inspired me with all those feelings for herself which she ex- 
pressed for her lover. Alas! it was very late, it was very hard for me, 
to be consumed by a passion, as violent as it was unfortunate, for a 
woman whose heart was full of love for another! 

In spite of the extraordinary emotions which I had felt in her 


456 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


presence, I did not at first understand what had happened to me. It 
was not until she had left me that, when I attempted to think of 
Julie, I was surprised to find that I could think of nothing but 
Madame d'Houdetot: Then the scales fell from my eyes; I under- 
stood my misfortune, I groaned over it, but I did not foresee its re- 
. sults. I hesitated for a long time how I should behave towards her, 
as if real love left anyone sufficiently rational to be able to act in ac- 
cordance with the result of such deliberations. I had not made up my 
mind, when she came again and took me by surprise. On this occa- 
sion, I understood the state of things. Shame, the companion of evil, 
made me speechless. I trembled before her, not venturing to open 
my mouth or lift my eyes. I was inexpressibly troubled, and she must 
have seen it. I resolved to confess it, and to leave her to guess the rea- 
son. This would be telling her the truth plainly enough. 

If I had been young and attractive, and Madame d’Houdetot had 
shown herself weak, I should here blame her conduct. Nothing of 
the kind; I can only applaud and admire it. The course she took was 
equally generous and prudent. She could not suddenly give up my 
acquaintance without telling Saint-Lambert the reason, for he had 
himself persuaded her to visit me. This would have exposed two 
friends to the risk of a rupture, and, perhaps, of a public scandal, 
which she desired to avoid. She esteemed me and wished me well. 
She pitied my folly, and, without flattering, lamented it, and en- 
deayoured to cure me of it. She was very glad to be able to keep for 
herself and her lover a friend whom she valued. Nothing gave her 
more pleasure than to speak of the close and happy intimacy which 
we might form between us, as soon as I should have recovered my 
senses. She did not, however, altogether confine herself to these 
friendly exhortations, and, when necessary, did not spare the harsher 
teproaches which I had so well deserved. 

I spared myself even less. As soon as I was alone, I came to myself 
again. I was calmer for having spoken. Love, when it is known to 
her who inspires it, becomes more endurable. The energy with 
which I reproached myself for the love which I felt, must have cured 
me of it, if it had been possible. I summoned to my aid all the most 
powerful arguments I could think of, to stifle it. My moral sense, 
my feelings, my principles, the shame, the disloyalty, the crime, the 


HIS gPASSION FOR HER 457 


abuse of a trust confided to me by friendship, and, lastly, the ab- 
surdity, at my age, of being inflamed with a most extravagant pas- 
sion for one whose heart, already engaged, could neither make me 
any return, nor permit me to entertain the least hope—a passion, be 
sides, which, far from having anything to gain by constancy, became 
more unbearable from day to day: -thought of all these. 

Who would believe that the last consideration, which should have 
added weight to all the rest, was the one hichi weakened their 
force? What scruples, said I to myself, need I entertain in regard to 
a folly by which I am the only sufferer? Am I a young gallant of 
whom Madame d’Houdetot should feel alarmed? Would it not be 
said, to judge from my conceited remorse, that my gallantry, my 
manner, and my personal appearance were on the way to lead her 
astray? O poor Jean Jacques! love on to your heart’s content, with a 
perfectly safe conscience, and have no fear that your sighs will ever 
injure Saint-Lambert. 

My readers have seen that I was never presuming, even in my 
youth. This way of thinking was in keeping with the bent of my 
mind; it flattered my passion; it’was sufficient to make me abandon 
myself to it unreservedly, and even laugh at the irrelevant scruples, 
which I thought I had created rather out of vanity than in accord- 
ance with the dictates of reason. What a lesson for honest souls, 
whom vice never attacks openly, but whom it finds the means to 
surprise, ever hiding itself under the mask of some sophism—fre- 
quently, of some virtue! 

Guilty without remorse, I soon became so without measure: and 
I beg the reader to observe how my passion followed the track of my 
disposition, to drag me finally into the abyss. At first, it assumed a 
humble attitude, to reassure me; and then, in order to encourage me, 
pushed this humility to mistrust. Madame d’Houdetot, without re- 
laxing her efforts to recall me to my duty and reason, without ever 
flattering my folly for a moment, treated me in other respects with 
the greatest gentleness, and assumed towards me a tone of the ten- 
derest friendship. This friendship would have been enough for ine, 
I deciare, if I had believed it to be sincere; but, as I found it too pro- 
nounced to be true, I proceeded to get the idea into my head that 
love, which was from this time forth so ill-suited to my age and gen- 


458 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


eral appearance, had degraded me in the eyes of Madame d’Houde- 
tot; that, in the extravagance of her youth, she only desired to amuse 
herself with me and my superannuated passions; that she had taken 
Saint-Lambert into her confidence, and that, indignation at my dis- 
loyalty having brought him over to her views, there was an under- 
standing between them to turn my head completely, and then to 
laugh at me. This folly, which had caused me, at twenty-six years of 
age, to make a fool of myself with Madame de Larnage, whom I did 
not know, would have been excusable in me, at the age of forty-five, 
in the case of Madame d’Houdetot, if I had not known that she and 
her lover were both too honourable to indulge in so cruel an amuse- 
ment. 

Madame d’Houdetot continued to pay me visits, which I was not 
slow to return. Like myself, she was fond of walking: we took long 
walks in an enchanted country. Content to love her, and to venture 
to declare it, my situation would have been most delightful, had not 
my extravagant folly completely destroyed its charm. At first, she 
utterly failed to understand the silly petulance with which I received 
her tenderness; but my heart, which has ever been incapable of con- 
cealing any of its emotions, did not long leave her in ignorance of 
my suspicions. She tried to treat them as a joke; but this expedient 
was unsuccessful. Violent attacks of rage would have been the re- 
sult: she accordingly altered her tone. Her compassionate gentleness 
remained unshaken. She reproachad me in a manner which cut me 
to the heart; she exhibited, in regard to my unjust apprehensions, an 
uneasiness which I abused. I demanded proof that she was not laugh- 
ing at me. She saw that there was no other way of reassuring me. I 
became pressing; the matter was a delicate one. It is surprising—it is, 
perhaps, unique—that a woman, who had ventured to go so far as 
to hesitate should have got out of the affair so well. She refused me 
nothing that the most tender friendship could grant. She granted 
nothing that could expose her to the charge of infidelity, and I had 
the humiliation of seeing that the flames, which the slightest favours 
on her part kindled in my heart, never threw the slightest spark into 
her own. 

I have said, somewhere, that one must grant nothing to the senses, 
when one desires to refuse them something. In order to see how this 


r 


REFLECTIONS UPON LOVE 459 


maxim was falsified in the case of Madame d’Houdetot, and how 
completely she was justified in her self-dependence, it will be neces- 
sary to enter into the details of our long and frequent téte-d-tétes, 
and to describe them, in all their liveliness, during the four months ` 
which we spent together, in the course of an intimacy almost un- 
precedented between two friends of opposite sexes, who confine 
themselves within the limits beyond which we never went. Ah! if it 
was so late before I felt true love, my heart and senses paid dearly 
for the arrears! How great are the transports one must feel, by the 
side of a dearly-loved object of affection, who returns our love, when 
even a love which is unrequited can inspire those which it does! 

But I am wrong in speaking of an unrequited love; to some ex- 
tent mine was returned; it was equal on both sides, although it was 
not mutual. We were both intoxicated with love; she for her lover, 
i for her. Our sighs, our delightful tears mingled together. Tender 
confidants, our feelings were so closely connected, that it was im- 
possible that they should not unite in something; and yet, amidst 
this dangerous intoxication, she never forgot herself for a moment; 
as for myself, I protest, I swear that if, sometimes carried away by 
my senses, I attempted to make her unfaithful, I never truly desired 
it. The vehemence of my passion of itself kept it within bounds. The 
duty of self-denial had exalted my soul. The splendour of all the vir- 
tures adorned in my eyes the idol of my heart; to have soiled its 
divine image would have been its annihilation. I might have com- 
mitted the crime; it has been committed a hundred times in my 
heart; but—to degrade my Sophie! could that ever have been pos. 
sible? No, no! I told her so myself a hundred times. Had it been in 
my power to satisfy myself, had she abandoned herself to me of her 
own accord, I should, except in a few brief moments of delirium, 
have refused to be happy at such a cost. I loved her too dearly to 
desire to possess her. 

It is nearly a league from the Hermitage to Eaubonne; on my fre- 
quent visits, I sometimes passed the night there. One bright moon- 
light evening, after having supped together, we went for a walk in 
the garden. At the bottom of this garden there was a rather large 
copse, through which we made our way to a pretty grove, adorned 
with a cascade, the idea of which she had carried out at my sugges- 


460 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


tion. Immortal souvenir of innocence and bliss! It was in this grove 
that, seated by her side on a grassy bank, under an acacia in full 
bloom, I found, to express the feelings of my heart, language that 
was really worthy of them. For the first and only time in my life I 
was sublime, if one may so call all the amiability and seductive 
charm that the tenderest and most ardent love can inspire in a man’s 
heart. What intoxicating tears I shed upon her knees! What tears I 
caused her to shed in spite of herself! At hast, in an involuntary trans- 
port, she exclaimed, “Never, no, never was a man so amiable; never 
did a lover love like you! But your friend Saint-Lambert is listening 
to us. My heart cannot love twice.” I sighed; and was silent; I em- 
braced her—what an embrace! But that was all. For six months she 
had lived alone, that is to say, far from her lover and her husband; 
during three of these months I saw her nearly every day, and Love 
was always with us. We had supped alone; we were alone, ina grove, 
beneath the light of the moon; and, after two hours of the liveliest 
and tenderest conversation, she left, in the middle of the night, this 
grove and the arms of her friend, as free from guilt, as pure in heart 
and person as she had entered it. Reader, weigh all these circum- 
stances: I will add no more. 

At the same time, let no one imagine that, on this occasion, my 
feelings left me as undisturbed as in the presence of Thérése or 
mamma. I have already said that this time it was love—iove in all its 
force and in all its frenzy. I will not describe the agitation, the shiver- 
ing, the palpitation, the convulsive movements, or the faintness of 
the heart, which I felt continually. The reader can judge of it from 
the impression which her image alone produced upon me. I have 
said that it was a considerable distance from the Hermitage to Eau- 
bonne. I went past the hills of Andilly, which are delightful. As I 
walked, I dreamed of her whom I was going to see, of the tender re- 
ception, of the kiss which awaited me on my arrival; This kiss alone, 
this fatal kiss, even before I received it, inflamed my blood to such a 
degree that I felt dizzy, my eyes swam, I was blinded; my trembling 
knees could no longer support me; I was obliged to stop and sit 
down; my whole bodily machinery was utterly out of gear; I felt 
teady to faint. Aware of the danger, I tried, when I set out again, to 
distract my attention and to think of something else. I had scarcely 


&lt; 


MONT OLYMPE 461 
e 


gone twenty yards, when the same recollections and their incidental 
results returned to the attack, and I found it impossible to shake 
them off. In spite of all my efforts, I do not believe that I have ever 
succeeded in accomplishing this journey alone, without paying the 
penalty. I arrived at Eaubonne, weak, exhausted, and worn out, 
scarcely able to stand upright. The moment I saw her, I was com- 
pletely reinvigorated. By her side, I felt nothing but the importunity 
of an inexhaustible and ever useless vigour. On the road, within 
sight of Eaubonne, there was a pleasant terrace called Mont Olympe, 
where we sometimes met. If I arrived first, I had to wait for her. 
How painful was this waiting! In order to divert my attention, I at- 
tempted to write notes with my pencil, which I might have written 
with my purest blood. I was never able to finish a single one that 
was legible. When she found one in the niche which we had agreed 
upon, all she could read in it was the truly deplorable state I was in 
when I wrote it. This state, and, above all, its continuance during 
three months of excitement and self-restraint, so exhausted me that 
I did not recover for several years, and, finally, brought on a rup- 
ture, which I shall carry with me, or which will carry me with it, 
into the grave. Such was the only amorous enjoyment of the man of 
the most inflammable temperament, but, at the same time, of the 
most retiring disposition that Nature has perhaps ever produced. 
Such were the last happy days that have been permitted to me upon 
earth. I now commence the long series of the misfortunes of my life, 
which was seldom, if ever, interrupted. 

Throughout the course of my life, as has been seen, my heart, 
transparent as crystal, has never been able to conceal, even for a mo- 
ment, any feelings at all lively which may have taken refuge in it. 
The reader can judge whether I found it possible to conceal for 
long my affection for Madame d’Houdetot. Our intimacy was pat- 
ent to everybody; we made no secret or mystery of it: it was not of 
a kind to require it; and, as Madame d’Houdetot had the tenderest 
friendship for me, of which she made no reproach, while I felt for 
her an esteem, the full justice of which no one knew better than 
myself, we afforded—she, by her frankness, absence of mind, and 
thoughtlessness; I, by my truthfulness, awkwardness, pride, impa- 
tience, and impetuosity—in our delusive security, more opportunity 


, 


462 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


for attack than we should have done if we had been guilty. We went 

together to La Chevrette, we frequently met there, sometimes even 
by appointment. We lived there as usual, walking alone every day 
while talking of our love, our duties, our friend, our innocent 
schemes, in the park, opposite Madame d’Epinay’s apartments, be- 
neath her windows, from which she continually watched us, and, 
thinking herself defied, glutted her heart, by means of her eyes, 
with rage and indignation. ; 

All women possess the art of concealing their anger, especially 
when it is strong. Madame d’Epinay, who was violent but deliber- 
ate, possesses this art in an eminent degree. She pretended to see 
nothing, to suspect nothing; and, while she redoubled her care and 
attention to me, and almost flirted with me, she at the same time 
pretended to overwhelm her sister-in-law with rudeness and marks 
of contempt, with which she appeared to wish to inspire me as well. 
It may be imagined that she did not succeed; but I was on the rack. 
Torn by contradictory feelings, while at the same time I felt touched 
by her tenderness, I had difficulty in restraining my anger, when I 
saw her wanting in respect to Madame d’Houdetot. The angelic 
gentleness of the latter enabled her to endure everything without 
complaining, even without resenting it. Besides, she was frequently 
so absent-minded, and always so little sensitive to such things, that 
half the time she did not even notice it. 

I was so taken up with my passion, that, seeing nothing but Sophie 
—this was one of Madame d’Houdetot’s names—I did not even no- 
tice that I had become the talk of the whole household and of the 
visitors. Baron d'Holbach, who, as far as I know, had never before 
been to La Chevrette, was one of the latter. If I had been as mis- 
trustful as I afterwards became, I should have strongly suspected 
Madame d’Epinay of arranging this visit, in order to afford him the 
gratification of the amusing spectacle of the amorous citizen. But at 
that time I was so stupid, that I did not even see what was glaringly 
obvious to everyone. However, all my stupidity did not prevent me 
from finding the Baron more contented and jovial than usual. In- 
stead of scowling at me, he discharged at me a volley of witticisms, 
of which I understood nothing. I opened my eyes wide without an- 


2 


SAINT-LAMBERT IS INFORMED 463 


swering; Madame d’Epinay was obliged to hold her sides to restrain 
her laughter; I could not make out what was the matter with them. 
As the limits of jest were not yet exceeded, the best thing I could 
have done, if I had understood, would have been to join in it. But 
it is true that, amidst all the Baron’s mocking joviality, it was easy 
to perceive the light of a spiteful joy in his eyes, which would per- 
haps have made me uneasy, if I had noticed it as much at the time, 
as I afterwards did when I recalled it to mind. 

One day, when I went to see Madame d’Houdetot at Eaubonne, 
on her return from one of her journeys to Paris, I found her sad, and 
saw that she had been crying. I was obliged to restrain myself, since 
Madame de Blainville, her husband’s sister, was present; but, as soon 
as I had a moment to myself, I told her of my uneasiness. “Ah!” she 
said, with a sigh, “I am much afraid that your follies will deprive me 
of all peace for the rest of my life. Saint-Lambert has been informed, 
and wrongly informed. He does me justice, but he is annoyed, and, 
what is worse, he does not tell me all. Happily, I have made no secret 
of our friendship, which was formed under his auspices. My letters, 
like my heart, were full of you; I have concealed nothing from him 
except your insensate love, of which I hoped to cure you, and which, 
although he does not mention it, I can see that he considers a crime 
on my part. Someone has done us an ill turn, and wronged me; but 
never mind. Let us either break off our acquaintance, or do you be- 
have yourself as you ought. I do not wish to have anything more to 
conceal from my lover.” 

This was the first moment when | was sensible of the shame of 
seeing myself humiliated, through the consciousness of my offence, 
in the presence of a young woman, whose reproaches I felt to be just, 
and whose Mentor I ought to have been. The indignation which 
this caused me to feel against myself might perhaps have been 
strong enough to overcome my weakness, had not the tender com: 
passion with which its victim inspired me again softened my heart. 
Alas! was that the moment to be able to harden it, when it over- 
flowed with tears which penetrated it from all directions? This ten- 
derness soon changed to anger against the vile informers, who had 
only seen the evil of a criminal but involuntary feeling, without be- 


464 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


lieving, or even suspecting, the honourable sincerity of heart which 
redeemed it. We did not Jong remain in doubt as to the hand which 
had dealt the blow. 

We both of us knew that Madame d’Epinay corresponded with 
Saint-Lambert. It was not the first storm which she had raised 
against Madame d’Houdetot; she had made countless attempts to 
get him away from her, and the past success of some of these at- 
tempts made Madame d’Houdetot tremble for the future. In addi- 
tion, Grimm, who I believe had followed M. de Castries to the army, 
was in Westphalia, as well as Saint-Lambert; and they sometimes 
saw each other. Grimm had made some advances to Madame 
d’Houdetot, which had been unsuccessful. This so annoyed him 
that he gave up visiting her. One can imagine the sang-froid with 
which, considering his well-known modesty, he received the sup- 
position that she preferred a man older than himself, and of whom, 
since he had been admitted to the society of the great, he only spoke 
as his protégé. 

My suspicions of Madame d’Epinay became certainties, when I 
heard what had happened at home. While I was at La Chevrette, 
Thérèse often came there to bring my letters or to do certain things 
for me which my ill-health rendered necessary. Madame d’Epinay 
had asked her whether Madame d’Houdetot and myself corre- 
sponded. When she told me that we did, Madame d’Epinay pressed 
her to hand Madame d’Houdetot’s letters to her, assuring her that 
she would seal them up again so cleverly that it would not be no- 
ticed. Thérése, without letting it be seen how shocked she was at 
this proposal, and even without informing me, contented herself 
with taking greater precautions to conceal the letters which she 
brought me—a very wise precaution, for Madame d’Epinay had her 
watched when she came, and, waiting for her as she passed, on sev- 
eral occasions carried her boldness so far as to feel in her bib. She 
did more: she invited herself one day, together with M. de Mar- 
gency, to dinner at the Hermitage, for the first time since I had 
lived there, and took advantage of the moment when I was walking 
with Margency, to go into my study with the mother and daughter, 
and begged them to show her Madame d’Houdetot’s letters. If the 
mother had known where they were, they would certainly have 


r 


LETTER FROM MADAME D’EPINAY 65 


5 
been handed to her, but, luckily, only the daughter knew, and she 
declared that I had not kept any of them. This was a falsehood, be- 
yond dispute, most honourable, loyal, and generous, while to have 
told the truth would have been simply an act of treachery. Madame 
d’Epinay, seeing that she could not seduce her, attempted to rouse 
her jealousy by reproaching her with her good-nature and blind- 
ness. “How can you,” she said to her, “fail to perceive that their 
connection is a criminal one? If, in spite of all you can see for your- 
self with your own eyes, you still want further proofs, assist in what 
you must do to obtain them: you say that he tears up Madame 
d’Houdetot’s letters as soon as he has read them; well, then! pick up 
the pieces carefully, and give them to me; I will put them together 
again.” Such were the lessons which my friend gave to my com. 
panion. 

Thérèse had the discretion to say nothing to me for a long time 
about all these attempts; but at last, seeing my embarrassment, sh¢ 
felt bound to tell me all, so that, knowing with whom I had to deal, 
I might take steps to protect myself against the treachery which wa: 
intended against me. My indignation and fury were indescribable, 
Instead of dissembling with Madame d’Epinay, as she had done with 
me, and employing counterplots, I abandoned myself without re- 
straint to my natural impetuosity, and, with my usual thoughtless- 
ness, broke out openly. My imprudence may be gauged by the fol- 
lowing letters, which sufficiently show how each of us proceeded on 
this occasion: 


LETTER FROM MapaMe p’Epinay (Packer A, No. 44). 


“What is the reason that I do not see you, my dear friend? I am 
uneasy about you. You promised me faithfully that you would con- 
fine yourself to going backwards and forwards from the Hermitage. 
Upon that, I left you to do as you pleased; but no, you have let a 
week go by. Unless I had been told that you were well, I should 
think that you were ill. I expected you yesterday or the day before, 
but I see no signs of you. My God! what can be the matter with you? 
You have no business, you can have nothing to annoy you either: for 
I flatter myself that you would have come at once to confide in me. 
You must be ill, then. Relieve my anxiety immediately, I beg you. 


466 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Adieu, my dear friend. May this ‘Adieu’ bring a ‘Good morning’ 
from you.” 


ANSWER. 
“Wednesday Morning. 


“I cannot yet say anything to you. I am waiting until I am better 
informed, as I shall be, sooner or later. Meanwhile, rest assured that 
accused innocence will find a defender sufficiently zealous to give 
the slanderers, whoever they may be, some cause for repentance.” 


SEconp LETTER FRoM MapaME pD’Epinay (Packet A, No. 45). 


“Do you know that your letter alarms me? What does it mean? 
[ have read it more than five-and-twenty times. In truth, I do not 
understand it. I can only learn from it that you are uneasy and tor- 
mented, and that you are waiting until you are so no longer, before 
speaking to me about it. My dear friend, is this what we agreed? 
What has become of our friendship, our confidence? and how have 
I lost it? Are you angry with me or because of me? In any case, 
come this evening, I entreat you. Remember that you promised, not 
a week ago, to keep nothing on your mind, but to let me know of it 
at once. My dear friend, I rely upon that confidence. . . . Stay! I 
have just read your letter again. I do not understand it any better, 
but it makes me tremble. You seem to me painfully agitated. I wish 
I could calm you; but as I do not know the reason of your uneasiness, 
I do not know what to say to you, except that I shall be as unhappy 
as yourself until I have seen you. If you are not here by six o’clock 
this evening, I shall start to-morrow for the Hermitage, whatever 
kind of weather it is, and whatever my state of health, for I can no 
longer endure this uneasiness. Good day, my dear, good friend. At 
all risks, I venture to tell you, without knowing whether I need do 
so or not, to try and take care of yourself and arrest the progress 
which solitude allows uneasiness to make. A fly becomes a monster. 
I have often experienced it.” 


ANSWER. 


“Wednesday Evening. 


“I can neither come to see you nor receive your visit, as long as my 
present uneasiness continues. The confidence of which you speak no 


HIS REPLY 467 
a 


longer exists, and it will not be easy for you to regain it. At present, 
I see in your eagerness nothing but the desire of extracting from the 
confessions of another some advantage which may promote your 
views. My heart, so ready to unbosom itself to another which opens 
to receive it, shuts its doors in the face of slyness and cunning. I rec- 
ognise your usual adroitness in the difficulty which you find in 
understanding my letter. Do you believe me simple enough to think 
that you have not understood it? No; but I shall know how to over- 
come your cunning by frankness. I am going to explain myself more 
clearly, in order that you may comprehend me still less. 

“Two lovers, firmly united and worthy of each other’s love, are 
dear to me; I expect that you will not understand whom I mean 
unless I tell you their names. I assume that attempts have been made 
to part them, and that I have been made use of to inspire one of them 
with jealousy. The choice is not very clever, but it appeared conven- 
ient for malicious purposes; and it is you whom I suspect of these 
designs. I hope that this makes matters clearer. 

“So then the woman, whom I esteem above all others, with my 
knowledge, would have the infamy of dividing her heart and her 
person between two lovers, and I the disgrace of being one of these 
two wretches? If I knew that, for a single moment in your life, you 
could have entertained such thoughts of her and me, I should hate 
you to my dying day; but I only accuse you of having said, not of 
having thought it. I do not understand, in such a case, which of the 
three you have desired to injure; but, if you love tranquillity, you 
should dread being so unfortunate as to succeed. I have neither con- 
cealed from you, nor from her, how much evil I see in certain con- 
nections; but I desire that they should be put an end to by means as 
honourable as the feelings which originally formed them, and that 
an illicit love should be changed into an eternal friendship. Should I, 
who never injured anyone, be made the innocent means of doing 
harm to my friends? No; I would never forgive you; I should be- 
come your irreconcilable enemy. Your secrets alone should be re- 
spected; for I will never be disloyal. 

“I do not imagine that my present embarrassment can last long. 
I shall soon know whether I am mistaken. Then I shall perhaps have 
a great injury to repair, and I shall never have done anything in my 
life with greater goodwill. But, do you know how I shall repair my 
errors during the short time which I have still to spend near you? 
By doing what no one but myself will do; by telling you frankly 
what the world thinks of you, and the breaches in your reputation 


468 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


which you have to repair. In spite of all the pretended friends by 
whom you are surrounded, when you see me depart, you may say 
farewell to truth; you will never find anyone else to tell it to you.” 


Tuirp Lerrer From MapaMe p’Eprinay (Packet A, No. 46). 


“I did not understand your letter of this morning; I told you so, 
because it was the truth. I understand that of this evening. Do not be 
afraid that I shall ever answer it; I am only too anxious to forget it; 
and although you excite my pity, I have been unable to resist the bit- 
terness with which it fills my soul. I employ slyness and cunning 
against you! I accused of the blackest of infamies! Good-bye; I regret 
that you have—good-bye; I do not know what I am saying—good- 
bye. I should be only too glad to forgive you. Come when you like; 
you will meet with a better reception than your suspicions would en- 
title you to. You can spare yourself the trouble of thinking about my 
reputation. It inatters little to me what it is. My conduct is good; 
that is enough for me. I may add, that I am absolutely ignorant of 
what has happened to the two persons who are as dear to me as to 
you. 


This last letter delivered me from one terrible embarrassment and 
plunged me into another, which was almost as great. Although all 
these letters and answers had been delivered with extraordinary ra- ` 
pidity in the course of a single day, this interval had been long 
enough to allow a break in my transports of fury, and to give me 
time to reflect upon my monstrous imprudence. Madame d’Houde- 
tot had impressed upon me, more strongly than anything else, the 
necessity of remaining calm; of leaving her the responsibility of ex- 
tricating herself; and of avoiding, especially at the moment, all noise 
and actual rupture; yet I, by the most open and monstrous insults, 
was on the point of completely filling with rage the heart of a 
woman, who was already only too much inclined towards it! Natu- 
rally, I could only expect, on her part, an answer so proud, disdain- 
ful, and contemptuous, that it would leave me no alternative, unless 
I behaved like an utter coward, but to leave her house immediately. 
Happily, her cleverness was greater than my rage. She avoided, by 
the tone of her answer, reducing me to this extremity. But it was 
absolutely necessary for me either to leave the house or to go and 


HIS ©£MBARRASSMENT 469 


see her at once; one or the other was unavoidable. I decided upon 
the latter, feeling greatly embarrassed as to the attitude I should 
adopt in the explanation, which I foresaw would have to be made. 
How could I extricate myself without compromising Madame 
d'Houdetot or Thérèse? And woe to her whom I should name! 
There was nothing which the vengeance of an implacable and in- 
triguing woman did not cause me to apprehend for her upon whose 
head it might fall. It was to prevent this misfortune that I had only 
spoken of suspicions in my letters to avoid being compelled to pro- 
duce my proofs. It is true that this made my outbursts the more in. 
excusable, since no mere suspicion justified me in treating a woman, 
especially one who was my friend, as I had just treated Madame 
d’Epinay. But here commences the grand and noble task, which I 
have worthily fulfilled, of expiating my secret faults and weaknesses, 
by taking upon myself the responsibility of more serious faults, of 
which I was incapable, and of which I never was guilty. 

I had not to endure the attack which I had feared, and got off 
with a simple fright. When I approached her, Madame d’Epinay 
flung her arms round my neck, and burst into tears. This unex- 
pected reception, on the part of an old friend, touched me greatly, 
and I also wept freely. I said a few words to her, which did not 
mean much: she said a few to me, which meant still less, and that 
was all. Dinner was served; we took our seats at the table, where, in 
the expectation of the explanation, which I thought was only put off 
until after supper, I cut a very poor figure; for I am so overcome by 
the slightest uneasiness which takes possession of me, that I cannot 
conceal it even from the most unobservant. My embarrassed manner 
should have inspired her with courage; however, she did not risk it. 
There was as little explanation after supper as before. There was 
none on the next day either; and our silent ¢éte-d-tétes were filled up 
with indifferent matters or a few polite words on my part, in which, 
while expressing myself to the effect that I could not yet say any- 
thing about the foundation for my suspicions, I protested with all 
sincerity that, if they proved unfounded, my whole life would be 
devoted to repairing their injustice. She did not exhibit the least 
curiosity to know exactly what these suspicions were, or how they 
had occurred to me; and our reconciliation, both on her part and my 


470 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


own, was entirely limited to our embrace when we met. Since she 
alone was the injured party, at least in form, it seemed to me that 
it was not my business to desire an explanation which she herself 
did not desire, and J returned home as I had left. In other respects 
my relations with her remained unaltered, I soon almost entirely 
forgot the quarrel, and foolishly believed that she had forgotten it 
herself, because she no longer seemed to remember it. 

As will presently be seen, this was not the only annoyance which 
my own weakness brought upon me; but I also suffered others, 
equally annoying, which I had certainly not brought upon myself, 
and which were caused solely by the desire of others to tear me away 
from my solitude, by dint of tormenting me in it.1° These annoy- 
ances came upon me from Diderot and the Holbachian clique. Since 
my establishment at the Hermitage, Diderot had never ceased to 
harass me, either himself or through Deleyre; and I soon saw, from 
the jests of the latter upon my walks in the forest, with what delight 
they had travestied the hermit as an amorous shepherd. But it was 
not a question of this in my encounter with Diderot, the cause of 
which was more serious. After the publication of the “Fils Naturel,” 
he had sent me a copy of it, which I had read with the interest and 
attention which one naturally bestows on the works of a friend. On 
reading the kind of poetical prose dialogue which he had added to 
it, I was surprised, and even somewhat saddened, to find in it, 
amongst several discourteous but endurable remarks directed against 
those who live a solitary life, the following harsh and bitter sentence, 
without anything to tone it down: “Only the wicked are alone.” 
This sentence is, it appears to me, ambiguous, and capable of two 
interpretations, one quite true, the other equally false; since it is im- 
possible for a man who is and who desires to be alone, to be able or 
desirous to injure anyone, and therefore he cannot be wicked. The 
sentence in itself therefore required an explanation; it required it 
still more on the part of an author who, when he wrote the sentence, 
had a friend who was living in retirement and solitude. It appeared 


* That is to say, the desire of tearing the old woman away from it, whose 
services Were necessary in arranging the conspiracy. It is astonishing that, during 
the whole of this long storm, my stupid confidence in others prevented me from 
understanding that it was not I, but she, whom they wanted to see in Paris again. 


+ 


DIDEROT 471 


to me shocking and dishonourable that, when publishing it, he 
should either have forgotten this solitary friend, or that, if he had 
remembered him, he should not have made, at least in the general 
statement, the honourable and just exception which he owed not 
only to this friend, but to the many respected philosophers, who, in 
all ages, have sought peace and tranquillity in retirement, and of 
whom, for the first time since the existence of the world, an author 
permits himself, by a single stroke of the pen, to make so many vil- 
lains without distinction. 

I was tenderly attached to Diderot, I esteemed him sincerely, and 
I reckoned upon the same feelings on his part with perfect confi- 
dence. But, worn out by his unwearying obstinacy in eternally op- 
posing me in my tastes, inclinations, manner of living, in fact, in 
everything which concerned myself alone; disgusted at seeing a man 
younger than myself attempting to control me absolutely like a child; 
sick of his readiness in making promises, and his carelessness in ful- 
filling them; weary of so many appointments made and broken on 
his part, and of his fancy for continually making fresh ones, only to 
be broken again; tired of waiting for him in vain three or four times 
a month, on days fixed by himself, and of dining alone in the eve- 
ning, after having gone as far as Saint-Denis to meet him, after 
waiting for him the whole day, my heart was already full of his con- 
tinued want of consideration. The last instance appeared to me more 
serious, and wounded me still more deeply. I wrote to him to com- 
plain of it, but with a gentleness and emotion which caused me to 
drench the paper with my tears; and my letter was touching enough 
to have drawn tears from him. No one would guess how he replied 
upon the matter; here is his answer word for word (Packet A, No- 


33): 


“I am very glad that my work has pleased you, that it has affected 
you. You are not of my opinion concerning hermits; say as much 
good of them as you please, you will be the only one in the world of 
whom I shall think it; and yet I should be able to say a good deal on 
the matter, if I could say it to you without offending you. A woman 
of eighty years of age! etc. Someone has told me of a phrase from a 
letter of Madame d’Epinay’s son, which must have pained you 
greatly, or else I do not know you thoroughly.” 


472 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


I must explain the two last phrases of this letter. 

At the beginning of my stay at the Hermitage, Madame le Vas- 
seur did not seem comfortable, and appeared to find it too lonely. 
Her remarks on the subject were repeated to me, and I offered to 
send her back to Paris if she preferred it, to pay for her lodging 
there, and to look after her just as if she were still with me. She re- 
fused my offer, declared that she was very well satisfied with the 
Hermitage, and that the country air did her good, which it was easy 
to see was true, for she seemed to grow younger, and was in far 
better health than at Paris. Her daughter even assured me that she 
would have been, on the whole, very sorry if we had left the Hermi- 
tage, which really was a charming residence; that she was very fond 
of pottering about in the garden and in the orchard, of. which she 
had the management, and that she had only said what she had been 
told to say, to try and induce me to return to Paris. 

This attempt having proved unsuccessful, they endeavoured to 
obtain, by appealing to my scruples, the result which my readiness 
to oblige had not produced; they declared that it was a crime on my 
part to keep the old woman there, far from the assistance which she 
might need at her age, without considering that she and many other 
old people, whose life is prolonged by the healthy air of the country, 
might procure this assistance from Montmorency, which was close 
to my doors—as if Paris had been the only place in which there were 
old people, and it was impossible for them to live anywhere else. 
Madame le Vasseur, who was a large and very ravenous eater, was 
subject to overflows of bile and violent attacks of diarrhoea, which 
lasted several days, and acted as a remedy. At Paris she took nothing 
for them, and let Nature take its course. She did the same at the 
Hermitage, since she knew well that she could do nothing better. 
Never mind; because there were no physicians and apothecaries in 
the country, to leave her there showed a wish for her death, although 
she was in very good health there. Diderot ought to have fixed the 
age at which it is no longer permitted, under penalty of being 
charged with manslaughter, to allow old people to live out of Paris, 

This was one of the two monstrous accusations, in regard to 
which he made no exception in my case, in his statement that “Only 
the wicked are alone”; and this was the meaning of his pathetic ex- 


LETTER TO MADAME *D’EPINAY 473 
oe 


clamation and the etcetera which he so kindly added, “A woman of 
eighty years of age! etc.” 

I thought I could not reply to this reproach better than by refer- 
ring to Madame le Vasseur herself. I asked her to write quite simply 
and naturally to Madame d’Epinay and tell her what her opinion 
was. To put her completely at her ease, I did not even ask to see her 
letter, and I showed her the following, which I wrote to Madame 
d’Epinay, in reference to an answer which I had decided to make to 
a still harsher letter from Diderot, and which she had prevented me 
from sending. 


“Thursday. 


“Madame le Vasseur is going to write to you, my good friend. I 
have asked her to tell you frankly what she thinks. To put her en- 
tirely at her ease, I have told her that I do not want to see her letter, 
and I beg you to tell me nothing about its contents. 

“T will not send my letter, since you oppose it; but as I feel griev- 
ously offended, it would be a baseness and a falsehood, which I can- 
not permit myself, to allow that I am wrong. The Gospel certainly 
orders him who receives a blow on one cheek to offer the other, but 
not to ask for pardon. Do you remember the man in the comedy, 
who exclaims, while dealing blows with his stick, ‘That is the part 
of the philosopher’? 

“Do not flatter yourself that you can prevent him from coming in 
the present bad weather. His anger will give him the time and 
strength which friendship refuses him, and it will be the first time in 
his life that he has come on the day he has promised. He will do his 
utmost to come and repeat, with his own mouth, the insults which 
he has heaped upon me in his letters. I will endure them with the 
utmost patience. He will return to Paris to be ill; and, as usual, I 
shall be a very hateful person. But what can I do? I must endure it. 

“But, can you help admiring the cleverness of this man, who 
wanted to come and take me in a coach to Saint-Denis to dinner, 
and to bring me back; and who, a week afterwards,!! finds that his 
finances do not allow him to visit the Hermitage except on foot? It 
is not absolutely impossible, to adopt his language, that this is the 
tone of sincerity; but, in this case, a strange alteration in the state of 
his finances must have taken place in the course of a week. 


1 Packet A No. 34. 


474 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


“I share your grief at your mother’s iliness; but you see that your 
sorrow is not nearly as great as mine. It causes less suffering to see 
those whom one loves, ill, than to see them cruel and unjust. 

“Adieu, my good friend; this is the last time that I shall speak to 
you about this unfortunate affair. You speak to me of going to Paris 
with a coolness and indifference, which, at any other time, would 
rejoice me greatly.” 


I informed Diderot of what I had done in regard to Madame le 
Vasseur, at Madame d’Epinay’s own suggestion; and as she chose, 
as may be imagined, to remain at the Hermitage, where she was very 
comfortable, always had company, and found her life very agreeable, 
Diderot, no longer knowing what crime to charge me with, con- 
strued this very precaution on my part into one, as well as Madame 
le Vasseur’s continued stay at the Hermitage, although it had been 
her own choice, and it had only rested, and still rested with her, to 
return to Paris to live, with the same assistance from me as she re- 
ceived at my house. 

Such is the explanation of the first reproach in Diderot’s letter, 
No. 33. The explanation of the second is contained in his letter, No. 
34: 
“ “The man of letters’ 1? must have written to you, that there were 
twenty poor wretches on the rampart dying of cold and hunger, and 
waiting for the farthing you used to give them. This is a sample of 


our small-talk—and if you were to hear the rest, it would amuse you 
as much as this.” 


Here is my answer to this terrible argument, of which Diderot 
seemed so proud: 


“I believe that I replied to the ‘man of letters,’ that is to say, the 
son of a farmer-general, that I did not pity the poor whom he had 
seen upon the rampart, waiting for my farthing; that he had appar- 
ently amply compensated them for its loss; that I had appointed him 
my substitute; that the poor of Paris would have no reason tp com- 
plain of the exchange; but that I could not easily find an equally 


* A name jokingly bestowed by Grimm upon Madame d’Epinay’s son. 


EXPLANATIONS 475 


good one for those of Montmprency, who had much greater need of 
it. There is here a good and worthy old man, who, after having 
_ worked all his life, can work no longer, and is dying of hunger in 
his old age. My conscience is better satisfied with the two sous which 
I give him every Monday, than with the hundred farthings which I 
should have distributed to all the beggars on the rampart. You are 
amusing, you philosophers, when you regard all the inhabitants of 
cities as the only people with whom your duty bids you concern 
yourselves. It is in the country that one learns to love and serve hu- 
manity; one only learns to despise it in cities.” 


Such were the singular scruples, which led a man of intelligence 
to the folly of seriously making a crime of my absence from Paris, 
and made him attempt to prove to me, by my own example, that it 
was impossible for anyone to live outside the city without being 
wicked. At the present day I cannot understand how J was so foolish 
as to answer him and to feel annoyed, instead of laughing in his face 
as my only reply. However, Madame d’Epinay’s decisions and the 
clamours of the Holbachian clique had so blinded people’s minds 
in her favour, that I was generally considered to be wrong in the 
matter, and Madame d’Houdetot herself, who was an enthusiastic 
admirer of Diderot, wanted me to go and see him in Paris, and make 
all the first advances towards a reconciliation, which, sincere and 
complete as it was on my part, did not last long. The triumphant 
argument, which she made use of to influence my heart was, that 
Diderot, at this moment, was unhappy. Besides the storm aroused 
against the “Encyclopédie,” he had at that time to endure another, 
even more violent, caused by his piece, which, in spite of the little 
account prefixed by him at the commencement, he was accused of 
having taken entirely from Goldoni. Diderot, even more sensitive 
to criticism than Voltaire, was overwhelmed. Madame de Graffigny 
had even had the spitefulness to circulate the report that I had taken 
this opportunity to break off my acquaintance with him. I con- 
sidered that it would be just and generous publicly to demonstrate 
the contrary, and I went to spend two days, not only in his company, 
but at his house. This was my second journey to Paris since my 
settlement at the Hermitage. I had taken the first in order to hasten 
to poor Gauffecourt, who had an attack of apoplexy, from which he 


. 


476 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


has never quite recovered, during which I never left his bedside 
until he was out of danger. 

Diderot received me cordially. How many wrongs can a friend’s 
embrace wipe out! What resentment, after that, can still remain in 
the heart? We entered into few explanations. There is no need of it 
in a case of mutual abuse. There is only one thing to be done—to 
forget it. There had been no underhand proceedings, at least as far 
as I knew; it was not the same as with `Madame d’Epinay. He 
showed me the outline of the “Père de Famille.” “That,” said I to 
him, “is the best defence of the ‘Fils Naturel.’ Remain silent, work 
this piece out carefully, and then suddenly fling it at your enemies’ 
head as your only reply.” He did so, and found the plan successful. I 
had sent him the first two parts of Julie nearly six months before, ask- 
ing for his opinion of them. He had not yet read them. We read a 
portion of them together. He found it all feuillet; that was the word 
he used, meaning that it was overloaded with words and full of pad- 
ding. I had already felt this myself; but it was the babbling of delir- 
ium; I have never been able to correct it. The last parts are different. 
The fourth especially, and the sixth, are masterpieces of diction. 

On the second day after my arrival, he insisted upon taking me 
to supper at M. d’Holbach’s. We could never manage to agree. I even 
wanted to break the agreement concerning the manuscript on Chem- 
istry, as I was indignant at being under an obligation for it to such 
a man. Diderot was completely victorious. He swore that M. d’Hol- 
bach had a most sincere affection for me; that I must excuse his man- 
ner, which was the same to everybody, and from which his friends 
had to suffer more than anyone. He represented to me that to refuse 
the production of this manuscript, after having accepted it two 
years before, would be an insult to the donor, which he had not de- 
served; that this refusal might even be misinterpreted, as a secret 
reproach to him for having been so long in fulfilling the agreement. 
“I see d'Holbach every day,” he added; “I know his inner self better 
than you do. If you had not reason to be satisfied with it, do you 
think your friend capable of advising you to act meanly?” In short, 
with my usual weakness, I allowed myself to be overcome, and we 
went to supper with the Baron, who received me in his usual man- 
ner; but his wife received me coldly, and almost rudely. I no longer 


- 


RETURN oF SAINT-LAMBERT 477 


recognised the amiable Caroline who, before she was married, 
showed me so many marks of goodwill. Long before, I had fancied 
that I perceived that, since Grimm had been a constant visitor at the 
house of Aine, I was no longer regarded with so favourable an eye. 

While I was in Paris, Saint-Lambert arrived on leave. As I knew 
nothing of it, I did not see him until after my return to the country, 
at first at La Chevrette, and afterwards at the Hermitage, where he ' 
came with Madame d’Houdetot to ask me to invite him to dinner. © 
It may be imagined how pleased I was to receive them; but I was 
still more pleased to see the good understanding between them. Re- 
joiced that I had not disturbed their happiness, I felt happy in it my- 
self; and I can swear that, during the whole course of my mad pas- 
sion, but especially at this moment, even if I had been able to take 
Madame d’Houdetot from him, I should not have wished, and I 
should not even have felt tempted to do so. I found her so amiable, 
so devoted to Saint-Lambert, that I could hardly imagine that she 
might have been equally devoted in her love for myself; and, with- 
out desiring to disturb their union, all that I had most truly desired 
from her in my delirium, was that she should allow herself to be 
loved. In short, however violent the passion with which I had been 
inflamed for her, I felt it as delightful to be the confidant as the ob- 
ject of her affections, and I have never for a moment regarded her 
Jover as my rival, but always as my friend. It will be said that this 
was not yet actual love. So be it; but then, it was more. 

As for Saint-Lambert, he behaved honourably and judiciously. 
As I was the only guilty party, I alone was punished, and that even 
mercifully. He treated me severely, but amicably; and I saw that I 
had lost something of his esteem, but nothing of his friendship. I 
consoled myself, since I knew that it would be easier for me to re- 
gain the former than the latter, and that he was too sensible to con- 
found an involuntary and momentary weakness with a radical vice. 
If, in all that had taken place, there had been errors on my part, they 
were trifling ones. Was it I who had sought his mistress? Was it not 
he who had sent her to me? Was it not she who had sought me? 
Could I have avoided seeing her? What could I do? They alone had 
done the mischief, and I had been the one to suffer from it. In my 
place, he would have done just as I did, perhaps worse; for, in short, 


478 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


however faithful, however estimable Madame d’Houdetot may 
have been, she was a woman. He was very often absent; the oppor- 
tunities were frequent, the temptations were great, and it would 
have been very difficult for her always to defend herself with equal 
success against a more enterprising lover. It was certainly a great 
thing for her and for me, in such a situation, that we had been able 
to fix the limits, which we never permitted ourselves to overstep. 
Although, in the bottom of my heart, I could produce sufficiently 
honourable testimony in my favour, appearances were so much 
against me, that the unconquerable feeling of shame, by which I was 
always dominated, gave me, in his presence, the appearance of a 
guilty person, and he often abused it in order to humiliate me. A 
single incident will make our mutual relations clear. After dinner I 
read to him the letter which I had written to Voltaire the year be- 
fore, and which he had heard spoken of. He went to sleep while I 
was reading it; and I, formerly so proud, now so foolish, did not 
venture to discontinue reading, and read on while he snored. Thus 
did I humble myself; thus did he avenge himself; but his generosity 
never permitted him to do so except when we three were alone. 
After he went away again, I found Madame d’Houdetot greatly 
altered in her behaviour towards me. I was as surprised as if I ought 
not to have expected it. I was more affected by it than I ought to have 
been, and this caused me much suffering. It seemed that everything 
by which I expected to be cured only plunged deeper into my heart 
the arrow which I had at length rather broken off than pulled out. 
I was resolved to conquer myself completely, and to leave nothing 
undone to change my foolish passion into a pure and lasting friend- 
ship. With this object, I had formed the most admirable plans in the 
world, which I needed Madame d’Houdetot’s assistance in carrying 
out. When I attempted to speak to her, I found her absent and em- 
barrassed. I felt that she had ceased to feel any pleasure in my society, 
and I saw clearly that something had taken place which she did not 
want to tell me, and which I have never learnt. This change, of 
of which I was unable to obtain an explanation, tortured me cruelly. 
She asked me to return her letters: I returned them all, with a fidelity 
which, to my great mortification, she for a moment doubted. This 
doubt was another unexpected pang for me, as she must have well 


COLDNESS OF MADAME D’HOUDETOT 479 


known. She did me justice, but not immediately. I understood that 
the examination of the packet which I had returned to her had made 
her conscious of her injustice. I even saw that she reproached her- 
self, and this gave me a certain advantage again. She could not take 
back her own letters without returning mine. She told me that she 
had burnt them; in my turn, I ventured to doubt it, and I confess 
that I doubt it still. No; one does not throw such letters into the fire. 
The letters in Julie have been considered burning. Good heavens! 
what would have been thought of mine? No, no; a woman capable 
of inspiring such a passion will never have the courage to burn the 
proofs of it. But neither do J fear that she has ever misused them. 
I do not believe her capable of it; and besides, I had taken measures 
to prevent it. The foolish, but lively fear of being ridiculed had made 
me commence this correspondence in a tone which protected the 
contents of my letters from being communicated to others. I even 
carried the familiar tone which I adopted in them so far as to thee 
and thou her, but in such a manner that she certainly could not have 
been offended. Certainly, she complained of it several times, but 
without success. Her complaints only aroused my suspicions, and, 
besides, I could not bring myself to draw back. If these letters are 
still in existence, and should one day see the light, it will be known 
how I have loved. 

The pain which Madame d’Houdetot’s coldness caused me, and 
the certainty that I had not deserved it, caused me to take the singu- 
lar course of complaining about it to Saint-Lambert himself. While 
waiting to see the result of my letter on the subject, I plunged into 
the distractions to which I ought to have had recourse sooner. Some 
festivities took place at La Chevrette, for which I composed the 
music. The pleasure of distinguishing myself in the eyes of Madame 
d’Houdetot, by the display of a talent which she admired, spurred 
my energies; and another circumstance contributed to arouse them, 
namely, the desire of showing that the author of the Devin du Vil- 
lage understood music; for I had long since perceived that someone 
was secretly working to make this seem doubtful, at least in regard 
to composition. My first appearance in Paris, the tests to which I had 
there been subjected on different occasions, at M. Dupin’s and M. de 
la Popliniére’s; the quantity of music which I had composed during 


480 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


fourteen years in the midst of the most famous artists, under their 
very eyes; and lastly, the opera of the Muses Galantes, even that of 
the Devin, a motet which I had written for Mademoiselle Fel, and 
which she had sung at the “spiritual concert,” the numerous dis- 
cussions on this beautiful art which had taken place between myself 
and its greatest masters—all these proofs should have prevented or 
dissipated any such doubt. It existed, however, even at La Chevrette, 
and I saw that M. d’Epinay was not free from it. Without appearing 
to be aware of it, I undertook to compose a motet for him for the 
dedication of the chapel of La Chevrette, and I asked him to supply 
me with words chosen by himself. He commissioned de Linant, his 
son’s tutor, to write them. De Linant composed some words suitable 
to the occasion, and, a week after they were given to me, the motet 
was finished. This time, spite was my Apollo, and never did richer 
music leave my hands. The words began with: “Ecce sedes hic 
Tonantis.” 13 The pomp of the opening was in keeping with the 
words, and the whole motet was so beautiful that everyone was 
struck with admiration. I had written for a large orchestra. D’Epinay 
got together the best instrumentalists. Madame Bruna, an Italian 
singer, sang the motet, and was excellently accompanied. The motet 
was so successful that it was afterwards given at the “spiritual con- 
cert,” at which, in spite of the secret intrigues and the poorness of 
the execution, it was twice heartily applauded. For M. d’Epinay’s 
birthday, I supplied the idea of a kind of piece, half drama, half 
pantomime, which Madame d’Epinay composed, and for which I 
also wrote the music. Grimm, on his arrival, heard of my musical 
successes; an hour later, nothing more was said about them; but, at 
any rate, as far as I know, there was no longer any question of my 
knowledge of composition. 

No sooner was Grimm at La Chevrette, where already I was not 
very comfortable, than he made my stay completely unendurable 
by putting on airs, which I had never seen exhibited by anyone be- 
fore, and of which I had not even an idea. The day before his arrival, 
I was turned out of the best visitor’s-room, which I was occupying, 
next to Madame d’Epinay’s; it was got ready for Grimm, and an- 





T have since heard that these words were by de Santeuil, and that M. de 
Linant had quietly appropriated them. 


GRIMM AND MADAME D’EPINAY 481 


other, in a more remote part of the house, was given to me. “See,” 
said I to Madame d’Epinay with a laugh, “see how the new-comers 
turn out the old.” She appeared embarrassed; and I understood the 
reason for this better in the evening, when J learned that, between 
her room and that which I was leaving, there was a secret door of 
communication, which she had not thought it worth while to show 
me. Her relations with Grimm were no secret to anybody, neither 
in her own house nor in public, nor even to her husband; however, 
far from admitting it to me, her confidant in secrets of far greater 
importance, and which she knew were perfectly safe with me, she 
stoutly denied it. I understood that this reserve was due to Grimm, 
who, although he was the depositary of all my secrets, was unwilling 
that I should have any of his own in my keeping. 

However much my former feelings, which were not yet extin 
guished, and the man’s real merits, prejudiced me in his favour, 
these feelings were not proof against the efforts he took to destroy 
them. He received me in the style of the Comte de Tufhére;'* he 
hardly condescended to return my greeting; he never addressed a 
single word to me, and soon cured me of addressing any to him, by 
never answering me at all. He took precedence everywhere, and held 
first place, without ever paying any attention to me. I could have let 
that pass, if he had not displayed an offensive affectation. A single 
incident out of a thousand will explain what I mean. One evening, 
Madame d’Epinay, feeling slightly unwell, told the servants to bring 
her something to eat upstairs to her room, where she intended to 
have her supper by the side of the fire. She asked me to go upstairs 
with her, which I did. Grimm came up afterwards. The little table 
was already laid, but only for two. Supper was brought in; Madame 
d’Epinay took her seat on one side of the fire. M. Grimm took an 
easy chair, settled himself in the other corner, drew up the little 
table between them, unfolded his napkin, and proceeded to eat, 
without saying a single word to me. Madame d’Epinay blushed, and, 
to induce him to apologise for his rudeness, offered me her own 
place. He said nothing, and did not even look at me. As I was un- 
able to get near the fire, I decided to walk up and down the room, 
until they brought me a plate. At last, he allowed me to sup at the 


14 One of the characters in Le Glorieux, a comedy by Destouches (1732). 


482 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


end of the table, away from the fire, without making the slightest 
apology to me, his senior, in ill-health, an older acquaintance of the 
family, who had introduced him to the house, the honours of which 
he ought even to have shown to me, as the favourite of the lady of 
the house. All his behaviour to me was very much after the same 
pattern. He did not treat me exactly as his inferior; he looked upon 
me as a perfect nonentity. I found it hard to recognise the former 
cuistre who, in the Prince of Saxe-Gotha’s establishment, felt him- 
self honoured by a look from me. I found it still harder to reconcile 
this profound silence, and this insulting haughtiness, with the tender 
friendship which he boasted he entertained for me, in the presence 
of these who he knew entertained it for me themselves. It is true 
that he rarely gave any signs of it, except to sympathise with my 
pecuniary position, of which I never complained, or to compassion- 
ate my melancholy lot, with which I was quite content, or to lament 
that I so harshly rejected the beneficent attentions which he declared 
he was eager to show me. It was by artifices like this that he caused 
his tender generosity to be admired, my ungrateful misanthropy to 
be censured, and imperceptibly accustomed everyone to imagine, 
that the relations between a protector like himself and an unfortu- 
nate creature like me could only be, on the one side, benefits, and, 
on the other, obligations, without supposing, even as a remote pos- 
sibility, a friendship between two equals. As for myself, I have vainly 
tried to discover in what respect I could be under an obligation to 
this new patron. I had lent him money, he had never lent me any; 
I had nursed him during his illness, he hardly ever came to see me 
during mine; I had introduced him to all my friends, he had never 
introduced me to one of his; I had sung his praises with all my 
might, he . . . if he sang my praises, it was less publicly, and in 
quite a different manner. He has never rendered or even offered to 
render me any service of any kind. How then was he my Maecenas? 
how was I his protégé? This was beyond my powers of comprehen- 
sion, and it still remains so. 

It is true that, more or less, he was arrogant with everybody, but 
with no one so brutally as with myself. I remember that, on one 
occasion, Saint-Lambert was on the point of throwing his plate at 
his head, when he ventured to give him the lie publicly at table, by 


x 


GRIMM’S ARROGANCE 483 


saying rudely, “That is nof true.” To his naturally sarcastic tone, he 
united the conceit of an upstart, and his continual impertinence 
even made him ridiculous. Intercourse with great people had led him 
to assume airs which one only sees in the least sensible amongst ' 
them. He never summoned his lackey except with an “Eh!”—as if 
my fine gentleman did not know which of his numerous attendants 
was on duty. When he gave him a commission to execute, he threw 
the money on the ground, instead of putting it into his hand. At 
last, forgetting altogether that he was a man, he treated him with 
such disgusting contempt and cruel disdain on every occasion that 
the poor lad, who was a very good fellow, whom Madame d’Epinay 
had given him, left his service, without any other cause of complaint 
than the impossibility of enduring such treatment. He was the La 
Fleur of this new Glorieux. As foppish as he was vain, with his large, 
dull eyes and his flabby face, he pretended to have great success with 
the ladies; and, after his farce with Mademoiselle Fel, he was con- 
sidered by numbers of the fair sex to be a man of deep feeling. This 
had made him the fashion and had given him a taste for feminine 
neatness. He began to play the dandy: his toilet became a serious 
matter. Everybody knew that he made up, and I, who at first re- 
fused to believe it, began to be convinced, not only by his beautiful 
complexion and by the fact of finding some pots of cosmetic on his 
dressing-table, but because one morning, on entering his rooms, I 
found him brushing his nails with a little brush made for the pur- 
pose, an occupation which he proudly continued in my presence. I 
argued that a man who could spend two hours every morning in 
brushing his nails might very well employ a few minutes in filling 
up the wrinkles in his skin with cosmetic. The worthy Gauffecourt, 
who was no fool, had humorously nicknamed him “Tiran le Blanc.” 

All this was merely ridiculous, but very antipathetic to my char- 
acter, and at last made me suspicious of his. I could scarcely believe 
that a man, whose head was so turned, could have his heart in the 
right place. He prided himself, more than anything else, upon his 
sensibility of soul and vigorous energy of feeling. How did that 
agree with those defects, which are peculiar to little minds only? 
How could the lively and continuous flights, which a feeling heart 
takes in pursuit of things outside it, allow him time to busy himself 


~ 


434 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


with such petty cares for his little person? Why, good heavens! one 
who feels his heart inflamed. by this heavenly fire seeks to pour it 
forth, and to display his inner self. He would be eager to show his 
heart upon his face; he will never think of any other cosmetics. 

I remembered the compendium of his morality, which Madame 
d’Epinay had told me of, and which she had adopted. This consisted 
of one single article, namely, that the sole duty of man is, to follow 
in everything the inclinations of his heart. This code of morality, 
when I heard of it, afforded me terrible material for thought, al- 


_ though at that time I only looked upon it as a witticism. But I soon 


saw that this principle was really his rule of conduct, and, in the 
sequel, I had only too convincing proof of it at my own expense. It 
is the inner doctrine, of which Diderot has so often spoken to me, 
but of which he has never given me any explanation. 

I remembered the frequent warnings that I had received, several 
years before, that the man was false, that he was only playing at 
sentiment, and that, above all, he had no affection for me. I recollect 
several little incidents, which M. de Francueil and Madame de 
Chenonceaux had related to me on that point; neither of them had 
any esteem for him, and both ought to have known him well, since 
Madame de Chenonceaux was the daughter of Madame de Roche- 
chouart, the intimate friend of the late Comte de Friese, and M. de 
Francueil, who was at that time very intimate with the Vicomte de 
Polignac, had lived much in the Palais-Royal just at the time when 
Grimm began to secure a footing there. All Paris heard of his de- 
spair after the death of the Comte de Friese. It was a question of 
keeping up the reputation which he had gained after the cruel treat- 
ment he had experienced from Mademoiselle Fel, the humbug of 
which I should have seen through better than anyone else, if I had 
not been so blind. He had to be dragged to the Hôtel Castries, where, 
abandoning himself to the most deadly affliction, he played his part 
worthily. Every morning he went into the garden to weep at his 
ease, holding before his eyes his handkerchief drenched with tears, 
as long as he was in sight of the hôtel; but as soon as he turned round 
into a certain narrow street, persons of whom he had no suspicion 
aw him immediately put his handkerchief in his pocket and pull 
vut a book. He was seen to do this more than once, and the fact 


HYPOCRITICAL BEHAVIOR OF GRIMM : 485 


soon became public property in Paris, and was almost as soon for- 
gotten. I had forgotten it myself; a fact, which concerned myself, 
reminded me of it. I was in bed, at death’s door, in the Rue de 
Grenelle; he was in the country. One morning he came to see me, 
quite out of breath, and declared that he had only just arrived. A 
minute afterwards, I learned that he had arrived the day before, 
and that he had been seen in the theatre the same day. 

A thousand little incidents of this kind came back to me; but 
something which I was surprised that I had not observed sooner, 
struck me most of all. I had introduced Grimm to all my friends 
without exception; they had all become his. I was so inseparable 
from him, that I should hardly have cared to continue visiting at a 
house to which he had not the entry. Only Madame de Créqui re- 
fused to admit him, and from that time I also almost entirely dis- 
continued my visits to her. Grimm, on his part, made other friends, 
both on his own initiative and also through the Comte de Friese. Of 
all those friends, not a single one ever became mine. He never said 
a word to me, to induce me at least to make their acquaintance; 
and, of all those whom I sometimes met at his rooms, not one ever 
showed me the least goodwill, not even the Comte de Friese, with 
whom he lived, and with whom it would consequently have been 
very pleasant to me to form a connection, nor the Comte de Schom- 
berg, his relation, with whom Grimm was even more intimate. 

More than this: my own friends, whom I made his own, and who 
had all been devotedly attached to me before they made his ac- 
quaintance, showed a sensible alteration in their feelings and be- 
haviour towards me, after they had made it. He never introduced 
one of his friends to me. I introduced him to all mine, and he ended 
by depriving me of them all. If such are the results of friendship, 
what will be the results of hatred? 

Diderot himself, at the outset, warned me several times that 
Grimm, upon whom I bestowed such confidence, was not my friend. 
Subsequently, he altered his tone, when he himself had ceased to be 
a friend. 

The manner in which I had disposed of my children had required 
no one’s assistance. However, I informed my friends of it, simply 
for the sake of informing them, in order not to appear better in 


486 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


their eyes than I really was. These friends were three in number: 
Diderot, Grimm, and Madame d’Epinay. Duclos, who was the most 
worthy of my confidence, was the only one whom I did not inform. 
However, he knew it. From whom? I do not know. It is hardly 
probable that Madame d’Epinay was guilty of this breach of confi- 
dence, for she well knew that, by imitating it, if I had been capable 
of doing so, I could have cruelly avenged myself. There remain 
Grimm and Diderot, at that time so closely united in many things— 
especially against myself—that it is more than probable that they 
were both guilty. I would wager that Duclos, to whom I did not 
reveal my secret, and who was consequently in no way bound to 
silence, was the only one who faithfully kept it. 

Grimm and Diderot, in their scheme of getting the women-folk 
away from me, had done their utmost to induce him to enter into 
their plans; but he always scornfully refused. It was not until later 
that I learned from him all that had taken place between them in 
the matter; but I learned enough at the time from Thérése to see 
that, in the whole affair, there was some secret design, and that they 
were anxious to dispose of me, if not against my will, at least with- 
out my knowledge; or that they certainly wished to make use of 
these two persons as their tools in some secret design. In all this there 
was certainly something very dishonourable. The opposition of 
Duclos proves it beyond contradiction. Let him who pleases believe 
that it was friendship. 

This pretended friendship was as disastrous to me at home as 
outside. The long and frequent conversations with Madame le Vas- 
seur, for several years past, had perceptibly altered her feelings 
towards me, and this alteration was most certainly not favourable 
to me, What, then, was the subject of discussion during these singu- 
lar téte-d-tétes? Why this deep mystery? Was the conversation of 
this old woman sufficiently agreeable for it to be considered such a 
piece of good fortune, or sufficiently important to make such a mys- 
tery about it? During the three or four years that these conferences 
lasted, they had appeared to me ridiculous; but, when I reconsidered 
them, I began to wonder at them. This feeling of wonder would 
have ended in uneasiness, if I had known at the time what this. 
woman was plotting against me. 


&lt; 


MADAME D'EPINAY DEFENDS GRIMM 487 


In spite of Grimm’s prétended zeal for me, of which he boasted 
so loudly outside, and which was difficult to reconcile with the tone 
which he assumed towards me in my presence, I gained nothing by 
it, from any point of view, and the pity which he pretended to feel 
for me served less to benefit than to humiliate me. He even, as far 
as lay his power, deprived me of the benefits of the profession which 
I had chosen for myself, by depreciating my abilities as a copyist. I 
admit that in that he spoke the truth, but it was not his place to do 
so. He clearly showed that he did not intend it as a joke, by employ- 
ing another copyist himself, and taking away from’ me all the cus- 
tomers he could. One would have said that his object was to make 
me dependent upon him and his interest for my subsistence, and to 
exhaust my resources until I should be reduced to such a condition. 

All things being taken into consideration, my reason at last im- 
posed silence upon my former prejudice in his favour, which still 
made itself heard. I came to the conclusion that his character was, 
at least, very suspicious; and, as for his friendship, I decided that it 
was false. Accordingly, having made up my mind not to see him 
again, I informed Madame d’Epinay of my determination, which 
I justified by several unanswerable reasons, which I have now for- 
gotten. 

She strongly opposed this determination, without exactly know- 
ing what reply to make to the reasons which had. decided me. She 
had not yet come to an understanding with him; but, on the follow- 
ing day, instead of entering into a verbal explanation with me, she 
sent me a very cleverly-worded letter, which they had drawn up to- 
gether, in which, without entering into details, she excused him on 
the ground of his reserved disposition, and imputing it as a crime 
to me that I had suspected him of treachery towards his friend, ex- 
horted me to become reconciled to him. This letter shook my deter- 
mination. In a conversation which subsequently took place between 
us, when I found her better prepared than she had been the first 
time, I allowed myself to be completely vanquished; I persuaded 
myself that I might have judged wrongly, and that, in this case, I 
had really committed a grave wrong towards a friend, which it was 
my duty to repair. In short, as I had several times already done in 
the case of Diderot and the Baron d’Holbach, partly of my own 


488 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


accord and partly through weakness, I made all those advances 
which I had a right to demand: I went to see Grimm, like a second 
George Dandin,! to apologise for offences of which he had been 
guilty against myself; always under the mistaken conviction, which 
all my life long has caused me to abase myself before my pretended 
friends, that there is no hatred so strong that it cannot be disarmed 
by gentleness and good behaviour; whereas, on the contrary, the 
hatred of the wicked is only strengthened by the impossibility of 
finding anything to justify it, and the consciousness of their own 
injustice is only an additional grievance against him who is the 
victim of it. Without going further than my own history, I have 
a strong proof of this axiom in the conduct of Grimm and Tronchin, 
who became my two most implacable enemies, of their own inclina- 
tion, for their own pleasure, out of sheer caprice, without being able 
to quote a single instance of any kind in which I had done either of 
them wrong,! and whose rage increases daily, like that of the tiger, 
from the ease with which they are able to glut it. 

I expected that Grimm, confused by my condescension and ad- 
vances, would receive me with open arms and the tenderest affec- 
tion. As a fact, he received me like a Roman Emperor, with an un- 
paralleled haughtiness. I was utterly unprepared for this reception. 
Embarrassed at having to play a part so ill-suited to me, in a few 
words I timidly explained the object of my visit. Before taking me 
back into favour, he delivered, with great dignity, a long harangue 
which he had prepared, containing a list of his numerous and rare 
virtues, especially in matters of friendship. He dwelt for some time 
upon a circumstance, which at first struck me considerably—that 
he always kept the same friends. While he was speaking, I said to 
myself that it would be cruel on my part to make myself the only 


* A character in Molitre’s comedy of the same name, also called Le mari con- 
fondu. George Dandin is a peasant, who marries a woman of distinguished 
family. 

“It was not until later that I nicknamed the latter “Jongleur” (juggler), long 
after his declaration of hostility and the cruel persecution which he stirred up 
against me at Geneva and elsewhere. I even soon suppressed the name when I 
saw that I was entirely his victim. I consider mean and paltry vengeance un- 
worthy of my heart, and hatred never sets foot in it. 


VISIT TO GRIMM 48g 


exception to this rule. He%returned to this so frequently and with 
such affectation, that he at last made me think that, if in this he only 
listened to the feelings of his heart, he would show himself less 
struck by this sentiment which he so freely expressed, and that he 
was making use of it as a trick which might serve his purpose of 
self-advancement. Hitherto I had been in the same case: I had al- 
ways kept all my friends; since my earliest childhood I had not lost 
a single one, except by death, and yet I had never made it a subject 
of reflection; it was not a principle which I had laid down for my- 
self. Since we both had this advantage in common, what right had 
he to boast of it as peculiar to himself, unless he already designed 
to deprive me of it? He devoted himself to the task of humiliating 
me by proving that our mutual friends preferred him to me. I was 
as well aware as he was of this preference; the question was, how 
he had obtained it. By superior merits or address, by exalting him- 
self, or by endeavouring to humiliate me? At last, when he had put 
between us, to his heart’s content, all the distance which could attach 
value to the favour which he intended to grant me, he bestowed 
upon me the kiss of peace in a slight embrace, which resembled the 
accolade which the King bestows upon newly-created knights. I fell 
from the clouds; I was amazed; I did not know what to say; I could 
not utter a single word. The whole scene had the appearance of a 
reprimand given by a master to a pupil, when he lets him off a 
flogging. I never think of it without feeling how deceptive are 
judgments founded upon appearances, to which the vulgar attach 
such weight, and how frequently audacity and pride are on the side 
of the guilty, shame and embarrassment on the side of the innocent. 

We were reconciled; this was at least a relief to my heart, which 
is always mortally distressed by a quarrel. It may be imagined that 
such a reconciliation produced no alteration in his manners; it 
simply deprived me of the right of complaining of them. Accord- 
ingly, I resolved to endure everything, and to say nothing. 

So many annoyances, one after another, threw me into a state of 
depression, which scarcely left me strength to regain command of 
myself. Without any reply from Saint-Lambert, neglected by Ma- 
dame d’Houdetot, no longer venturing to open my heart to anyone, 
I began to fear that, in making friendship the idol of my heart, I had 


490 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


wasted my life in sacrificing to chimeras. In proof of this, out of all 
my friendships, there only remained two men, who had retained my 
full esteem, and whom my heart could trust: Duclos, whom I had 
lost sight of since my retirement to the Hermitage, and Saint-Lam- 
bert. I believed that I could only repair my injustice towards the 
latter by opening my heart to him unreservedly; and I resolved to: 
make a full and complete confession to him, in everything which 
did not compromise his mistress. I have no doubt that this resolu- 
sion was another snare set by my passion, in order to keep me closer 
to it; but it is certain that I should have thrown myself unreservedly 
into her lover’s arms, that I should have submitted myself com- 
pletely to his guidance, and that I should have pushed my frankness 
as far as it could go. I was ready to write a second letter to him, to 
which I felt sure that he would reply, when I learned the melancholy 
reason of his silence in regard to the first. He had been unable to 
endure the fatigues of the campaign to the end. Madame d’Epinay 
informed me that he had just had a stroke of paralysis; and Madame 
d’Houdetot, whose affliction at last made her ill herself, and who: 
was not in a fit state to write to me immediately, sent me word, 
two or three days later, from Paris, where she was at that time, that 
he intended to be removed to Aix-la-Chapelle, to take the baths. I do 
not say that this melancholy news afflicted me as much as her; but 
I doubt whether the sorrow which it caused me was less painful 
than her grief and tears. Sorrow at knowing him to be in such a 
condition, aggravated by the apprehension that uneasiness might 
have contributed to it, touched me more than all that hitherto hap- 
pened to me; and I felt, to my cruel sorrow, that I could not find, in 
my own self-esteem, the strength which I needed in order to support 
such grief. Happily, this generous friend did not long leave me in 
such a state of depression; in spite of his illness, he did not forget 
me, and I soon learned from himself that I had illjudged his feel- 
ings and condition. But it is time to proceed to the great and sudden 
change in my destiny, the catastrophe which has divided my life into 
two parts, so different from each other, and which, from a very 
trifling cause, has drawn such terrible effects. 

One day, when I least expected it, Madame d’Epinay sent for me.. 
When I entered the room, I observed, in her eyes and manner, an 


MADAME D’EPINAY’S ILLNESS. 491 


appearance of embarrassment, which was the more striking to me 
as it was unusual, since no one in the world knew better than she 
how to control her features and movements. “My friend,” said she, 
“I am leaving for Geneva; my chest is in a bad state, my health is 
breaking up so rapidly that I must go and consult Tronchin, even if 
I have to neglect everything else.” This resolution, so abruptly taken, 
at the commencement of bad weather, astonished me the more, as, 
when I left her thirty-six hours before, not a word had been said 
about it. I asked her whom she intended to take with her. She told 
me that she meant to take her son and M. de Linant, and then added, 
in an indifferent tone, “And won’t you come too, my dear bear?” 
As I did not believe that she spoke seriously, since she knew that, 
in the time of year upon which we were just entering, I was hardly 
in a fit state to leave my room, I spoke jestingly of the advantage of 
one sick person being accompanied by another: She herself did not 
seem to have meant the proposition seriously, and nothing more was 
said about it. During the rest of my visit, we spoke of nothing but 
the preparations for her journey, into which she threw herself with 
great energy, as she had made up her mind to start in a fortnight. 

I did not need much penetration to understand that there was 
some secret reason for this journey which was concealed from me. 
This secret, which was a secret to me alone in the house, was dis- 
covered the very next day by Thérése, to whom Teissier, the maitre 
d'hôtel, who had heard it from the lady’s-maid, revealed it. Although 
I am under no obligation to Madame d’Epinay to keep the secret, 
since I did not learn it from her, it is too closely connected with those 
which she did confide to me, for me to be able to make any distinc- 
tion. On this point, therefore, I will say nothing. But these same 
secrets, which never have been, and never will be revealed by me, 
either by word of mouth or the pen, have become known to too 
many, for it to be possible that they can have remained unknown to 
any of Madame d’Epinay’s associates. 

When I was informed of the true motive of this journey, I should 
have recognised the secret instigation of the hand of an enemy, in 
the attempt to make me the chaperon of Madame d’Epinay; but, as 
she had not pressed me at all to accompany her, I persisted in regard- 
ing the attempt as not seriously intended, and I merely laughed at 


492 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


the fine figure that I should have cut, if I had been foolish enough 
to undertake the charge. Besides, she gained considerably by my 
refusal, for she succeeded in persuading her husband himself to 
accompany her. ; 

A few days afterwards I received the following letter from Dide- 
rot. This letter, merely folded in two, so that anyone could easily 
read its contents, was addressed to me, “Care of Madame d’Epinay,” 
and intrusted to M. de Linant, the tutor of the son and the confidant 
of the mother. 


LETTER FRoM Diprrot (Packet A, No. 52). 


“I am born to love you and to cause you annoyance. I hear that 
Madame d’Epinay is going to Geneva, and I do not hear it said that 
you accompany her. My friend, if you are satisfied with Madame 
dEpinay, you must go with her; if you are dissatisfied, you must 
go all the more readily. Are you over-burdened with the weight of 
the obligations under which she has laid you? here is an opportunity 
of partly discharging them and of lightening your burden. Will you 
find another opportunity in your life of showing your gratitude to 
her? She is going into a country where she will be as if she had 
fallen from the clouds. She is ill; she will need amusement and dis- 
traction. Winter, too! Consider, my friend. The objection on the 
score of your health may be far stronger than I think it is; but, are 
you worse to-day than you were a month ago, and than you will be 
at the beginning of spring? Will you make the journey, three 
months hence, more comfortably than now? For myself, I declare 
to you that, if I could not endure the carriage, I would take a stick 
and follow her. Then, are you not afraid that your behaviour may 
be misinterpreted? You will be suspected either of ingratitude or 
of some other secret motive. I am well aware that, whatever you do, 
you will always have the testimony of your conscience on your side; 
but is this testimony sufhcient by itself, and is it allowed to neglect, 
up to a certain point, that of other men? Besides, my friend, I write 
this letter in order to discharge an obligation to you as well as to 
myself. If it displeases you, throw it in the fire, and think no more 
of it than if it had never been written. I salute, love, and embrace 


39) 


you. 


I trembled with rage, and felt so utterly astounded while reading 


HE REPLIES TO DIDEROT 493 


this letter, that I could scarcely finish it; but this did not prevent me 
from observing how cleverly Diderot affected a gentler, more flat- 
tering, and more polite tone than in any of his other letters, in which 
he at most addressed me as “my dear,” without condescending to 
call me “friend.” I easily perceived the indirect means by which this 
letter had reached me: the address, style, and the way in which it 
arrived, betrayed the roundabout manner of proceeding clumsily 
enough; for we usually corresponded through the post or the Mont- 
morency messenger, and this was the first and only time that he 
made use of the present method of communication. 

When my first transports of indignation permitted me to write, 
I hastily threw off the following reply, which I immediately took 
from the Hermitage, where I was at the time, to La Chevrette, to 
show it to Madame d’Epinay, to whom, in my blind passion, I in- 
tended to read it, as well as Diderot’s letter. 


“My dear friend, you cannot know either the extent of my obliga- 
tions to Madame d’Epinay, or how far they are binding, or whether 
she has really need of me on her journey, or wishes me to accompany 
her, or whether it is possible for me to do so, or the reasons I may 
have for refusing. I do not object to discuss all these points with you; 
but, in the meantime, you must admit that to dictate to me so posi- 
tively what I ought to do, without being in a position to judge, is, my 
dear philosopher, to talk nonsense. The worst thing about it is, that I 
see that the opinion is not your own. Not to mention that I am little 
disposed to allow myself to be led by a third or fourth person under 
your name, I find in these indirect acts a certain amount of under- 
handedness, which ill suits your frankness, which, for both our 
sakes, you will do well to avoid for the future. 

“You express yourself afraid that my conduct may be misinter- 
preted; but I defy a heart like yours to venture to think ill of mine. 
Others would perhaps speak better of me, if I were more like them. 
Heaven preserve me from gaining their approval! Let the wicked 
spy upon me and interpret my conduct as they please. Rousseau 
is not a man to fear them, or Diderot a man to listen to them. 

“You wish me to throw your letter in the fire if it displeases me, 
and to think no more about it. Do you think that what comes from 
you can be so easily forgotten? My dear friend, you hold my tears, 
in the pain which you cause me, as cheap as my life and health, in 


494 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


the care which you exhort me to take. If you could correct yourself 
of this, your friendship would be so much sweeter to me, and I 
should be so much the less to be pitied.” 


On entering Madame d’Epinay’s room, I found Grimm with her, 
which delighted me. I read to them, in a loud and clear voice, my 
two letters, with an intrepidity of which I should not have believed 
myself capable, and, when I had finished, I added a few remarks 
which did not belie it. I saw that this unexpected audacity on the part 
of a man usually so timid astonished and astounded them both. 
They did not answer a word. Above all, I saw that arrogant man 
cast down his eyes, not venturing to meet the angry flashes from 
my own; but, at the same instant, in the bottom of his heart, he was 
vowing my destruction, and I am positive that they agreed upon it 
before they parted. 

It was about this time that I at last received, through Madame 
d'Houdetot, Saint-Lambert’s letter (Packet A, No. 57), dated from 
Wolfenbuttel, a few days after his accident, written in answer to 
mine, which had been greatly delayed on the road. This reply af- 
forded me some consolation, which I greatly needed at that moment, 
in the proofs of esteem and friendship of which it was full, and 
which gave me the courage and strength to deserve them. From that 
moment I did my duty; but it is certain that, if Saint-Lambert had 
shown himself less sensible, less generous, less a man of honour, I 
should have been lost beyond recall. 

The weather became bad, and people were beginning to leave the 
country. Madame d’Houdetot informed me of the day on which 
she intended to come and say good-bye to our valley, and made an 
appointment to meet me at Eaubonne. It so happened that it was the 
day on which Madame d’Epinay was leaving La Chevrette for 
Paris, in order to make her final preparations for her journey. For- 
tunately, she set out in the morning, and I still had time, after leav- 
ing her, to go and dine with her sister-in-law. I had Saint-Lambert’s 
letter in my pocket, and read it several times as I walked along. It 
acted as a shield against my weakness. I made and kept the resolu- 
tion to see in Madame d’Houdetot nothing but my friend and my 
friend’s mistress; and I spent four or five hours in her company, 


VISITS MADAME D’HOUDETOT 495 


téte-a-téte, in a delightful calm, infinitely preferable, even in the mat- 
ter of enjoyment, to the attacks of burning fever which I had 
hitherto felt in her presence. As she knew only too well that my heart 
was unchanged, she was grateful for the efforts I had made to con- 
trol myself; it increased her esteem for me, and I had the pleasure of 
seeing that her friendship for me was not extinguished. She in- 
formed me of the speedy return of Saint-Lambert, who, although he 
had almost recovered from his attack, was no longer in a condition 
to endure the fatigues of war, and was leaving the service in order to 
live quietly with her. We formed the charming plan of an intimate 
companionship between us three, and we had reason to hope that 
the execution of this plan would be lasting in its results, seeing that 
all the feelings which can unite upright and feeling hearts were the 
foundation of it, and we combined, in our three selves, sufficient 
talents and knowledge to render any foreign elements unnecessary. 
Alas! while abandoning myself to the prospect of so charming a life, 
I little thought of that which awaited me. 

We afterwards spoke of my relations with Madame d’Epinay. I 
showed her Diderot’s letter, together with my answer; I told her 
all the circumstances connected with it, and informed her of my 
resolution to leave the Hermitage. She vigorously opposed it, and 
with arguments which were all-powerful with my heart. She de- 
clared that she would have much liked me to go with her to Geneva, 
as she foresaw that she would inevitably be compromised by my 
refusal; indeed, Diderot’s letter seemed to announce it beforehand. 
However, as she knew my reasons as well as myself, she did not 
insist upon this point; but she begged me at any price to avoid 
scandal, and to palliate my refusal by reasons sufficiently plausible 
to remove the unjust suspicion that she had anything to do with it. 
I told her that it was no easy task that she was imposing upon me; 
but that, being resolved to atone for my offences, even at the cost of 
my reputation, I desired to give the preference to hers, as far as’ 
honour would allow me to go. It will soon be seen whether I knew 
how to keep my promise. 

I can swear that, far from my unfortunate passion having lost any 
of its force, I never loved my Sophie so fondly, so tenderly, as on 
that day. But Saint-Lambert’s letter, my sense of duty, and horror of 


496 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


treachery, made such an impression upon me that, during the whole 
of the interview, my senses left me completely at peace in her com- 
pany, and I was not even tempted to kiss her hand. At parting, she 
kissed me before her servants. This kiss, so different from those 
which I had sometimes stolen from her beneath the trees, was a 
guarantee to me that I had regained command over myself. I am 
nearly certain that, if my heart had had time to strengthen itself 
without interruption, three months would have been more than 
enough to cure me completely. 

Here end my personal relations with Madame d’Houdetot: rela- 
tions, of which every man has been able to judge by appearances 
according to the nature of his own heart, but in which the passion 
with which this amiable woman inspired me, the liveliest passion 
that a man has perhaps ever felt, will always be honoured in Heav- 
en’s sight and our own, by the rare and painful sacrifices which we 
both made to duty, honour, love and friendship. We had too high 
an opinion of each other to be able to degrade ourselves easily. We 
must have been utterly unworthy of esteem to make up our minds 
to lose a mutual regard of such great value; and the energy of our 
feelings, which might have made us guilty, was the very thing which 
prevented us from becoming so. 

Thus, after a long friendship for the one of these two women, 
and a deep affection for the other, I took farewell of both on the 
same day: of one, never to see her again in my life; of the other, only 
to see her twice more, upon occasions of which I shall afterwards 
speak. 

After their departure, I found myself greatly embarrassed hew 
to fulfil so many urgent and contradictory obligations, the result of 
my follies. If I had been in my natural position, after the proposal 
of the journey to Geneva had been made and I had declined it, I 
need only have remained quiet, and there would have been nothing 
more to be said. But I had foolishly made of it a matter which could 
not remain where it was, and I could only avoid further explanation 
by leaving the Hermitage, which I had just promised Madame 
d'Houdetot not to do, at least for the present. Besides, she had asked 
me to make my excuses for my refusal to my so-called friends, to 
prevent it being laid to her charge. And yet I could not declare the 


JUSTIFIES HIMSELF TO GRIMM 497 


real reason without insultigg Madame d’Epinay, to whom I cer- 
tainly owed some gratitude, after all that she had done for me. After 
carefully considering everything, I found myself confronted by the 
cruel but unavoidable alternatives, of showing disrespect to Madame 
d’Epinay, Madame d’Houdetot, or myself: I chose the last. I chose 
it boldly, unreservedly, without shuffling, and with a generosity 
which surely deserved to expiate the offences which had reduced me 
to such an extremity. This sacrifice, which my enemies perhaps ex- 
pected, and by which they have known how to profit, has caused 
the ruin of my reputation, and, thanks to their efforts, has robbed 
me of the esteem of the public; but it has restored to me my own, 
and has consoled me in my misfortunes. This is not the last time, as 
will be seen, that I have made similar sacrifices, nor the last time 
that they have been taken advantage of to overwhelm me. 

Grimm was the only one who appeared to have taken no part in 
this affair; and it was to him that I resolved to address myself. I 
wrote a long letter to him, in which I exposed the absurdity of wish- 
ing me to look upon it as my duty to take the journey to Geneva, 
the uselessness of it, even the embarrassment I should have been to 
Madame d’Epinay, and the inconveniences which would have re- 
sulted to myself. In this letter, I could not resist the temptation of let- 
ting him see that I was well informed, and that it seemed to me sin- 
gular that anyone should expect me to undertake the journey, while 
he himself was considered exempt, and his name was not even men- 
tioned. This letter, in which, owing to its being impossible for me 
to state my reasons outright, I was often obliged to wander from 
the point, might have presented the appearance of guilt to the gen- 
eral public; but it was a model of prudence and discretion for those 
who, like Grimm, were well acquainted with the facts, which I did 
not mention in it, and which fully justified my conduct. I did not 
even shrink from exciting a further prejudice against myself, by 
foisting Diderot’s advice upon my other friends, in order to hint 
that Madame d’Houdetot had thought the same, as in fact was the 
case, and by avoiding to mention that, in consequence of my argu- 
ments, she had changed her opinion. There was no better way of 
clearing her from the suspicion of connivance on her part, than by 
seeming to be dissatisfied with her conduct in this respect. 


-498 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


This letter concluded with an exhibition of confidence by which 
any other man would have been touched. While I exhorted Grimm 
to consider my reasons well, and afterwards to inform me of his 
opinion, I gave him to understand that his advice, whatever it might 
be, would be followed. Such was really my intention, even if he had 
declared himself in favour of my going. As M. d’Epinay had under- 
taken to be his wife’s escort on the journey, my company would have 
assumed quite a different aspect: whereas, at first, it was I who was 
asked to undertake this duty, and there was no question of M. 
d’Epinay until I had refused. 

Grimm did not reply for some time. His answer was curious. I 
will here give a copy of it (See Packet A, No. 59): 


“Madame d’Epinay’s departure is put off; her son is ill, and she 
is obliged to wait until he has recovered. I will think over your 
letter. Stay quietly at your Hermitage. I will let you know my opin- 
ion in time. As she will certainly not leave for some days, there is no 
hurry. Meanwhile, if you think fit, you can make your offers to her, 
although that appears to me a matter of indifference. For, as I know 
your position as well as you know it yourself, I have no doubt that 
she will reply to them as she ought. It seems to me that the only 
thing to be gained by it is, that you will be able to say to those who 
urge you, that, if you do not go, it will not be for want of having 
offered your services. Besides, I do not see why you think it abso- 
lutely necessary that the philosopher should be the speaking-trumpet 
of all the world; and why do you imagine, because his advice is that 
you should go, that all your friends are of the same opinion? If you 
write to Madame d’Epinay, her answer may serve as a reply to all 
those friends, since you set such great store upon replying to them. 
Adieu. I salute Madame le Vasseur and the ‘Criminal.’ ” 17 


Greatly astonished by the perusal of this letter, I anxiously en- 
deavoured to find out what it might mean, but in vain. What! in- 
stead of sending me a simple answer to my letter, he takes time to 
think over it, as if the time he had already taken had not been 


“M. le Vasseur was in the habit of calling his wife, who ruled him rather 
strictly, the “Criminal-Lieutenant.” Grimm, in jest, gave the same name to the 
-daughter, and, for shortness, afterwards omitted the second word. 


GRIMM RENOUNCES ROUSSEAU 499: 


enough! He even informs rñe of the state of suspense in which he 
desires to keep me, as if it were a question of a difficult problem 
which had to be solved, or as if it was important to him to deprive 
me of every means of clearly understanding his feelings, until the 
moment when he should be pleased to declare them to me! What 
could be the meaning of all these precautions, this delay, this se- 
crecy? Is this the way to respond to confidence? Does this look like 
honourable and upright behaviour? I sought in vain for some fa- 
vourable interpretation of his conduct; I found none. Whatever his 
intention might be, his position made it easy for him to carry it 
out, if it was hostile to myself, while my own made it impossible for 
me to put any obstacle in his way. A favourite in the house of a 
great Prince, with many acquaintances in the world, a man who 
gave the tone to the society, in which we moved, whose oracle he 
was, he was able, with the help of his usual cleverness, to arrange all 
his machinery as he pleased; whereas I, alone in my Hermitage, far 
from all, without anyone to advise me, without communication 
with the outside world, could do nothing but wait and remain quiet. 
All I did was to write to Madame d’Epinay, about her son’s illness, 
as polite a letter as could possibly be, but in which I did not walk 
‘into the snare of offering to accompany her on her journey. 
After long waiting, in a state of cruel anxiety, into which this: 
barbarous man had plunged me, I heard, eight or ten days later, 
that Madame d’Epinay had set out, and I received a second letter 
from him. It contained only seven or eight lines, which I did not 
read through. . . . It proclaimed a rupture, but in terms such as. 
only the most infernal hate can dictate, and which, from his eager- 
ness to make them offensive, seemed almost silly. He forbade me to 
enter his presence as he might have warned me off his estates. His 
letter, to make it appear ridiculous, only needed to be read with 
greater calmness. Without copying it, without even reading it to the 
end, I sent it back to him immediately with the following note: 


“T refused to listen to my just suspicions. Too late I understand 


your character. 
“This, then, is the letter which you wanted time to think over. 


I send it back to you; it is not for me. You can show mine to all the 


500 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


world, and hate me without concealment: that will be one falsehood 
less on your part.” 


The permission which I gave him to show my preceding letter 
referred to a passage in his own, from which the reader will be 
enabled to judge of the profound adroitness with which he acted 
throughout the whole affair. 

I have said that, in the opinion of the uninitiated, my letter might 
have afforded many opportunities for attacking me. He was de- 
lighted to see it; but how was he to take advantage of it without 
compromising himself? If he showed the letter, he exposed himself 
to the reproach of abusing his friend’s confidence. 

To relieve himself from this embarrassment, he determined to 
break off his relations with me in the most cutting manner possible, 
and to make me feel, in his letter, the favour which he did me by 
not showing mine. He felt quite certain that, in my indignant anger, 
I should reject his pretended discretion, and allow him to show my 
letter to everybody. This was exactly what he wanted, and every- 
thing turned out as he had planned. He sent my letter all round 
Paris, together with remarks of his own, which, however, did not 
prove so successful as he had expected. It was not considered that 
the permission to show my letter, which he had known how to ex- 
tort from mie, exempted him from reproach, for having so lightly 
taken me at my word in order to injure me. People kept asking what 
personal wrong I had done to him that could justify so violent a 
hatred. At last they came to the conclusion that, even if they had 
been of such a nature as to oblige him to break with me, friendship, 
even though extinguished, still had rights which he ought to have 
respected. But, unfortunately, Paris is frivolous. Impressions of the 
moment are soon forgotten. The unfortunate man who is absent is 
neglected; the prosperous man inspires respect by his presence. The 
game of intrigue and wickedness continues, and is renewed; and its 
effects, unceasingly reviving, soon efface the past. 

This was the way in which this man, after having so long de- 
ceived me, at last threw off the mask, convinced that, in the state to 
which he had brought matters, he no longer needed it, Relieved 


WRITES TO MADAME D’EPINAY 501 


from all apprehension of being unjust towards this wretch, I left 
him to his own reflections, gnd ceased to think of him. Eight days 
after the receipt of his letter, I received from Geneva an answer 
from Madame d’Epinay to my former letter (Packet B, No. 10). 
I saw, from the tone which she assumed for the first time in her life, 
that both, reckoning upon the success of their plans, were acting in 
concert, and that, looking upon me as a man lost beyond all hope of 
safety, they intended to devote themselves from that time forth, 
without any risk, to the pleasure of completely crushing me. 

In fact, my condition was most deplorable. I saw all my friends 
leaving me, without my knowing how or why. Diderot, who 
boasted of alone remaining faithful to me, and who had, for three 
months past, promised to pay me a visit, never came at all. The win- 
ter now began to make itself felt, and, with it, attacks of my usual 
complaints. My constitution, although vigorous, had been unable to 
sustain the conflicts of so many contradictory passions. I was in a 
state of exhaustion, which left me neither strength nor courage to 
resist anything. Even if my promises, even if the continued remon- 
strances of Diderot and Madame d’Houdetot had allowed me to 
leave the Hermitage at this moment, I did not know either where 
to go or how to drag myself there. I remained stupid and motion- 
less, without power to think or act. The mere idea of taking a step, 
of writing a letter, of saying a word, made me shudder. However, I 
could not leave Madame d’Epinay’s letter unanswered, without con- 
fessing that I deserved the treatment with which she and her friend 
overwhelmed me. I decided to communicate my feelings and resolu- 
tions to her, not doubting for a moment that the feelings of human- 
ity, generosity, propriety, and the good qualities which I believed I 
had recognised in her, in spite of those that were bad, would make 
her hasten to agree with me. My letter was as follows: . 


“THe Hermirace, November 23rd, 1757. 


“If one could die of grief, I should not be alive now. But at last 
I have made up my mind. All friendship between us is over, madam; 
but that which no longer exists still preserves its rights, which I 
know how to respect. I have by no means forgotten your kindness 


/ 
502 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


towards me, and you can reckon upon all the gratitude which a man 
can feel for one whom he can no longer love. All further explanation 
would be useless: I keep my own conscience, and refer you to your 
own. 

“I wanted to leave the Hermitage, and I ought to have done so. 
But it is declared that I must remain here until spring; and since 
my friends desire it, I will remain until then, if you consent to it.” 


After this letter had been written and despatched, my only 
thought was to remain quiet at the Hermitage, take care of my 
health, endeavour to recover my strength, and make arrangements 
to leave in the spring, without creating any disturbance or openly 
proclaiming the rupture. But this was not what M. Grimm and 
Madame d’Epinay reckoned upon, as will be seen directly. 

A few days later, I at last had the pleasure of receiving from 
Diderot the visit which he had so often promised, and as often failed 
to keep his word. It could not have occurred at a more opportune 
moment; he was my oldest friend; he was almost the only friend I 
had left; under these circumstances, my delight at seeing him may 
be imagined. My heart was full; I poured its contents into his. I en- 
lightened him upon many facts which had been kept from him, or 
had been disguised or invented. I told him what I felt justified in 
telling him of all that had taken place. I made no pretence of con- 
cealing from him what he knew only too well—that a love, as un- 
fortunate as it was foolish, had been the instrument of my destruc- 
tion; but I never admitted that Madame d’Houdetot knew of it, or, 
at least, that I had declared it to her. I told him of Madame 
d’Epinay’s unworthy artifices to intercept the very innocent letters 
written to me by her sister-in-law. I desired that he should learn 
these details from the lips of the persons whom she had attempted 
to seduce. Thérése gave him an exact account of everything; but my 
feelings may be imagined, when it came to the mother’s turn, and I 
heard her declare and maintain that she knew nothing at all about 
it! This was her statement, in which she never wavered. Not four 
days since, she had repeated all the details to me, and then, in my 
friend’s presence, she flatly contradicted me. This attitude appeared 
to me decisive; and I then keenly felt my imprudence in having so 


DISMISSED FROM HERMITAGE 503 


long kept such a woman near me. I did not break out into invectives; 
I hardly condescended to say a few contemptuous words to her. I 
felt how much I owed to the daughter, whose unassailable upright- 
ness contrasted strongly With her mother’s contemptible cowardice. 
But, from that moment, my mind was made up in regard to the 
old woman, and I only waited for a suitable Sppe to carry 
out my ETEEN 

This opportunity came sooner than I had expected. On the roth 
of December I received an answer from Madame d’Epinay. Its con- 
tents were as follows (Packet B, No. rr): 


“GENEVA, December 1st, 1757. 


“After having given you, for several years, every possible proof 
of friendship and sympathy, I can now only pity you. You are very 
unhappy. I wish your conscience may be as clear as mine. That may 
be necessary for your future tranquillity. 

“Since you wanted to leave the Hermitage, and ought to have 
done so, I am astonished that your friends have prevented you. As for 
myself, I do not consult my friends as to my duties, and I have 
nothing more to say to you concerning yours.” 


A dismissal so unexpected, but so clearly expressed, did not leave 
me a moment to hesitate. I was bound to leave the Hermitage at 
once, whatever the weather or the state of my health might be, even 
if I had to sleep in the woods or on the snow, with which the ground 
was covered, and in spite of anything Madame d’Houdetot might 
say or do; for, although I was ready to humour her in everything, 
I was not prepared to disgrace myself. 

I found myself in the most terrible embarrassment of my life; but 
my mind was made up: I swore that, whatever might happen, I 
would not sleep in the Hermitage after a week. I set about removing 
my effects, having determined to leave them in the open field rather 
than keep the key longer than the week; for I was anxious, above 
all, that everything should be settled before anyone could write to 
Geneva and receive an answer. I was filled with a courage which I 
had never felt before: all my vigour had returned to me. Honour 


504 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


and indignation, upon which Madame d’Epinay had not reckoned, 
restored it to me. Fortune assisted my boldness. M. Mathas, procur- 
eur fiscal'® of M. le Prince de Condé, heard of my difficulties. He 
offered me a little house which stood in his garden at Mont-Louis, 
in Montmorency. I accepted his offer with eagerness and gratitude. 
The bargain was soon concluded. I hastily bought some furniture, 
in addition to what I had already, that Thérése and myself might 
have a bed to sleep on. With great trouble, and at great expense, I 
managed to get my goods removed in a cart. In spite of the ice and 
snow, my removal was effected in two days, and, on the 15th of 
December, I gave up the keys of the Hermitage, after having paid 
the gardener’s wages, as I could not pay my rent. 

I told Madame le Vasseur that we must separate; her daughter 
tried to shake my resolution, but I was inflexible. I saw her off to 
Paris in the messenger’s cart, with all the furniture and effects be: 
longing to her and her daughter in common. I gave her some money, 
and undertook to pay fer her lodging with her children or elsewhere, 
to provide for her as long as it was in my power, and never to let 
her want for bread as long as I had any myself. Lastly, the day after 
my arrival at Mont-Louis, I wrote the following letter to Madame 
d’Epinay: 


“Montmorency, December 17th, 1757. 


“Madam,—Nothing is so simple or so necessary as to leave your 
house, since you do not approve of my remaining there. As you re- 
fused to allow me to spend the rest of the winter at the Hermitage, 
I left it on the 15th of December. I was fated to enter and to leave 
it in spite of myself. I thank you for the stay which you invited me 
to make there, and I would thank you still more if I had paid less 
dearly for it. You are right in thinking that I am unhappy: no one in 
the world knows better than yourself the extent of that unhappiness. 
If it is a misfortune to be deceived in the choice of one’s friends, it is 
equally cruel to be disabused of so pleasant a mistake.” 


18 The attorney who prosecutes in all cases in which the lord paramount or the 
public are concerned. 


LEAVES THE HERMITAGE 505 


Such is the true story of my Stay at the Hermitage, and of the 
reasons which caused me to leave it. I have been unable to interrupt 
this narrative, and it was important to give the most exact details, 
since this period of my life has exercised an influence upon the 
future, the effects of whick will last to my dying day. 


BOOK X 


[1758] 


Tue extraordinary energy with which a temporary irritation had 
enabled me to leave the Hermitage, left me as soon as I was out of 
it. I was no sooner settled in my new abode than severe and frequent 
attacks of retention of urine were complicated by the fresh incon- 
venience of a rupture, which had for some time tortured me, with- 
out my knowing that it was one. I soon became subject to the most 
painful attacks. My old friend Thierry came to see me, and enlight- 
ened me as to my condition. Probes, bougies, bandages, and all the 
preparations for the infirmities of age which were collected around 
me, made me feel rudely, that one can no longer have a young 
heart without suffering for it, when the body has ceased to be young. 
The fine weather did not restore my strength, and I passed the 
whole of 1758 in a state of weakness which made me believe that I 
was near the end of my career. I saw it approaching almost with 
eagerness. Cured of idle dreams of friendship, separated from every- 
thing which had made me fond of life, I no longer saw anything 
in it which could make it agreeable; I saw nothing but misery and 
suffering, which prevented me from all self-enjoyment. I yearned 
for the moment when I should be free and beyond the reach of my 
enemies. But let us take up the thread of events again. 

It appears that my retirement to Montmorency disconcerted Ma- 
dame d’Epinay; probably she had not expected it. My melancholy 
condition, the severity of the weather, and my general loneliness, 
made her and Grimm believe that, by driving me to the last ex- 
tremity, they would compel me to cry for mercy, and to degrade 
myself to the depths of meanness, in order to be left in the refuge 
which honour ordered me to leave. I changed my quarters so 
abruptly that they had not time to anticipate the step; no alternative 

506 


LETTER FROM MADAME D’EPINAY 507 


was left to them except to go double or quits and ruin me com- 
pletely, or to endeavour to get me back. Grimm was in favour of 
the former; but I believe that Madame d’Epinay would have pre- 
ferred the latter. I am incliged to believe this from her answer to my 
last letter, in which she adopted a much milder tone, and seemed 
to open the door to reconciliation. The time she made me wait for 
an answer—a whole month—is a sufficient indication of the diff- 
culty which she found in giving it a suitable turn, and of the anxious 
thought which she devoted to it. She could not go further without 
committing herself; but, after her previous letters, and my abrupt 
departure from her house, one cannot but be struck by the pains 
she has taken in this letter not to allow a single uncivil word to creep 
in. In order that the reader may judge for himself, I will give it in 
full (Packet B, No. 23): 


“GENEVA, January 17th, 1758. 


“Sir,—I did not receive your letter of the 17th of December until 
yesterday. It was sent to me in a box filled with different things, 
which has been all this time on its way. I will only answer the post- 
script; as for the letter itself, I do not clearly understand it; and, if it 
were possible for us to come to an explanation, I would gladly set 
down all that has passed to a misunderstanding. To return to the 
postscript. You may remember that we agreed that the gardener’s 
wages should be paid through you, to make him feel that he was 
dependent upon you, and to spare you the laughable and unseemly 
scenes which his predecessor had caused. A proof of this is, that his 
first quarter’s wages was handed to you, and, a few days before I 
left I arranged with you to repay what you advanced. I know that at 
first you made a difficulty about it; but I had asked you to make 
these advances; J had merely to discharge my obligations, and this 
we agreed upon. Cahouet has told me that you refused to accept this 
money. There must be some mistake about the matter. I have 
ordered it to be offered to you again; I do not see why you should 
want to pay my gardener, in spite of our agreement, even beyond 
the time of your stay at the Hermitage. Therefore, sir, I feel sure 
that, remembering all that I have the henour to tell you, you will 
not refuse to take back the money which you have been kind enough 
to advance.” 


508 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


After all that passed, being no longer able to trust Madame 
@’Epinay, I did not desire to renew my connection with her. I did 
not answer the letter at all, and our correspondence ended with it. 
Seeing that I had made up my mind, she did the same; and enter- 
ing into all the plans of Grimm and the Holbachian clique, she 
united her efforts with theirs in order to ruin me. While they were 
working at Paris, she was working at Geneva. Grimm, who after- 
wards went to join her, finished what she had begun. Tronchin, 
whom they easily gained over, vigorously assisted them, and became 
my most violent persecutor, without having the least cause of com- 
plaint against me, any more than Grimm. All three, acting together, 
secretly sowed in Geneva the seed which, four years later, was seen 
to spring up. 

They found more difficulty in Paris, where I was better known, 
and where people’s hearts, less disposed to hatred, did not receive its 
impressions so easily. In order to deal their blows more adroitly, they 
began by spreading the report that it was I who had left them. (See 
Deleyre’s letter, Packet B, No. 30.) Starting with that, and pretend- 
ing to be still my friends, they cleverly sowed the seeds of their 
malicious accusations, in the form of complaints against the injustice 
of their friend. The result of this was that their hearers, thrown off 
their guard, were more inclined to listen to them and to blame me. 
The secret accusations of treachery and ingratitude’ were spread 
with greater precaution, and for that very reason with greater effect. 
I knew that they accused me of the most heinous crimes, without 
ever being able to learn in what, according to them, they consisted. 
All that I could infer from public report was, that they were re- 
duced to these four capital offences: my retirement to the country, 
my love for Madame d’Houdetot, my refusal to accompany Madame 
d’Epinay to Geneva, my departure from the Hermitage. If they 
added other grievances, they took their measures so admirably, 
that it has been absolutely impossible for me ever to learn what was 
the nature of them. 

From this time, therefore, I think that I can date the establish- 
ment of a system, subsequently adopted by those who have the dis- 
posal of my destiny, which has met with such rapid success, that it 


MORE CONSPIRACIES AGAINST HIM 509 


would seem almost marvellous to anyone who does not know how 
easy it is for everything which assists men’s malice to secure ap 
proval. I must now endeavour to explain, as briefly as possible, what 
is visible to my eyes in this secret and deeply-laid system. 

With a name already famous and known throughout Europe, I 
had preserved the simplicity of my early tastes. My deadly aversion 
to all that was called party, faction, or cabal, had kept me free and 
independent, without any other fetters than the attachments of my 
heart. Alone, a stranger, isolated, without support, without family, 
attached to nothing but my principles and duties, I followed without 
flinching the paths of uprightness, never flattering, never favouring 
anyone at the expense of justice and truth. Besides, during two years 
spent in solitude and retirement, without hearing any news, without 
any connection with the affairs of the world, without being in- 
formed or curious about anything, I lived, four leagues from Paris, 
separated from it by my carelessness as far as I should have been 
by the sea from the island of Tinian. 

On the other hand, Grimm, Diderot, and d’Holbach, in the midst 
of the vortex, lived in the society of the great world, and divided 
between them nearly all its circles. Great men, wits, men of letters, 
lawyers, women, all listened to them when they acted in concert. It 
is easy to see the advantage which such a position gives to three men 
united against a fourth in a position like my own. It is true that 
Diderot and d’Holbach were not—at least, I cannot believe it—the 
men: to form very black designs; the one was not wicked enough,? 
the other was not sufficiently clever; but for that very reason they 
played their game better together. Grimm alone formed his plan 
in his head, and only disclosed so much of it to the other two as 
was necessary to enable.them to assist in carrying it out. His as- 
cendency over them made this co-operation easy, and the effect of 
the whole corresponded to his superior abilities. 

With these superior abilities, sensible of the advantage he could 
derive from our respective positions, he formed the design of utterly 
destroying my reputation, and changing it into one totally different, 

11 confess, since I wrote this work, that the glimpses which I have had of the 
mysteries which surround me, make me afraid that I did not know Diderot. 


510 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


without compromising himself, by beginning to erect around me an 
edifice of obscurity which it was impossible for me to penetrate, 
so as to throw light upon his stratagems, and to unmask him. 

This undertaking was difficult, seeing that it was necessary for 
him to palliate its injustice in the eyes of those who were to assist in 
it. It was necessary to deceive those who were honourable; it was 
necessary to keep everyone away from me, and not to leave me a 
single friend, either great or small. What do I say? it was necessary 
for him not to allow a single word of truth to penetrate to me. 
If a single generous man had come and said te me, “You are play- 
ing the virtuous man; and yet, look how you are treated, and how 
you are judged—what have you to say?” Truth would have tri- 
umphed, and Grimm would have been lost. He knew it; but he had 
sounded his own heart, and estimated men at their true value. I 
regret, for the honour of humanity, that he calculated so accurately. 

In these underground paths, his steps, to be sure, were obliged to 
be slow. He has for twelve years pursued his plans, and the most 
difficult thing still remains for him to do—to deceive the entire pub- 
lic. There are eyes which have watched him more closely than he 
thinks. He is afraid of this, and does not yet venture to expose his 
plot to the light of day.” But he has found the least difficult way of 
accompanying it with power, and this power disposes of me. With 
this to support him, he proceeds with less risk. As the satellites of 
power as a rule think but little of uprightness, and still less of frank- 
ness, he need not fear the indiscretion of any honourable man. Above 
all, it is necessary for him that I should be surrounded by impene- 
trable darkness, and that his plot should always be concealed from 
me, since he well knows that, however skilfully he may have laid 
his plans, they would never be able to resist a look from me. His 
great cleverness consists in appearing to treat me indulgently, while 
in reality defaming me, and in giving his perfidity the appearance 
of generosity. 

I felt the first effects of this system through the secret accusations 
of the Holbachian clique, without it being possible for me to know, 


? Since these words were written, he has taken the plunge with the most com- 
plete and inconceivable success. I believe that it is Tronchin who has supplied 
him with the courage and the means. 


COOLNESS OF MME. D’HOUDETOT 511 


or even to conjecture, what formed the subject of these accusations. 
Deleyre, in his letters, told me that I was accused of most disgrace- 
ful offences. Diderot, more mysteriously, told me the same thing; 
and when I entered upon_an explanation with both, the whole was 
reduced to the four heads already mentioned. I became conscious of 
a growing coolness in Madame d’Houdetot’s letters. I could not 
attribute this coolness to Saint-Lambert, who continued to cor- 
respond with me with the same friendliness, and even came to see 
me after his return. Nor could I blame myself either, since we had 
parted very amicably, and, on my side, I had done nothing since 
then, except leaving the Hermitage, a step which she herself had fely 
to be necessary. Consequently, not knowing what to consider respon- 
sible for this coolness—which she did not admit, although my heart 
could not be deceived—I felt generally uneasy. I knew that she was 
extremely cautious in her behaviour to her sister-in-law and Grimm, 
on account of their relation to Saint-Lambert; I was afraid of their 
schemes. This agitation reopened my wounds, and made our cor- 
respondence so stormy, that she became quite disgusted. I caught 
a glimpse of a thousand cruel circumstances, without seeing any- 
thing distinctly. My position was most unbearable for a man whose 
fancy is so easily inflamed. If I had been altogether isolated, if I had 
known nothing at all, I should have been calmer; but my heart still 
clung to the attachments which gave my enemies a thousand handles 
against me; and the feeble rays which penetrated my refuge only 
served to show me the blackness of the mysteries which were con: 
cealed from me. 

I have no doubt that I should have succumbed to this cruel torture, 
which was too much for my frank and open disposition, which, 
while it makes it utterly impossible for me to conceal my own feel- 
ings, makes me fear everything from those which are concealed 
from me; but, fortunately, other things presented themselves, suf- 
ficiently interesting to my heart to create a healthy diversion from 
those which, in spite of myself, engaged my attention. During the 
last visit which Diderot had paid to the Hermitage, he had spoken 
to me about the article on “Geneva” which D’Alembert had inserted 
in the “Encyclopaedia;” he had told me that this article, which had 
been agreed upon tegether with some Genevese of high standing, 


512 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


had in view the establishment of a theatre at Geneva; that the neces- 
sary steps had been taken, and that it would soon be carried out. As 
Diderot seemed to look favourably upon the scheme, and had no 
doubt of its success, and as I had too many other things to discuss 
with him to have time to argue further upon the point, I said 
nothing; but, feeling indignant at all these intrigues to corrupt my 
country, I awaited with impatience the volume of the “Encyclo- 
paedia” which contained the article, that I might see whether I 
could not find some means of answering it in such a manner 
as to ward off the blow. I received the volume soon after I was set- 
tled at Mont-Louis, and I found that the article was written with 
considerable skill and cleverness, and was worthy of the pen from 
which it had proceeded. However, this did not deter me from my 
intention of replying to it; and, in spite of my low spirits, in spite of 
my grief and suffering, the severity of the weather, and the un- 
comfortableness of my new abode, in which I had not yet had time 
to settle down, I set to work with an eagerness which overcame all. 
During a somewhat severe winter, in the month of February, and 
in the condition I have already described, I spent two hours, morn- 
ing and afternoon, in an open turret at the bottom of the garden 
in which my house stood. This turret, which stood at the end of a 
terraced walk, looked upon the valley and fish-pond of Mont- 
morency, and showed me in the distance, as far as I could see, the 
simple but stately château of Saint-Gratien, the retreat of the vir- 
tuous Catinat. In this place, which at that time was bitterly cold, 
unsheltered from the wind and snow, and with no other fire except 
that in my heart, I composed, in three weeks, my letter to D’Alem- 
bert upon Theatres. This was the first of my writings—for “Julie” 
was not half finished—in which I have found delight in work.- 
Hitherto, virtuous indignation had been my Apollo; on this occa- 
sion, tenderness and gentleness of soul supplied his place. The in- 
justices of which I had only been a spectator had irritated me: those 
by which I had myself been attacked saddened me; and this sad- 
ness, free from all gail and bitterness, was nothing but the sadness of 
a too loving and tender heart, which, deceived by those whom it be- 
lieved to be of its own stamp, had been forced to retire into itself. 
Full of all that had just happened to me, still shaken by so many 


WRITES TO D'ALEMBERT | 513 


violent emotions, my heart mingled the feelings of its sufferings 
with the ideas with which meditation upon my subject had inspired 
me: my work showed evident traces of this mingling. Without per- 
ceiving it, I described my-situation at that time: I portrayed Grimm, 
Madame d’Epinay, Madame d’Houdetot, Saint-Lambert and my- 
self. While writing, whit delightful tears I shed! Alas! in what I 
wrote it is only too evident that love, the fatal love of which I was 
doing my utmost to cure myself, was not yet banished from my 
heart. With all this was mingled a certain feeling of tenderness in 
regard to myself, as I felt that I was dying, and believed that’I was 
saying farewell to the public for the last time. Far from being 
alarmed at death, I beheld its approach with joy, but I felt regret at 
leaving my fellows before they had learned to appreciate me prop- 
erly, before they knew how much I should have deserved their affec- 
tion if they had known me better. These are the secret reasons of 
the singular tone which prevails in this work, and which offers so 
striking a contrast to that which preceded it.3 

I revised and made a fair copy of this letter, and was about te 
get it printed, when, after a long silence, I received a letter from 
Madame d’Houdetot, which overwhelmed me with a fresh afflic- 
tion, the most painful that I had as yet suffered. She told me in this 
letter (Packet B, No. 34), that my passion for her was known 
throughout Paris; that I had spoken of it to persons who had made 
it public; that these rumours had reached the ears of her lover, and 
had nearly cost him his life; that at last he did her justice, and that 
they had become reconciled; but that she owed it to him, as well as 
to herself and her reputation, to break off all intercourse with me; 
that, in the meanwhile, she assured me that they would never cease 
to take an interest in me, that they would defend me before the 
public, and that she would send from time to time to inquire after 
me. 

“And you too, Diderot!” I exclaimed. Unworthy friend! Never- 
theless, I could not make up my mind to condemn him yet. My 
weakness was known by other persons who might have caused it 
to be talked about. I wanted to doubt; but soon I was unable to co 
so any longer. Soon afterwards, Saint-Lambert behaved in a manner 


3 The “Discours sur |’Inégalité des Conditions.” 


514 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


worthy of his generosity. Knowing my heart tolerably well, he 
guessed the state of mind in which I must be, betrayed by one sec- 
tion of my friends, and abandoned by the rest. He came to see me. 
When he came first, he had very little time to spare. He came again. 
Unfortunately, as I did not expect him, I was not at home. Thérèse, 
who was, had a conversation with him, which lasted more than two 
hours, in the course of which they told each other of several things 
which it was of great importance for both of us to know. The sur- 
prise with which I learned that no one doubted that I had lived with 
Madame d’Epinay, as Grimm was living with her at that time, was 
only equalled by his own, when he learned that the report was ut- 
terly false. Saint-Lambert, to the lady’s great displeasure, was in the 
same case as myself; and all the explanations, which were the result 
of this conversation, utterly stifled any regrets I may have felt at 
having irrevocably broken with her. As for Madame d’Houdetot, he 
gave Thérèse a detailed account of many circumstances with which 
neither she nor even Madame d’Houdetot were acquainted—things 
which I alone knew, which I had mentioned to Diderot alone under 
the seal of friendship; and it was Saint-Lambert himself to whom he 
had chosen to confide them. This finally decided me. Resolved to 
break with Diderot once and for all, I had nothing further to think 
about, except the manner of doing it; for I had perceived that secret 
ruptures always proved prejudicial to me, since they left a mask of 
friendship to my most cruel enemies. 

The rules of good breeding established in the world upon this 
point seem to be dictated by the spirit of falsehood and treachery. 
To appear to be the friend of a man, when one has ceased to be so, 
is to reserve to oneself the means of injuring him by deceiving 
honourable men. I recalled to mind that when the illustrious Mon- 
tesquieu broke with Father de Tournemine, he hastened to an- 
nounce it openly, and said to everybody, “Do not listen either te 
Father de Tournemine or myself, when one speaks of the other, 
for we are no longer friends.” His conduct was highly applauded, 
and its frankness and generosity were universally praised. I deter- 
mined to follow his example in dealing with Diderot; but how was I 
to announce the rupture authentically from my retreat, and, in addi- 
tion, without causing a scandal? I decided to insert in my work, in 


SAINT-LAMBERT’S LETTER 515 


the form of a note, a passage from Ecclesiasticus, which announced 
it and even the attendant circumstances, in terms sufficiently clear to 
anyone who was well informed, while it had no meaning for others. 
I further took care only to allude to the friend whom I was renounc- 
ing in the respectful terms which are always due to friendship even 
when it no longer exists. All this may be seen in the work itself. 

There is nothing in this world but good and bad fortune;* and 
it appears that in adversity every act of courage is a crime. The 
very same thing which had been admired in Montesquieu only 
brought upon me blame and reproach. As soon as my. work was 
printed and I had received copies of it, I sent one to Saint-Lambert, 
who, the very day before, had written to me, in Madame d’Houde- 
tots name and his own, a letter full of the tenderest expressions of 
friendship (Packet B, No. 37). He returned my copy, accompanied 
by the following letter (Packet B, No. 38): 


“EauBONNE, October roth, 1758. 


“Really, sir, I am unable to accept the present which you have 
just sent me. At the passage in your Preface, where, mentioning 
Diderot, you quote a passage from Ecclesiastes” (he is wrong, it is 
Ecclesiasticus), “the book fell from my hands. After our conversa- 
tions during this summer, you appeared to me to be convinced that 
Diderot was innocent of the pretended indiscretions which you laid 
to his charge. He may have treated you wrongly; I do not know; 
but I do know that this does not give you the right to insult him 
publicly. You are not ignorant of the persecutions to which he has 
to submit, and now you unite the voice of an old friend to the cries 
of the envious! I cannot conceal from you, sir, how greatly this out- 
rageous conduct shocks me. I do not live with Diderot, but I honour 
him, and I feel keenly the pain which you cause to a man whom you 
have never reproached, at least in my presence, with anything more 
than a little weakness. Sir, we differ too much in our principles ever 
to be able to agree. Forget my existence; this ought not to be difficult 
for you. I have never done men either good or harm which they 
remember for long. I promise you, sir, to forget your person, and to 
remember your talents alone.” 


411 wy a qu’heur et malheur dans ce monde: a proverbial expression, mean- 
ing, “In this world everything depends upon luck.” 


516 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


I felt no less afflicted than indignant, when I read this letter, and, 
in the excess of my wretchedness, finding my pride again, I replied 
to him as follows: 


“MontMorEncy, October 11th, 1758. 


“Sir——When I read your letter, I did you the honour of being 
surprised at it, and I was foolish enough to be affected by it; but now 
I find that it is unworthy of an answer. 

“I have no wish to continue the copies for Madame d’Houdetot. 
If it is not agreeable to her to keep what she has, she can send it 
back to me; I will return her money. If she keeps it, she must still 
send for the rest of her paper and money. I beg, at the same time, 
that she will return me the prospectus which she has in her keeping. 
Farewell, sir.” 


Courage in misfortune irritates cowardly hearts, but pleases those 
that are generous. It appears that this letter caused Saint-Lambert 
to reflect, and that he was sorry for what he had done; but, being 
too proud on his side to admit it openly, he seized, perhaps pre- 
pared, the means of deadening the force of the blow which he had 
dealt me. A fortnight later, I received the following letter from 
M. d’Epinay (Packet B, No. 10): 


“Thursday, 26th. 


“Sir,—I have received the book which you have been kind enough 
to send me; I read it with great pleasure. This is always the feeling 
with which I have read all the works which have proceeded from 
your pen. Accept my best thanks for it. I would have offered them 
to you in person, if my affairs had allowed me to stay any time in 
your neighbourhood; but I have lived very little this year at La 
Chevrette. M. and Madame Dupin are coming to dine with me next 
Sunday. I expect that MM. de Francueil and Saint-Lambert, and 
Madame d’Houdetot will be of the party. You would do me a real 
favour by consenting to join us. All those who will be my guests 
are anxious for your company, and will be delighted to share with 
me the pleasure of spending a portion of the day with you. I have 
the honour to be, with the most perfect esteem, etc.” 


THE DINNER-PARTY 517 


This letter made my heart beat terribly. After having been for 
a year the talk of Paris, the idea of going to exhibit myself before 
Madame d’Houdetot made me tremble, and I could scarcely muster 
up sufficient courage to sustain this ordeal. However, since she and 
Saint-Lambert desired it, since D’Epinay spoke in the name of all 
those who had been invited, and mentioned no one whom I should 
not be glad to see, I came to the conclusion that, after all, I was not 
compromising myself by accepting an invitation to dinner which 
was sent me, as it were, by all the guests. I“attordingly promised to 
go. On Sunday, the weather was bad: M. d’Epinay sent his carriage 
for me, and I went. 

My arrival created a sensation. I have never met with a more 
cordial reception. One would have said that the whole company 
felt how greatly I needed cheering. Only French hearts know how 
to show tenderness of this kind. However, I found more people 
there than I had expected; amongst others, the Comte d’Houde- 
tot, whom I did not know at all, and his sister, Madame de Blain- 
ville, whose company I could very well have dispensed with. She 
had visited Eaubonne several times during the preceding year; and 
her sister-in-law, during our solitary walks, had often made her 
dance attendance until she was tired out. She cherished a resent- 
ment against me which she gratified during this dinner to her heart’s 
content; for it may be guessed that the presence of the Comte 
d’Houdetot and Saint-Lambert did not give me the laugh on my 
side, and that a man who found himself at a loss during the most 
ordinary conversations did not shine very much on that occasion. 
I have never suffered so much, never cut such a bad figure, or been 
subjected to more unexpected attacks. When at length we left the 
table, I escaped from this vixen; I had the pleasure of seeing Saint- 
Lambert and Madame d’Houdetot come up to me, and we talked 
together during part of the afternoon, concerning matters which it is 
true were of no importance, but with the same familiarity as before 
my fit of madness. This friendliness did not escape my heart; and if 
Saint-Lambert had been able to read therein, he would certainly 
have been satisfied. I can swear that, although, on my arrival, the 
sight of Madame d’Houdetot caused my heart to beat so violently 


518 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


that I almost fainted, when I took my leave I scarcely thought of 
her at all, my mind being entirely occupied with Saint-Lambert. 

Notwithstanding Madame de Blainville’s spiteful sarcasms, this 
dinner did me a great deal of good, and I heartily congratulated my- 
self upon not having refused the invitation. It showed me not only 
that the intrigues of Grimm and the Holbachians had not separated 
my old friends from me,° but, what was still more flattering to me, 
that the feelings of Madame d’Houdetot and Saint-Lambert were 
less changed than I had expected; and I at last understood that 
jealousy had more to do with his keeping her away from me than 
-disesteem. This consoled and calmed me. Sure of not being an ob- 
ject of contempt to those whom I esteemed, I worked upon my 
own heart with greater courage and success. If I did not succeed in 
completely extinguishing in it a guilty and unfortunate passion, 
T at least kept its remains so well in order, that since that time they 
have not caused me to commit a single error. Madame d’Houdetot’s 
copying, which she persuaded me to resume; my works, which I 
continued to send her when they appeared, still brought me, from 

time to time, messages and notes from her, of no great importance, 
' but couched in polite terms. She even did more, as will be subse- 
quently seen; and the reciprocal conduct of all the three, after our 
intercourse had ceased, may serve as an example of the way in 
which honourable persons separate, when it is no longer agreeable 
to them to associate. 

Another advantage resulting from this dinner was, that it was 
spoken of in Paris, and served to refute unanswerably the report 
which was everywhere circulated by my enemies, that I was at dag- 
gers-drawn with all those who had been present, especially with M. 
d’Epinay. On leaving the Hermitage, I had written to him a very 
polite letter of thanks, to which he replied with equal politeness; 
and this mutual interchange of civilities continued between our- 
selves and his brother, M. de Lalive, who even came to see me 
at Montmorency, and sent me his engravings. With the exception 
of Madame d’Houdetot’s two sisters-in-law, I have never been on 
bad terms with any member of his family. 


5 This was what, in the simplicity of my heart, I still believed when I wrote 
my “Confessions.” 


M. MARMONTEL 5iv 


My letter to D’Alembert met with great success. All my works 
had done the same, bue this was even more profitable to me. It 
taught the public to mistrust the Holbachian clique. When I went to 
the Hermitage, they predicted, with their usual self-assurance, that I 
should not stop there for three months. When they saw that I. 
stopped twenty, and that, when obliged to leave it, I still remained 
in the country, they declared that it was pure obstinacy: that I was 
wearying myself to death in my retirement; but that, eaten up with 
pride, I preferred to die there, the victim of my own obstinacy, 
rather than to give in and return to Paris. The letter to D’Alem- 
bert breathed a gentleness of soul which it was easy to see was not 
pretended. If I had been devoured by ill-humour in my retreat, it 
would have made itself felt in the style of the letter. It showed itself 
in all the writings which I had written at Paris: it ceased to show 
itself in the first work which I had written in the country. For 
those who are capable of observing, this indication was decisive. 
They saw that I had returned to my proper element. 

Nevertheless, this same work, full of gentleness though it was, 
owing to my awkwardness and my usual ill-luck, made me another 
enemy in the literary world. At M. de la Popliniére’s I had made 
the acquaintance of Marmontel, and this acquaintance had been 
kept up at the Baron’s. At that time Marmontel was editor of the 
Mercure de France. As I was too proud to send my works to those 
who wrote for the newspapers, and yet wanted to send him this, 
without letting him think that it was meant for him in his editorial 
capacity, or that I desired a notice of it in the Mercure, I wrote upon 
the copy, which I sent him, that it was not intended for the writer 
of the Mercure, but for M. Marmontel. I thought that I was paying 
him a very graceful compliment; but he appeared to see in it a 
deadly insult, and became my irreconcilable enemy. He wrote a 
polite article against my letter, but with evident bitterness; and 
from that time, he missed no opportunity of injuring me in society 
and of indirectly attacking me in his works. So difficult is it to 
manage the irritable amour-propre of literary men, and such great 
care is necessary, in paying them compliments, to leave nothing 
which can even be suspected of a double meaning. 

[1759.]—Thus freed from all anxiety, I employed my leisure and 


520 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


independence in resuming my literary occupations with greater 
regularity. I finished “Julie” in the winter, and sent it to Rey, who 
had it printed in the following year. However, my work was again 
interrupted by a trifling, but rather unpleasant incident. I heard that 
arrangements were being made at the Opera for a reproduction of 
the Devin du Village. Highly indignant at the idea of these people so 
arrogantly claiming the right to dispose of my property, I again 
took up the memorial which I had sent to M. d’Argenson, to which 
I had received no reply; and having revised it, I sent it by M. Sellon, 
together with a letter which he was kind enough to take charge of, 
to M. le Comte de Saint-Florentin, who had succeeded M. d’Argen- 
son in the management of the Opera. Duclos, whom I informed of 
what I had done, spoke of it to the “little violins,” who offered to 
give me back, not my Opera, but my free pass, which was no longer 
of any use to me. Seeing that I could not hope for justice from any 
quarter, I gave up the affair; and the directors of the Opera, without 
either replying or listening to my arguments, continued to make 
what use they pleased of the Devin, which incontestably belongs 
to me alone,® as if it had been their own property, and to draw profits 
from it. 

Since I had shaken off the yoke of my tyrants, I led a tolerably 
even and peaceful life; deprived of the charm of two strong attach- 
ments, I was also free from the weight of their chains. Disgusted 
with patronising friends, who wanted to have the absolute disposal 
of my destiny and to make me the slave of their pretended benefits 
in spite of myself, I was resolved for the future to keep to connec- 
tions formed by simple goodwill, which, without putting any re- 
straint upon perfect freedom, constitute the enjoyment of life, and 
are founded upon a footing of complete equality. I had sufficient 
connections of this kind to be able to taste the pleasures of society, 
without being obliged to submit to dependence upon it; and, as soon 
as I had tried this manner of life, I felt that it was most suitable 
to my age, to end my days in peace, far beyond the reach of the 
storms, quarrels, and annoyances by which I had recently been 
almost swamped. . 


° It now belongs to them by virtue of a fresh agreement made between us quite 
recently. 


HIS NEW ACQUAINTANCES 521 


During my stay at the Hermitage, and since my settlement at 
Montmorency, I have fhade some agreeable acquaintances in the 
neighbourhood, to whom I felt under no obligations. At the head of 
these was young Loyseau de Mauléon, who was just beginning his 
career at the Bar, but did not know what position he would take. 
I had no such doubts as he had. I soon marked out for him a bril- 
liant career, which has culminated in his present position. I pre- 
dicted to him that, if he was rigidly careful in his choice of cases, 
and always defended the cause of justice and virtue, his talents, 
elevated by these lofty sentiments, would make him the equal of the 
greatest orators. He has followed my advice, and has felt the benefit 
of it. His defence of M. de Portes is worthy of Demosthenes. He 
was in the habit of coming every year to spend his vacations at 
Saint-Brice, a quarter of a league from the Hermitage, in the fief 
of Mauléon, which belonged to his mother, and where the great 
Bossuet had formerly lived. It is a fief, in which a succession of 
such proprietors would render it difficult to keep up the old nobility. 

Another of my friends, in the same village, was Guérin the book- 
seller, a man of wit, learning, and amiable character, and in the 
first rank of his business. Through him J made the acquaintance of 
Jean Néaulme, an Amsterdam bookseller, his friend and corre- 
spondent, who afterwards printed “Emile.” Nearer than Saint-Brice, 
I had M. Maltor, curé of Grosley, more fitted to be a minister and 
statesman than a village curé, who should at least have had the ad- 
ministration of a diocese, if places were bestowed according to abil- 
ity. He had been secretary to the Comte du Luc, and had known 
Jean Baptiste Rousseau intimately. As full of esteem for the memory 
of that illustrious exile as of loathing for that of the rascal Saurin 
who had ruined him, he knew a number of curious anecdotes 
about both, which Seguy had not inserted in the as yet unprinted life 
of the former; and he assured me that the Comte du Luc, far from 
ever having had reason to complain of him, had preserved the warm- 
est friendship for him to the end of his life. M. Maltor, upon whom 
M. de Vintimille had bestowed this comfortable retreat after the 
death of his patron, had been formerly employed in several affairs, 
of which, in spite of his years, he still had a vivid recollection, and 
which he discussed very sensibly. His conversation, as instructive 


522 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


as it was amusing, in no way reminded one of a village curé: he com- 
bined the air of a man of the world with the learning of a student. 
Of all my permanent neighbours, he was the one whose society was 
the most agreeable to me, and whom I left with the greatest regret. 

At Montmorency I had the members of the Oratory; amongst 
others Father Berthier, professor of physics, to whom I became 
attached, owing to a certain air of geniality which I discovered in 
him, in spite of a slight dash of pedantry. I found it difficult, how- 
ever, to reconcile this excessive simplicity with his eagerness and 
adroitness in thrusting himself everywhere; amongst the great, the 
ladies, the devotees, and the philosophers. He knew how to be all 
things to all men. I found great pleasure in his society. I spoke of 
him to everybody; and what I said apparently went back to him. One 
day he thanked me, with a grin, for having found him a good fel- 
low. There appeared to me something sardonic in his smile, which 
totally altered his features in my eyes, and which I have often 
thought of since then. This smile may be most fitly compared to that 
of Panurge, when buying Dindenaut’s sheep. Our acquaintance had 
commenced soon after my arrival at the Hermitage, where he fre- 
quently came to see me. I was already settled at Montmorency, when 
he left to return to Paris. He often saw Madame le Vasseur there. 
One day, when nothing was further from my thoughts, he wrote 
me a letter on her behalf, to inform me that Grimm had offered to 
support her, and to ask my permission to accept the offer. I heard 
that he offered her an allowance of 300 livres, on condition that 
she went to live at Deuil, between La Chevrette and Montmorency. 
I will not describe the impression which this information produced 
upon me: it would have been less surprising if Grimm had had an 
income of 10,000 livres, or any more intelligible connection with 
this woman, and if it had not been considered such a crime on my 
part to have taken her into the country, to which he was now in- 
clined to take her back, as if she had grown younger since then. 
I understood that the good old lady only asked this permission, 
which she could easily have dispensed with if I had refused it, in 
order not to run the risk of losing what she received from me. 
Although this exhibition of charity on the part of Grimm appeared 
to me very extraordinary, it did not strike me so much at the time 


- Z i ¢ 


2 


MM. FERRAND AND MINARD 523 


as it did afterwards. But; even if I had known all that I have since 
found out, I should have given my consent just the same as I did, 
and was obliged to do, tfnless I had been prepared to outbid Grimm. 
From that time, Father Berthier somewhat cured me of the belief 
in his geniality, which had seemed to him so amusing, and of 
which I had so thoughtlessly accused him. 

This same Father Berthier enjoyed the acquaintance of two per- 
sons, who, for some unknown reason, also sought mine: for there 
was certainly very little sympathy between their tastes and my own. 
They were children of Melchisedec,” whose country and family no 
one knew—probably, not even their real names. They were Jan- 
senists, and passed for priests in disguise—perhaps in consequence 
of their absurd fashion of wearing long swords, by which they set 
great store. The prodigious secrecy which marked all their pro- 
ceedings gave them the appearance of party-chiefs, and I have always 
felt convinced that they managed the Gazette Ecclésiastique. One of 
them, tall, benevolent, and wheedling, was named M. Ferrand; the 
other, short, dumpy, sneering, and punctilious, was named M. 
Minard. They called each other cousin. They lived at Paris with - 
D’Alembert in his nurse’s house; and had taken a small house at 
Montmorency, where they spent their summers. They managed for 
themselves, without servant or messenger. They took it in turns each 
week to go to market, do the cooking, and sweep the house. They 
were pretty comfortable, and we sometimes had our meals together. 
I do not know what made them care about me: the only thing I 
cared about in them was, that they played chess; and, for the sake 
of a poor little game, I endured four hours of weariness. As they 
wanted to poke their noses in everywhere, Thérèse called them ‘ ‘the 
gossips,” and this name stuck to them at Montmorency. 

Such, together with my landlord, M. Mathas, who was a worthy 
fellow, were my chief country acquaintances. I still had a sufficient 
number at Paris to make it pleasant for me to live there, whenever I 
might wish, outside the circle of literary men, amongst whom I 
could reckon no friend except Duclos. Deleyre was too young: and 


7 Enfants de Melchisédech: i.e., persons about whom nothing is known. 
8 An alternative rendering is: “to which they were fastened,” i.e., from which 


they seemed inseparable. 


524 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


although, upon a closer acquaintance with the intrigues of the 
philosophical clique against me, he had detached himself from it 
altogether—or, at least, I thought so—I was not yet able to forget 
the readiness he had shown in making himself the speaking-trumpet 
of the whole tribe. 

In the first place, I had my old and worthy friend, M. Roguin. 
He was a friend of the good old times, whose friendship I did not 
owe to my writings, but to my own merits; and for this reason I have 
always preserved that friendship. I had the worthy Lenieps, my 
fellow-countryman, and his daughter, Madame Lambert, who was 
alive at the time. I had a young Genevese named Coindet, who 
seemed to me a good fellow, careful, obliging, and zealous, but ig- 
norant, credulous, gluttonous, and presuming; he came to see me 
immediately after I had gone to live at the Hermitage, and, acting as 
his own introducer, soon established himself on a firm footing, in 
spite of me. He had some taste for drawing, and was acquainted 
with several artists. I found him useful for the illustrations of 
“Julie”; he undertook to see after the drawings and plates, and 
executed his commission very successfully. 

M. Dupin’s house was open to me; and although the society to be 
met there was less brilliant than in Madame Dupin’s best days, it 
was still one of the best houses in Paris, owing to the distinguished 
qualities of its heads, and the select company which assembled 
there. As I had always preferred them to all others, and had only 
left them in order to be independent, they had never ceased to regard 
me with friendship, and I was always sure of a welcome from 
Madame Dupin. I could even reckon her as one of my country 
neighbours, since they had set up an establishment at Clichy, where 
[ sometimes spent a day or two; and I should have gone there 
oftener, if Madame Dupin and Madame Chenonceaux had been on 
more friendly terms. But the difficulty of dividing my attentions in 
the same house between two women who had no sympathy with 
each other, made my position at Clichy too constrained. Being on 
more equal and familiar terms with Madame Chenonceaux, I had 
the pleasure of enjoying her society with less restraint at Deuil, close 
to my doors, where she had taken a little house, and even at my 
own place, where she came to see me pretty frequently. 


THE CHEVALIER DE CARRION 525 


Another of my friends was Madame de Créqui, who had de: 
voted herself to a religipus life, and had given up the society of 
D’Alembert, Marmontel, and most literary men, with the exception, 
I believe, of the Abbé Trublet, who at that time was a sort of cant- 
ing hypocrite, of whom she herself was tolerably weary. I, whose 
society she had sought, did not lose her goodwill, and always kept 
up a correspondence with her. She sent me some fat pullets from 
Le Mans as a new year’s present; and she had made up her mind to 
come and see me in the following year, when a journey undertaken 
by Madame de Luxembourg at the same time interfered with her 
plans. I owe her a place by herself; she will always hold a prominent 
place in my recollections. 

I also had a friend who deserves the next place after Roguin; my 
old colleague De Carrio, formerly nominal secretary to the Spanish 
embassy at Venice, afterwards in Sweden, where his Court ap- 
pointed him chargé d’affaires, who had since become the actual 
secretary to the embassy in Paris. He surprised me at Montmorency 
when I least expected it. He was decorated with some Spanish 
order, the name of which I forget, and wore a splendid cross of 
precious stones. He had been obliged, in his proofs of ancestry, to 
add another letter to his name, and now called himself the Chevalier 
de Carrion. I found him just the same—the same excellent heart, 
and a mind that developed greater amiability day by day. I should 
have resumed my former intimacy with him, had not Coindet, 
thrusting himself between us in his usual fashion, taken advantage 
of my distance from Paris to worm himself into my place, and, in 
my name, into his confidence, and to supplant me, from his excessive 
eagerness to serve me. 

The recollection of Carrion reminds me of one of my country 
neighbours, whom it would be the more unpardonable on my part 
to omit to mention, as I have to confess myself guilty of an inexcus- 
able wrong towards him. This was the worthy M. le Blond, who 
had rendered me considerable services at Venice; and who, after 
making a journey in France with his family, had taken a country 
house at La Briche, not far from Montmorency.® As soon as I heard 


® When writing this, full of my usual blind confidence, I was far from sur 
pecting the real reason and result of this journey to Paris. 


526 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


that he was my neighbour, in the joy of my heart I went to call upon 
him, more as a pleasure than a duty. I set out the very next day. 
I met some people who were coming to see me, and I was obliged to 
turn back with them. Two days afterwards I set out again; he had 
gone to dine in Paris with all his family. The third time I called, he 
was at home: I heard women’s voices, and saw at the door a car- 
riage which alarmed me. I wished to see him, at any rate for the 
first time, without interruption, and to talk over our old acquaint- 
ance. In short, I put off my visit from one day to another, until at 
last my shame at deferring so long the fulfilment of such a duty 
prevented me from fulfilling it at all: having dared to wait so long, 
I no longer dared to show myself. This neglect, at which M. le 
Blond was justly indignant, made my idleness appear ingratitude; 
and yet, in my heart, I felt myself so little to blame, that, if I had 
been able to afford him any real pleasure, even unknown to him, I 
am sure that he would not have found me slow in doing so. But 
indolence, carelessness, and delay in the performance of trifling 
duties, have always been more prejudicial to me than great vices. 
My worst faults have been those of omission; I have seldom done 
what I ought not to have done, but, unfortunately, I have still less 
often done what I ought to have done. 

Since I have returned to the acquaintances I made at Venice, I 
ought not to forget one which is connected with them, and which has 
lasted rnuch longer than the rest. I refer to M. de Jonville, who, since 
his return from Genoa, had continued to show his friendship for 
me in many ways. He was very fond of my society, and liked to 
talk about Italian affairs and the mad folly of M. de Montaigu, con- 
cernir.g whom he had heard several characteristic anecdotes through 
his connection with the Foreign Office. I was also glad to meet at 
his house my old comrade Dupont, who had bought a commission 
in his province, and was sometimes obliged to visit Paris on busi- 
ness. M. de Jonville gradually showed such fondness for my society, 
that it became somewhat irksome; and, although we lived at a great 
distance from each other, it na a disturbance, if I let a week pass 
without going to dine with him. When he went to Jonville, he 
always wanted to take me with him; but after I had once spent 
a week there, which seemed interminably long, I had no desire 


= 


M. DE JONVILLE 527 


to go there again. He was certainly an honourable man and an 
agreeable companion, even amiable in certain respects, but he had 
little intellectual capacit¥; he was handsome, somewhat proud of his 
personal appearance, and tolerably wearisome. He had a singular 
collection, perhaps unique of its kind, to which he devoted a great 
deal of his attention, and in which he also endeavoured to interest’ 
his friends, who sometimes found less amusement in it than he 
did. This was a very complete collection of all the Court and Pari- 
sian vaudevilles of the last fifty years, in which many anecdotes 
were to be found, which it would have been useless to look for else- 
where. There is a collection of Memoirs for the History of France, 
which would scarcely be thought of in any other nation. 

One day, while we were on the best of terms, he gave me so cold 
and freezing a reception, so little after his usual manner, that, after 
I had given him an opportunity of explanation, and even begged 
him to give me one, I left his house, resolved never to set foot in it 
again, and I kept my resolution; for I am rarely seen again where I 
have once been ill received, and here there was no Diderot to plead 
for M. de Jonville. In vain I puzzled my brains to discover how I 
had offended him; I could think of nothing. I felt certain that I had 
never spoken of him or his except in terms of the greatest respect, 
for I was sincerely attached to him; and, besides that I had nothing 
but good to say of him, it has always been my inviolable principle, 
never to speak of the houses at which I visited in other than re- 
spectful terms. 

At length, after long pondering, I arrived at the following con- 
jecture. The last time that we had seen each other, he had invited 
me to supper at the rooms of some girls with whom he was ac- 
quainted, together with two or three Foreign Office clerks, very 
worthy fellows, who had neither the manner nor the appearance 
of libertines; and I can swear that, for my part, I spent the evening 
in melancholy reflections upon the unhappy lot of these poor crea- 
tures. I did not contribute towards the expenses, because M. de 
Jonville gave the supper; and I gave the girls nothing, because I 
did not give them the chance of earning the present which I might 
have been able to offer them. We left together, in high spirits and 
on the best of terms. Without having paid another visit to the girls, 


528 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


three or four days afterwards, I went to dine with M. de Jonville, 
whom I had not seen since. It was on this occasion that he received 
me in the manner I have mentioned. As I could not attribute it to 
anything else but some misunderstanding in reference to the supper, 
and as I saw that he was not disposed to offer an explanation, I made 
up my mind and gave up visiting him. I continued, however, to send 
him my works, and he often sent me his compliments. One evening, 
when I met him in the foyer of the Comedy, he politely reproached 
me for not going to see him; but this did not make me return to 
him. Thus the whole affair had the appearance of a fit of sulkiness 
rather than a regular rupture. However, as I never saw him again, 
and never heard anything more of him since that time, it would 
have been too late, after our intercourse had been broken off for 
several years, to renew the acquaintance. This is the reason why I 
do not here mention M. de Jonville in my list, although I had for 
a long time been a visitor at his house. 

I will not swell this same list with the names of other less inti- 
mate acquaintances, or of those with whom, in consequence of my 
absence, I had gradually become less intimate, although I still 
sometimes saw them in the country, either at my own or my neigh- 
bours’ houses, such, for instance, as the Abbés de Condillac and de 
Mably, MM. de Mairan, de Lalive, de Boisgelou, Watelet, Ancelet, 
and others whom it would be tedious to mention. I will just men- 
tion, in passing, M. de Margency, the King’s chamberlain, a former 
member of the Holbachian clique, which, like myself, he had left, 
and an old friend of Madame d’Epinay, whom, in this also like 
myself, he had given up; lastly, his friend Desmahis, the famous but 
soon-forgotten author of the comedy called L’Impertinent. The for- 
mer was my country neighbour, his estate at Margency being close 
to Montmorency. We were old acquaintances; but our nearness to 
each other and a certain similarity in our experiences brought us 
still closer together. The latter died shortly afterwards. He was a 
man of wit and ability; but he in some respects resembled the origi- 
nal of his comedy, being a bit of a coxcomb with the ladies, 
by whom his loss was not particularly regretted. 

I cannot, however, leave unnoticed a fresh correspondence, which 
began at that time, and which has had too much influence upon 


M. DE LAMOIGNON DE MALESHERBES 529 


the remainder of my life for me to omit to indicate its origin. I am 
speaking of M. de Largoignon de Malesherbes, first President of 
the Excise Office, who‘at that time was censor of published books, 
an office which he filled with. equal intelligence and mildness, to 
the complete satisfaction of literary men. I had not eyen visited. 
him in Paris; but I had always met with the most courteous civility 
from him, in matters connected with the censorship; and I knew 
that, on more than one occasion, he had severely rebuked those whe 
were in the habit of writing against me. In reference to the print- 
ing of “Julie,” he gave me fresh proofs of his kindness: the cost of 
postage from Amsterdam of the proof sheets of a work of such 
size was considerable; and, as all communications were sent to him 
post free, he allowed them to be addressed to him, and he forwarded 
them on to me, franked by his father the Chancellor. When the 
work was printed, he did not allow it to be sold in the kingdom until 
an edition had been sold, the profits of which he insisted that I 
should take, notwithstanding my opposition. As acceptance on my 
part would have been a fraud upon Rey, to whom I had sold my 
manuscript, I not only refused to accept the present, which was in- 
tended for me, without his consent, which he very generously gave, 
but I wanted to share with him the roo pistoles to which it 
amounted; but he refused to accept anything. These 100 pistoles 
caused me the annoyance, for which M. de Malesherbes had not pre- 
pared me, of seeing my work fearfully mutilated, and prevented the 
sale of the good edition until the bad was exhausted. 

I have always considered M+ de Malesherbes as a man of unassail- 
able uprightness. Nothing that has ever occurred has made me doubt 
his honesty for a moment; but since his weakness is as great as his 
honour, he sometimes injures those, in whom he takes an interest, 
by his efforts to protect them. He not only ordered more than a hun- 
dred pages of the Paris edition to be cut out, but he mutilated the 
copy of the good edition which he sent to Madame de Pompadour, 
in a manner which deserved to be called a breach of faith. I have said 
somewhere in this work, that a coal-heaver’s wife is more worthy of 
respect than the mistress of a Prince. This phrase had occurred to 
me in the fervour of composition, and I swear that no personal 
allusion was intended. On reading the work over again, I saw that 


530 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


others would certainly see one. However, I would not strike out 
the phrase, in accordance with my very injudicious principle of leav- 
ing nothing out, because it might be considered to contain some 
personal allusion, provided my conscience assured me that nothing 
of the kind had been intended when I wrote it; and I contented 
myself with substituting the word “Prince” for “King,” which I had 
at first written. This alteration did not satisfy M. de Malesherbes; he 
suppressed the whole sentence in a fresh sheet, which he had printed 
on purpose and glued in as neatly as possible in Madame de Pom- 
padour’s copy. She did not remain in ignorance of this piece of 
jugglery: some worthy souls were kind enough to inform her of it. 
I myself did not hear of it until some time afterwards, when I began 
to feel the consequences. 

Is not this also the origin of the secret but implacable hatred of 
another lady whose case was similar, without my knowing anything 
of it, and with whom I was not even acquainted when I wrote the 
passage? When the book was published, the acquaintance was 
made, and I felt very uneasy. I told the Chevalier de Lorenzi, who 
laughed at me, and said that the lady in question felt so little of- 
fended, that she had not even taken any notice of it. I believed it, per- 
haps rather too readily, and regained my calmness at a very inop- 
portune moment. 

At the beginning of winter, I received a further mark of M. de 
Malesherbes’ kindness, which I greatly appreciated, although I did 
not consider it advisable to take advantage of it. There was a place 
vacant on the Journal des Savants; Margency wrote to offer it to 
me, as if on his own initiative. But it was easy for me to see, from 
the style of his letter (Packet C, No. 33), that he was acting under 
instructions and authority; and he himself in a subsequent letter 
(Packet C, No. 47) gave me to understand that he had been com- 
missioned to make the offer. The work was trifling; it consisted of 
two extracts a month, to be made from books which were to be 
brought to me, so that there would never be any need for me-to go 
to Paris, not even to pay a visit of thanks to the magistrate. This gave 
me admission into the society of literary men of the first rank, MM. 
de Mairan, Clairaut, de Guignes, and the Abbé Barthélemy. I was 
already acquainted with the first twe, and I looked forward with 


- ne is 


= 


KINDNESS OF M. DE MALESHERBES 531 


pleasure to making the’ acquaintance of the last two. Lastly, for 
this by no means laborious work, which I could easily perform, 
I was to receive a honorarium of 800 francs. I deliberated a few 
hours before deciding, and I can swear that the only reason for my 
hesitation was the fear of annoying Margency and displeasing M. 
de Malesherbes. But, at length, the insupportable restraint of not be- 
ing able to work when I pleased, and of being tied to time, and, still 
more, the certainty of inefficiently performing the duties which I 
should have been obliged to undertake, prevailed over all, and made 
me decide to refuse a post for which I was not adapted. I knew that 
my talent consisted entirely in a certain lively interest in the subjects 
which I had to treat, and that nothing but the love of the great, the 
true, and the beautiful, could enliven my genius. What would the 
contents of the different books, from which I should have had to 
make extracts, or even the books themselves, have mattered to me? 
My indifference to the whole thing would have frozen my pen and 
deadened my mind. It was thought that I could write according to 
the rules of a trade, like all other literary men, whereas I have never 
been able to write except from inspiration. That was certainly not 
the kind of thing that was wanted for the Journal des Savants. I ac- 
cordingly wrote a letter of thanks to Margency, couched in the po- 
litest terms possible, in which I explained my reasons so fully, that 
neither he nor M. de Malesherbes can possibly have believed that ill 
temper or pride had anything to do with my refusal. They both ap- 
proved of it; it made no alteration in their friendship for me, and 
the secret was so well kept, that the public never got the least scent 
of it. 

The proposal was not made at a favourable moment for me to ac- 
cept it; for I had for some time intended to abandon literature alto- 
gether, especially the profession of an author. All that had just oc- 
curred had completely disgusted me with literary men, and I had 
cause to feel that it was impossible for me to pursue the same career, 
without coming into contact with them. I was equally disgusted 
with men of the world, and, in general, with the mixed life which I 
had recently led, half by myself, and half in society for which I was 
utterly unfitted. I felt more than ever, from constant experience, that 
all association on unequal terms is always prejudicial to the weaker 


532. THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


party. Living with wealthy people, who belonged to a different state 
of life from that which I had chosen, without keeping house as they 
did, I was nevertheless obliged to imitate them in many respects; 
and certain petty expenses, which were mothing to them, were for 
me as ruinous as they were indispensable. If another man goes to 
visit at a country-house, he is waited upon by his lackey, at table as 
well as in his room; he sends him to fetch whatever he wants; with- 
out coming directly into contact with the servants of the house, per- 
haps not even seeing them, he only gives them a gratuity whenever 
and as it pleases him; whereas I, alone, without a servant of my own, 
was at the mercy of the people of the house, whose good graces it 
was absolutely necessary to gain, if I did not want to suffer many 
annoyances; and, being treated as their master’s equal, I was obliged 
to treat his servants accordingly, and even to do more for them than 
anyone else, because, in fact, I had much greater need of their serv- 
ices. Where there are only few servants, this is not a matter of such 
importance; but, in the houses at which I visited, they were very 
numerous, all very uppish, great rascals, and keenly alive—to their 
own interests; and the rascals knew how to manage so that I needed 
the services of each of them in turn. The women of Paris, with all 
their ‘wit and intelligence, are entirely wrong in their ideas upon 
this point; and, in their anxiety to save my purse, they ruined me. If 
I went out to supper a little distance from home, instead of letting 
me send for a coach, the lady of the house ordered her horses to be 
put to to drive me back; she was delighted to spare me the expense 
of the carriage, twenty-four sous; but she never thought of the 
crown which I gave the footman and coachman. If a lady wrote to 
me from Paris to the Hermitage or Montmorency, in order to spare 
me the four sous for postage, she sent the letter by one of her serv- 
ants, who made the journey on foot and arrived bathed in perspira- 
tion, and I had to give him a crown and a dinner, which he had cer- 
tainly well earned. If she invited me to stay a week or a fortnight at 
her country-house, she said to herself: Anyhow, it will be a saving 
for the poor fellow; he will not have to pay for his food while he is 
here. She forgot that, during that time, I did no work; that my rent, 
household expenses, washing, and clothes, still had to be paid for; 
that it cost me twice as much for my barber, and that it was more 


$ 


2 


PETTY EXPENSES OF VISITING 533 


expensive for me to live in her house than at home. Although I lim. 
ited my trifling gratuitigs to the houses in which I was in the habit 
of staying, they were none the less ruinous to me. I am convinced 
that it cost me more than twenty-five crowns at Madame d’Houde- 
tot’s house at Eaubonne, where I only slept four or five times, and 
more than a hundred pistoles at Epinay and La Chevrette, during 
the five or six years in which I was a constant visitor there. These 
expenses are unavoidable for a man of my disposition, who does not 
know how to do anything for himself or to set his wits to work 
upon anything, who cannot endure the sight of a lackey who grum- 
bles and performs his duties sulkily. Even at Madame Dupin’s, 
where I was one of the family, and where I rendered many services 
to the servants, I never received any from them unless I paid for 
them on the nail.1° Subsequently I was obliged altogether to discon- 
tinue these trifling gratuities, which my position no longer allowed 
me to give; and then it was that I felt even more keenly the disad- 
vantage of associating with persons in a different station of life to 
one’s own. 

Again, if this life had been to my taste, I should have felt con- 
soled for the heavy expenditure on my pleasures; but I could not en- 
dure to ruin myself, simply for the sake of becoming utterly wearied; 
and I had feit so strongly the burden of this manner of life, that, tak- 
ing advantage of the interval of freedom which I then enjoyed, I 
determined to make it lasting, to renounce fashionable and literary 
society altogether, to give up writing books, and to confine myself 
for the remainder of my days to the limited and peaceful sphere for 
which I felt that I was born. 

The profits of the “Letter to D’Alembert” and the “New Héloïse” 
had somewhat improved the state of my finances, which had been 
almost exhausted at the Hermitage. I saw about 1,000 crowns in 
prospect. “Emile,” to which I seriously began to devote my atten- 
tion after I had finished “Héloïse,” was well advanced, and I ex- 
pected that its profits would at least double that sum. I formed the 
resolution of investing this fund in such a manner as to bring me in 
a small annuity, which, together with my copying, would be suffi- 


10 4 la pointe de mon argent: lit., I never received any from them except at 
the point of—my money. 


534 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


cient to keep me without writing any more. I still had two works in 
hand. The first was my “Institutions politiques.” I examined the 
state of this work, and found that it would still require several years 
of labour. I had not the courage to continue it and to wait until it 
was finished, before carrying out my resolution. I accordingly aban- 
doned it, and decided to extract what was possible, and to burn the 
rest; and, pushing on this work vigorously, without discontinuing 
“Emile,” in less than two years I put the finishing touch to the “Con- 
trat Social.” 

There still remained the “Dictionnaire de Musique.” This was a 
purely mechanical work which could be taken up at any time, and 
which I had undertaken merely for the sake of the money. I reserved 
to myself the right of abandoning it, or finishing it at my leisure, 
according as my other combined resources might render it necessary 
or superfluous. In regard to the “Morale sensitive,” of which I had 
only made an outline, I abandoned it altogether. 

As my last intention, if I could dispense with copying altogether, 
was to remove to a distance from Paris, where the constant stream 
of visitors made it expensive for me to live, and deprived me of the 
time to make provision for myself, I kept in reserve, in order to pre- 
vent in my retirement the feeling of weariness which is said to come 
upon an author when he has laid down his pen, an occupation 
which might fill up the void in my solitude, without leading me 
into the temptation of publishing anything more during my life- 
time. I do not know what whim had prompted Rey, for a long time 
past, to urge me to write the Memoirs of my life. Although, as far 
as incidents were concerned, they were not at that time particularly 
interesting, I felt that they might be made so by the candour with 
which I was capable of treating the subject; and I was determined 
to make it a work unique of its kind, by an unexampled veracity, 
which, for once at least, would enable the outside world to behold a 
man as he really was in his inmost self. I had always ridiculed the 
false ingenuousness of Montaigne, who, while pretending to confess 
his defects, is most careful to attribute to himself only such as are 
amiable; whereas I, who have always believed, and still believe, my- 
self to be, all things considered, the best of men, felt that there is no 
human heart, however pure it may be, which does not conceal some 


- 7 


= 


DECIDES TO WRITE CONFESSIONS 535 


odious vice. I knew that L was representéd in the world under fea- 
tures so utterly different from my own, and sometimes so distorted, 
that, in spite of my defeets, none of which I had the least desire to 
conceal, I could not help being the gainer by showing myself in my 
true character. Besides, this was impossible without also showing 
others as they were, and consequently this work could not be pub- 
lished until after my own death and that of several others. This fur- 
ther emboldened me to write my Confessions, for which I shall 
never have to blush before anybody. I accordingly determined to de. 
vote my leisure to carrying out this undertaking, and I commenced 
to collect the letters and papers which might guide or assist my 
memory, greatly regretting all that I had torn up, burned, or lost, up 
to this time. 

This project of complete retirement, one of the most sensible thar 
I had ever formed, made a very strong impression on my mind, and 
I had already commenced to carry it out, when Heaven, which was 
preparing a different destiny for me, flung me into a fresh whirl of 
excitement. 

Montmorency, the ancient and splendid patrimony of the family 
of that name, has been confiscated, and no longer belongs to it. 
Through the sister of Duc Henri, it has passed to the house of 
Condé, which has changed the name of Montmorency to Enghien; 
and the Duchy has no other chateau except an old tower, in which 
the archives are kept, and where the vassals come to render homage. 
But at Montmorency, or Enghien, may be seen a private house, built 
by Croiset (called Je pauvre) which, equal in magnificence to the 
most superb chateau, deserves and bears the name of one. The im- 
posing aspect of this fine building, the terrace upon which it stands, 
the view from it, which is perhaps unequalled in the world, its spa- 
cious salon, painted by a master-hand, its garden, laid out by the 
celebrated Le Nostre—all this forms a whole, the striking majesty 
of which nevertheless presents a certain simplicity, which arouses a 
lasting admiration. M. le Maréchal, Duc de Luxembourg, who at 
that time occupied the house, came twice every year into the district 
where his forefathers had formerly been masters, to spend five or six 
weeks as an ordinary inhabitant, but in great style, which in no way 
fell short of the old magnificence of his house. The first time he 


536 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


visited it, after I had settled at Montmorency, M. and Madame la 
Maréchale sent their compliments to me by a footman, and an invi- 
tation to sup with them whenever I pleased. Each time that they 
came again, they never failed to repeat their compliments and invi- 
tation. This reminded me of Madame de Beuvenzal sending me to 
dine in the servants’ hall. Times were changed, but I was still the 
same. I had no desire to be sent to dine in the servants’ hall, and I 
cared but little for the tables of the great. I should have preferred 
that they had left me for what I was, without making much of or 
humiliating me. I replied to M. and Madame de Luxembourg’s ci- 
vilities politely and respectfully, but I did not accept their invita- 
tions. My ill-health, as much as a natural shyness and awkwardness 
in conversation, made me shudder at the mere idea of presenting 
myself before an assembly of Court grandees; and I did not even go 
to the chateau to pay a complimentary visit of thanks, although I 
understood well enough that this was what they wanted, and that 
all their eagerness was due to curiosity more than goodwill. 

Nevertheless, they continued to make advances, and even with 
greater persistency. Madame la Comtesse de Boufflers, who was very 
intimate with Madame la Maréchale, had come to Montmorency. 
She sent to inquire after me, and asked whether she might pay me 
a visit. I replied politely, but did not stir. During the Easter visit of 
the following year (1759), the Chevalier de Lorenzi, who belonged 
to the suite of M. le Prince de Conti, and to Madame de Luxem- 
bourg’s circle, came to visit me several times. We became ac- 
quainted; he pressed me to go to the chateau. I refused. At last, one 
afternoon, when I least expected it, I saw M. le Maréchal de Luxem- 
bourg approaching, attended by five or six persons. There no longer 
remained any means of escape; and I could not, without being con- 
sidered arrogant and ill-bred, avoid returning his visit, and paying 
my respects to Madame la Maréchale, on the part of whorn he over- 
whelmed me with polite messages. Thus commenced, under fatal 
auspices, a connection which I could no longer escape, but which a 
presentiment, only too well founded, made me dread, until I found 
myself committed to it. 

I was terribly afraid of Madame de Luxembourg. I knew that she 
was amiable. I had seen her several times at the theatre, and at 


MADAME DE LUXEMBOURG 537 


Madame Dupin’s ten or twelve years ago, when she was Duchesse 
de Boufflers, and was still in the first brilliancy of her beauty. But 
she had the reputation of being spiteful; and this, in so great a lady, 
made me tremble. No sooner did I see her than I was vanquished. I 
found her charming, with that charm which is proof against time, 
and is most calculated to act upon my heart. I expected to find her 
conversation sarcastic and full of epigrams. This was not the case; 
it was something far better. Her conversation does not sparkle with 
wit; it exhibits no flights of fancy, or even, properly speaking, 
finesse; but it is marked by an exquisite refinement, which is never 
striking, but is always pleasing. Her flatteries are the more intoxi- 
cating in proportion to their simplicity; it seems as if they fall from 
her lips without thinking, and are the overflowings of a heart which 
is too full. I fancied that I perceived, at my first visit, that, in spite 
of my awkward manner and clumsy phrases, she found my society 
agreeable. All Court ladies know how to produce this impression 
whenever they please, whether it be true or not; but all do not know, 
as Madame de Luxembourg did, how to produce it in so charming 
a manner, that one no longer thinks of doubting it. From the first 
day, my confidence in her would have been as complete as it soon 
afterwards became had not Madame la Duchesse de Montmorency, 
her daughter-in-law, a somewhat spiteful, and, as I believe, quarrel- 
some young fool, taken it into her head to attack me, and, in the 
midst of all her mamma’s civilities and her own coquetries, made 
me suspect that they were only laughing at me. 

I should, perhaps, have found it difficult to make myself easy in 
regard to this apprehension in the case of the two ladies, had not the 
very great kindness of M. le Maréchal convinced me that theirs also 
was genuine. Considering my timid disposition, nothing is more 
surprising than the readiness with which I took him at his word as 
to the footing of equality on which he wanted to put himself with 
me, except perhaps the equal readiness with which he himself took 
my word as to the complete independence in which I wanted to live. 
Convinced that I was right to be satisfied with my position and not 
to desire any change in it, neither he nor Madame de Luxembourg 
appeared for a moment to trouble themselves about my purse or my 
means. Although I could not doubt the warm interest which they 


538 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


both took in me, they never offered to find me a place or to assist me 
with their influence, except once, when Madame de Luxembourg 
seemed desirous that I should enter the Académie Française. I raised 
the objection of my religious faith; she said that that was no obstacle, 
or that, if it was one, she would undertake to remove it. I replied 
that, in spite of the great honour I should consider it, to be a member 
of so illustrious a body, as I had refused the invitation of M. de 
Tressan, and, in a manner, of the King of Poland, to enter the 
Académie of Nancy, I could not with propriety become a member 
of any other. Madame de Luxembourg did not press the matter fur- 
ther, and nothing more was said about it. The simplicity of inter- 
course with such great people, who could have done anything for 
me, since M. de Luxembourg was, and deserved to be, the special 
friend of the King, is in singular contrast with the continual fussi- 
ness, as troublesome as it was officious, of the patronising friends I 
had just left, and whose object was rather to humiliate than to serve 
me. 
When M. le Maréchal had visited me at Mont-Louis, I had re- 
ceived hiin and his suite in my own room with a feeling of embar- 
rassment; not because I was obliged to ask him to sit down in the 
middle of my dirty plates and broken jugs, but because my floor 
was rotten and falling to pieces, and I was afraid that the weight of 
his suite might make it give way altogether. Thinking less of my 
own danger than of that to which this worthy gentleman’s affabil- 
ity exposed him, I hastened to get him out of it, by taking him, in 
spite of the weather, which was still very cold, to my tower, which 
was completely exposed and had no fireplace. When we were there, 
I told him the reason why I had brought him; he repeated it to 
Madame la Maréchale, and both pressed me to stay at the chateau 
until the floor had been repaired; or, if I preferred, at a detached 
building in the middle of the park, which was called the “little châ- 
teau.” This enchanted abode deserves special mention. 

The park or garden of Montmorency is not on a level, like that of 
La Chevrette. It is uneven, hilly, with alternate elevations and de- 
presstons, which the clever artist has taken advantage of to give va- 
riety to the groves, waters, decorations, and different views, and to 
multiply, so to speak, with the aid of genius and art, a space which 


2 KOE AN. | 
RESIDENT AT THE CHATEAU 539 


in itself is somewhat confined. This park is crowned at the top by 
the terrace and the chateau; at the bottom, it forms a ravine, which 
opens and widens in the direction of the valley, the angle of which is 
filled by a large sheet of@water. Between the orangery, which occu- 
pies this enlarged space, and this sheet of water surrounded by ele- 
vations adorned with groves and trees, is the little chateau of which 
I have spoken. This building and the ground which surrounds it 
formerly belonged to the celebrated Le Brun, who amused him- 
self with building and ornamenting it with the exquisite taste in 
architecture and decoration which this great painter had made his 
own. Since then, this chateau has been rebuilt, but after its first 
owner’s designs. It is small, simple, but elegant. As it lies between 
the basin of the orangery and the large sheet of water, and is conse- 
quently exposed to the damp, it has been pierced in the middle by 
an open peristyle between two rows of columns, so that the air, blow- 
ing through the whole building, keeps it dry, notwithstanding its 
situation. On looking at this building from the opposite height in 
perspective, it appears completely surrounded by water, like an en- 
chanted island, or the most beautiful of the three Borromean Is- 
lands, Isola Bella, in Lago Maggiore. 

In this solitary building, I was offered the choice of one of the 
four complete apartments which it contains, in addition to the 
ground floor, which consists of a ball-room, a billiard-room, and a 
kitchen. I chose the smallest and simplest, above the kitchen, which 
I had as well. It was delightfully neat, with furniture in blue and 
white, In this profound and delightful solitude, in the midst of 
woods and waters, to the accompaniment of the songs of birds of 
every kind, surrounded by the perfumes of orange blossoms, I com- 
posed, in a continued state of ecstasy, the fifth book of “Emile,” the 
fresh colouring of which is in great part due to the lively impression | 
of the locality in which I wrote. 

How eagerly I ran every morning at sunrise to breathe the per- 
fumed air of the peristyle! What delicious café au lait I took there 
with my Thérése! My cat and dog kept us company. This retinue 
alone would have been enough for my whole life; F should never 


12 A celebrated French painter (1619-1690). 


540 THE CONFBSSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


have experienced a moment’s weariness. I was in an earthly para- 
dise; I lived there in the same state of innocence, and enjoyed the 
same happiness. ` 

During their July visit, M. and Madame de Luxembourg showed 
me so many attentions, and treated me with-such kindness, that, liv- 
ing in their house and overwhelmed by their civilities, I could not 
do less than repay it by visiting them frequently. I hardly left them 
at all: in the morning, I went to pay my respects to Madame la 
Maréchale; after dining there, I took a walk in the afternoon with 
M. le Maréchal; but I did not stay to supper, at which a number of 
great persons were always present; besides, they supped too late for 
me. Up to this time, all went on without a hitch, and no harm 
would have resulted, if I had known how to leave things alone. But 
l have never been able to preserve a mean in my friendships, and 
simply to fulfil the duties of society. I have always been everything 
or nothing. Soon I was everything: and finding myself made much 
of and spoiled by people of such importance, I overstepped the 
proper limits, and conceived for them a friendship, which it is only 
allowable to feel towards one’s equals. I showed it by the familiarity 
which I assumed in my manners, while they, on their part, never 
abandoned the politeness to which they had accustomed me. Yet I 
never felt quite at my ease with Madame la Maréchale. Although 
not completely reassured as to her character, I feared it less than her 
wit, of which I particularly stood in awe. I knew that she was diffi- 
cult to satisfy in conversation, and that she had the right to be so. I 
knew that women, especially great ladies, must be amused, and that 
it is better to offend them than to bore them; and I judged, from her 
remarks upon the conversation of the people who had just taken 
leave of her, what she must have thought of my silly nonsense. I 
thought of an expedient to save myself from the embarrassment of 
talking to her: this was, to read to her. She had heard “Julie” spoken 
of; she knew that it was being printed; she showed an eagerness to 
see the work; I offered to read it to her, and she consented. I went to 
her every morning at ten o'clock: M. de Luxembourg came, and the 
door was shut. I read by the side of her bed, and portioned out my 
readings so well, that they would have lasted throughout her stay, 


MME. DE LUXEMBOURG’S LETTER 541 


even if it had not been ipterrupted.!* The success of this expedient 
surpassed my expectations. Madame de Luxembourg took a violent 
fancy to “Julie” and its author; she spoke of nothing but me, 
thought of nothing but me, flattered me the whole of the day, and | 
embraced me ten times a day. She insisted that I should always sit 
by her at table, and when any great noblemen wanted to take this 
place, she told them that it belonged to me, and made them sit some- 
where else. It is easy to imagine the impression which these charm- 
ing manners produced upon me, who am subjugated by the slight- 
est marks of affection. J became sincerely attached to her, in propor- 
tion to the attachment which she showed for me. My only fear, when 
I perceived this infatuation, was that, as I felt I was not sufficiently 
agreeable to keep it alive, it might change to disgust, and, unfor- 
tunately for me, this fear was only too well founded. 

There must have been a natural opposition between her turn of 
mind and my own, since, independently of the many stupid and in- 
judicious remarks which every moment escapedeme in the course of 
conversation, and even in my letters, and when I was on the best of 
terms with her, there were certain things which displeased her, 
without my being able to imagine the reason. I will only mention 
one instance out of twenty. She knew that I was making a copy of 
“Héloïse” for Madame d’Houdetot, at so much a page; she wanted 
me to make one for her on the same terms. I promised to do so; and, 
consequently, entering her name as one of my customers, I wrote her 
a few lines of polite thanks, or, at least, I had intended them as such. 
I received the following answer, which utterly astonished me 
(Packet C, No. 43): 


“VERSAILLES, Tuesday. 


“T am delighted, I am satisfied; your letter has given me infinite 
pleasure; I hasten to inform you and to thank you for it. 

“Here are the exact words of your letter: “Although you are 
certainly a very good customer, I feel some difficulty about taking 
your money; properly speaking, I ought to pay for the pleasure of 


12 The loss of a great battle, which greatly afflicted the King, obliged M. de 
Luxembourg to return suddenly to Court. 


542 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


being permitted to work for you.’ I will not mention the subject 
again. I regret that you do not tell me more about the state of your 
health. Nothing ‘interests me more. I love you with all my heart; 
and, I assure you, it is with great sorrow that I write this to you for 
it would be a great pleasure to me to tell it to you by word of mouth. 
M. de Luxembourg loves you and embraces you in all sincerity.” 


On receiving this letter, I hastened to reply to it before examining 
it more fully, in order to protest against any impolite interpretation; 
and, after having devoted several days to this examination with a 
feeling of uneasiness which may be imagined, without being able to 
understand what was the matter, I wrote the following note as a 
final answer on the subject: 


Montmorency, December 8th, 1759. 


“Since writing my letter, I have examined the passage in question 
hundreds and hundreds of times. I have considered it in its own 
natural meaning, I have considered it in every meaning that could 
be put upon it, and I confess, Madame la Maréchale, that I am at a 
loss to know whether it is I who owe you excuses or whether it is 
not rather yourself who owe them to me.” 


It is now ten years since these letters were written. I have often 
thought of them since then: and, even to this day, I am so stupid on 
this point, that I have not been able to understand what she could 
find in the passage in question that was, I will not say offensive, but 
even calculated to cause her displeasure. 

In reference to this manuscript of “Héloïse,” which Madame de 
Luxembourg wanted to have, I ought to mention here what I had 
intended to do, in order to give it some special distinction above all 
the rest. I had written the adventures of Lord Edward separately, 
and I had long been undecided whether I should insert them, either 
wholly or in extracts, in this work, in which they seemed to me to 
be out of place. I finally decided to cut them out altogether, because, 
not being in keeping with the tone of the remainder, they would 
have spoiled its touching simplicity. I had a weightier reason, when 
I made the acquaintance of Madame de Luxembourg. In these ad- 


A FOOLISH GIFT 543 


ventures there was a Roman Marchioness of very odious character, 
some features of which, Without being applicable to her, might per- 
haps have been applied to her by those who only knew her by repu- 
tation. I therefore congratulated myself upon the resolution I had 
taken, and determined to keep to it. But, being extremely desirous - 
of enriching her copy with something which was not contained in 
any others, I was misguided enough to think of these unfortunate 
adventures, and I formed the plan of making a selection of them and 
Adding it to the work—a mad project, the extravagance of which 
can only be explained by the blind fatality which was dragging me 
to my destruction. Quos vult perdere Jupiter dementat. 

I was foolish enough to make this extract with great care and la- 
bour, and to send it to her as if it had been the most beautiful thing 
in the world, at the same time informing her, as was true, that I had 
burnt the original, that the extract was intended for her alone, and 
would never be seen by anybody, unless she herself showed it; and 
this action on my part, far from proving to her my prudence and dis- 
cretion, as I expected, only gave her an idea of the opinion which ] 
myself held as to the application of the features of the work, by 
which she might have felt offended. My imbecility was so great, that 
I entertained no doubt that she would be enchanted by what I had 
done. She did not compliment me upon it as heartily as I expected, 
and, to my very great surprise, never spoke-to me of the manuscript 
which I had sent her. I myself, delighted with my conduct in the 
matter, did not suspect till long afterwards, in consequence of other 
indications, the effect which it had produced. 

In regard to her manuscript, I had another idea, which was more 
sensible, but which, in its remoter effects, was almost equally preju- 
dicial to me. So greatly does everything assist the work of destiny, 
when it summons a man to misfortune. I thought of ornamenting 
this manuscript with the drawings of the engravings of “Julie,” 
which were of the same size as the manuscript. I asked Coindet for 
the drawings, to which I had every possible claim, the more so as I 
had allowed him the profits of the plates, which had a large sale. 
Coindet is as cunning as I am the reverse. My repeated requests for 
them at last made him understand for what purpose I wanted them, 
Then, under pretence of improving them, he induced me to leave 


544 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


them with him, and finally presented them himself. Ego versiculos 
feci: tulit alter honores. 

This introduced him to the Hôtel de Luxembourg and gave him 
a certain footing in it. After my removal to the little château, he fre- 
quently came to see me, and always in the morning, especially when 
M. and Madame de Luxembourg were at Montmorency. The con- 
sequence was that, in order to spend the day with him, I did not go 
to the chateau at all. I was reproached for these absences; I explained 
the reason. I was pressed to take M. Coindet with me; I did so. This. 
was just what the rascal had been scheming for. Thus, thanks to the 
extraordinary kindness with which I was treated, M. Thélusson’s 
clerk, who was sometimes invited to dine with his master when there 
were no other guests, suddenly found himself admitted to the table 
of a Marshal of France, and the company of Princes, Duchesses, and 
the highest personages of the Court. I shall never forget that, one 
day, when he was obliged to return to Paris early, M. le Maréchal 
said to the company after dinner, “Let us walk along the road to 
Saint-Denis, then we can give M. Coindet our company.” The poor 
fellow could not stand it: he lost his head completely. As for me, I 
felt so affected that I could not utter a word. I followed behind, 
weeping like a child, and longing to kiss the footprints of this good 
Maréchal. But the continuation of the history of this manuscript has 
made me anticipate events. Let me now take them up in their proper 
order, as far as my memory will allow me. 

As soon as the little house at Mont-Louis was ready, I furnished 
it neatly and simply, and returned there to live, being unable to re- 
nounce the determination to which I had come when I left the 
Hermitage, namely, always to live in a place of my own: but neither 
could I make up my mind to give up my apartment in the little 
chateau. I kept the key of it, and in my fondness for the nice little 
breakfasts in the peristyle, I often slept there, and sometimes spent 
two or three days, as if it had been my country-house. I perhaps had 
more comfortable and agreeable apartments at that time than any 
private individual in Europe. My landlord, M. Mathas, who was the 
best fellow in the world, had left me the complete control of the 
repairs at Mont-Louis, and insisted that I should make use of his 
workmen as I pleased, without any interference on his part. I found 


- E i 


MONT-LOUIS 545 


means to make a complete suite of apartments out of a single room 
on the first floor, consisting of a bedroom, an antechamber, and a 
wardrobe. On the groune floor were the kitchen and Thérése’s room. 
The turret served as a study, after a glazed partition and a fire-place 
had been added. When I was there, I amused myself with decorating 
the terrace, which was already shaded by two rows of young lime-. 
trees; I planted two more rows, in order to make a regular arbour; 
I had a table and some stone benches put there; I surrounded it with 
lilac, syringa and honeysuckle; I had a pretty border of flowers laid 
out, parallel to the two rows of trees; and this terrace, which was 
higher than that of the chateau, from which the view was at least 
as fine, and which was inhabitated by a number of birds which I had 
tamed, served me as a kind of reception room, when J had company, 
such as M. and Madame de Luxembourg, M. le Duc de Villeroy, M. 
le Prince de Tingry, M. le Marquis de Armentiéres, Madame la 
Duchesse de Montmorency, Madame la Duchesse de Boufflers, Ma- 
dame:la Comtesse de Valentinois, Madame la Comtesse de Boufflers, 
and other persons of similar rank, who condescended to undertake, 
by a very fatiguing climb, the pilgrimage from the chateau to Mont- 
Louis. I owed the compliment of all these visits to M. and Madame 
de Luxembourg: I was sensible of this, and my heart rendered them 
the homage of gratitude. It was in one of my transports of emotion 
that I said to M. de Luxembourg, “Ah! M. le Maréchal, I used to hate 
the great before I knew you; and I hate them still more, since you 
have made me feel how easy it would be for them to make them- 
selves adored.” More than this, I put the question to all those who 
knew me during this period, whether they have ever observed that 
this brilliancy has dazzled me for a single moment, that the fumes 
of this incense have mounted to my head; whether they have seen me 
less uniform in my conduct, less simple in my manners, less affable 
towards the people, less familiar with my neighbours, less ready to 
assist everyone when I have had the power, without ever being of- 
fended by the numberless and frequently unreasonable importuni- 
ties, with which I was incessantly overwhelmed. If my heart drew 
me towards the chateau of Montmorency, owing to my sincere at- 
tachment for its owners, it brought me back in the same manner to 
my own neighbourhood, to taste the sweets of that even and simple 


546 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


life, outside which there is no happiness for me. Thérése had formed 
a friendship with the daughter of one of my neighbours, a brick- 
layer, named Pilleu: I did the same with the father, and, after having 
lunched at the chateau in the morning, not without some unwilling- 
ness, in order to please Madame la Maréchale, I eagerly returned in 
the evening to sup with the worthy Pilleu and his family, sometimes 
at his house, sometimes at mine. 

Besides these two lodgings, I soon had a third at the Hôtel de 
Luxembourg, the owners of which pressed me so earnestly to go and 
see them sometimes, that I agreed, in spite of my aversion to Paris, 
where I had only been on the two occasions I have mentioned, after 
my retirement to the Hermitage; even then I only went on days 
that had been agreed upon beforehand, simply to supper, and re- 
turned the following morning. I entered and left by the garden ad- 
joining the boulevard; so that I was enabled to say, with strict truth, 
that I had never set foot upon the pavement of Paris. 

In the midst of this temporary prosperity, the catastrophe which 
was to mark the end of it was preparing in the distance. Shortly after 
my return to Mont-Louis, I made, in spite of myself as usual, a new 
acquaintance, which also marks an epoch in my history: whether 
for good or evil, will be afterwards seen. I refer to my neighbour, 
the Marquise de Verdelin, whose husband had just bought a coun- 
try-house at Soisy, near Montmorency. Mademoiselle d’Ars, daugh- 
ter of the Comte d’Ars, a man of position but poor, had married 
M. de Verdelin, old, ugly, deaf, harsh, brutal, jealous, covered with 
sears, and one-eyed; in other respects a good sort of fellow, when one 
knew how to take him, and possessed of an income of 15,000 to 
20,000 livres, to which his wife’s parents married her. This paragon 
of amiability, who swore, shouted, grumbled, stormed, and made 
his wife cry all day long, always ended by doing what she wanted, 
with the idea of putting her in a rage, seeing that she knew how to 
make him believe that it was he, and not she, who wanted it done. 
M. de Margency, of whom I have spoken, was Madame’s friend, and 
became her husband’s. Some years ago he had let to them his chateau 
of Margency, near Eaubonne and Ardilly, where they were living 
just at the time of my amour with Madame d’Houdetot. Madame de 
Verdelin and the latter had made each other’s acquaintance through 


= 


MADAME DE VERDELIN 547 


their mutual friend, Madame d’Aubeterre; and as the garden of 
Margency was on the road which Madame d’Houdetot had to take 
to get to Mont-Olympe,“her favourite walk, Madame de Verdelin 
gave her a key, that she might go through the garden. Thanks to 
this key, I often went with her; but I was not fond of unexpected 
meetings; and when Madame de Verdelin happened to‘meet us, I- 
left them together without saying a word, and walked on. This un- 
gallant behaviour on my part could not have given her a very 
favourable impression of me. However, when she was at Soisy, she 
nevertheless sought my society. She came to see me several times at 
Mont-Louis, without finding me at home; and as I did not return 
her visit, she bethought herself of sending me some pots of flowers 
for my terrace, in order to force me to do so. I was obliged to go and 
thank her; that was enough; the acquaintance was made. 

This connection was stormy at first, like all those which I made 
in spite of myself. It was never even really peaceful; Madame de 
Verdelin’s turn of mind was too antipathetic to my own. She utters 
spiteful and epigrammatic remarks with such an air of simplicity, 
that it requires the closest attention, which is very fatiguing to me, 
to know when she is laughing at anybody. One instance of her silli- 
ness which I remember will be enough to give an idea of her man- 
ner. Her brother had just been appointed to the command of a frig- 
ate which was starting on a cruise against the English. I was speak- 
ing of the manner in which this frigate had was armed, without 
any injury to its speed. “Yes,” said she, without changing her tone, 
“only as many cannon are taken as are wanted for fighting.” I have 
_ rarely heard her say anything good of any of her absent friends with- 
out slipping in something against them. What she did not put a bad 
construction upon she turned into ridicule; her friend Margency was 
not excepted. Another thing which I found unendurable was the 
continual nuisance of her little messages, presents, and notes, which 
I was obliged to rack my brains to know how to answer, and which 
were always a source of fresh embarrassment, whether I had to write 
a letter of thanks or a refusal. However, from continually seeing her, 
I at last became attached to her. She, like myself, had her sorrows; 
our mutual confidences made our #éte-d-tétes interesting. Nothing 
unites hearts so much as the pleasure of shedding tears together. We 


548 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


sought each other’s society in order to console ourselves, and the 
need for this made me overlook much. I had shown such roughness 
in my outspokenness to her, and had sometimes shown so little re- 
spect for her character, that I really must have felt a great deal, to 
believe that she could sincerely pardon me. The following is a sample 
of the letters which I sometimes wrote to her, in regard to which it 
is worthy of notice that she never, in any of her answers, showed the 
least sign of annoyance: 


Montmorency, November 5th, 1760. 


“You inform me, madame, that you have not expressed yourself 
very well, in order to give me to understand that I have expressed 
myself very badly. You speak of your pretended stupidity, in order 
to make me sensible of my own. You boast of being nothing n more 
than a ‘good woman,’ as if you were afraid of being taken at your 
word, and you make excuses to me in order to make me feel that I 
owe you some in return. Yes, madame, I know it well; it is I who 
am a fool, a ‘good man, and worse still, if it is possible. It is I who 
do not choose my terms sufficiently well to please a fine French lady, 
who pays as much attention to phrases and speaks as well as you do. 
But you must consider that I take them in the ordinary meaning of 
the language, without being familiar with the polite acceptations 
which are sometimes attached to them in the virtuous society of 
Paris. If my expressions are sometimes ambiguous, I endeavour, by 
my conduct, to give them a definite meaning,” etc. 


The remainder of the letter is after the same style. Her answer 
(Packet D, No. 41) will give an idea of the incredible self-restraint 
of a woman’s heart, who can feel no greater resentment against such 
a letter than is shown in her reply, and than she herself has exhibited 
towards me. Coindet, bold and daring to the verge of effrontery, 
who was ever lying in wait for my friends, was not slow to introduce 
himself at Madame de Verdelin’s in my name, and soon became, un- 
known to me, more intimate there than myself. This Coindet was a 
queer fellow, He introduced himself from me to all my acquaint- 
ances, made himself at home, and took his meals with them without 
ceremony. In his devoted zeal for me, he never spoke of me except 
w'th tears in his eyes; but, when he came to see me, he preserved 


&gt; Thai =n 


EXCHANGE “OF PORTRAITS 549 


the most profound silence about all these connections, and every- 
thing in which he knew I must feel interested. Instead of telling me 
what he had heard, said, or seen, which was of interest to me, he 
listened to me, and even asked me questions. He never knew any- 
thing about Paris except what I told him; in short, although every- 
one spoke to me of him, he never spoke to me of anybody. He was 
only close and mysterious with his friend. But let us leave Coindet 
and Madame de Verdelin for the present; we will return to them 
later. 

Some time after my return to Mont-Louis, Latour, the painter, 
came to see me, and brought me my portrait in pastil, which he had 
exhibited some years before at the Salon. He had wanted to make 
me a present of it, but I had refused it. Madame d’Epinay, who had 
given me hers and wanted mine, had made me promise to ask him 
for it back. He had taken some time to touch it up. In the meantime, 
my rupture with Madame d’Epinay occurred. I gave her back her 
portrait, and, as I could no longer think of giving her mine, I hung 
it up in my room in the little chateau. M. de Luxembourg saw it 
there, and took a fancy to it. I offered it to him; he accepted it, and 
I sent it to him. He and Madame la Maréchale understood that I 
should be very pleased to have theirs. They had them taken in 
miniature by a very clever artist, and set in a sweetmeat-box of rock- 
crystal, mounted in gold, which they presented to me in a most hand- 
some manner, with which I was delighted. Madame de Luxem- 
bourg would never consent that her portrait should be on the upper 
part of the box. She had several times reproached me with being 
fonder of the Marshal than of herself; and I had not denied it, be- 
cause it was true. She proved to me very politely, but at the same 
time very cleverly, by this manner of placing her portrait, that she 
did not forget my preference. 

About the same time, I was guilty of an act of folly which did 
not help to keep me in her good graces. Although I had no acquaint- 
ance with M. de Silhouette,!? and was little inclined to like him, I 
had a great opinion of his administrative powers. When he began to 
lay a heavy hand upon the financiers, I saw that he was not com- 
mencing the operation at a favourable moment. Nevertheless, I 


38 Controller-general of Finance in 1757. 


550 FHE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


wished him all success; and, when I heard that he had been removed 
from office, I was so thoughtless as to write the following letter to 
him, which assuredly I do not attempt to justify: 


Monrmorency, December 2nd, 1759. 


“Condescend, sir, to accept the homage of a recluse who is un- 
known to you, but who esteems you for your talents, who respects 
you for your administration, and who has done you the honour of 
believing that it would not long remain in your hands. Unable to 
save the State, except at the expense of the capital which has de- 
stroyed it, you have dared to brave the outcries of the money- 
grubbers. When I saw how you crushed these wretches, I envied you 
your office. Now that I see how you have abandoned it without 
belying yourself, I admire you. Be satisfied with yourself, sir; you 
take with you from it an honour which you will long enjoy without 
a rival. The execrations of rascals are the glory of an upright man.” 


[1760.]—Madame de Luxembourg, who knew that I had written 
this letter, spoke to me about it when she came out at Easter; I 
showed it to her; she wished for a copy, and I gave her one; but I 
did not know, when I did so, that she herself was one of those 
money-grubbers who had an interest in sub-leases and had caused 
the removal of Silhouette. To judge from my numerous follies, it 
seemed as if I purposely wanted to arouse the hatred of an amiable 
and influential woman, to whom I was becoming more sincerely at- 
tached every day, and whose displeasure I was far from wishing to 
bring upon myself, although by my repeated acts of stupidity, I was 
doing everything that was wanted to produce such a result. I think 
it is hardly necessary to mention that it is to her that the story of M. 
Tronchin’s opiate, of which I have spoken in the first part of my 
Confessions, refers; the other lady was Madame de Mirepoix. Nei- 
ther of them has ever mentioned it to me again, or appeared to have 
the slightest recollection of it; but I find it difficult, even if one did 
not know anything of subsequent events, to assume that Madame 
de Luxembourg can have really forgotten it. For my own part, I 
tried to reassure myself as to the effect of my follies by the evidence 
which I produced to myself, that none of them had been committed 


- ah eg a 


LETTER TO MME. DE LUXEMBOURG 551 


with the intention of offending her; as if a woman could ever pardon 
such follies, even though she is perfectly certain that they were not 
the result of deliberate igtention. 

However, although she seemed to see and feel nothing, although 
I found no abatement in her warmth, and no alteration in her man- 
ner towards me, a continually growing presentiment, which was 
only too well founded, made me tremble incessantly, for fear her 
infatuation for me might be succeeded by disgust. Could I expect, 
on the part of so great a lady, a constancy which would be proof 
against my lack of address to support it? I did not even know how 
to conceal from her this dim presentiment, which disquieted me 
and only made me more sullen and awkward. This may be seen 
from the following letter, which contains a very singular prediction. 

N.B.—This letter, which is undated in my rough copy, was 
written in October, 1760, at the latest. 


“How cruel your kindness is! Why disturb the tranquillity of a 
recluse, who renounced the pleasures of life, in order to feel the 
weariness of them no longer? I have spent my life in the vain endeav- 
our to find lasting attachments: I have been unable to form any in 
the ranks which were accessible to me. Am I to look for them in 
yours? Neither interest nor ambition has any temptations for me; 
I have little vanity: I am rather timid; I can resist everything except 
affection. Why do you both attack me in a weakness which I must 
overcome, since, considering the distance which separates us, the 
overflowings of tender hearts cannot bring mine near to you. Will 
gratitude be sufficient for a heart which knows not two ways of 
bestowing itself and only feels capable of friendship? Friendship, 
Madame la Maréchale! Ah! therein lies my misfortune. It is very 
handsome of you and Monsieur le Maréchal to use this term; but I 
‘am a fool to take you at your word. You are amusing yourselves: I 
am forming an attachment to you, and the end of the game has 
fresh sorrows in store for me! How I hate all your titles, and how I 
pity you for having them! You seem to me so worthy to taste the 
charms of private life. Why do you not live at Clarens? I would go 
there in search of the happiness of my life; but—the chateau of 
Montmorency, the Hôtel de Luxembourg! Is that where one ought to 
see Jean Jacques? Is that where a friend of equality, who, in thus pay- 
ing for the esteem which is shown for him, believes that he is re- 


552 n THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


turning as much as he receives, ought to carry the affections of 2 
tender heart? You are good, and also feeling: I know it: I have seen 
it. I regret that I have not been able to believe it sooner; but, con- 
sidering the position which you hold, and the manner in which you 
live, nothing can make a lasting impression upon you; and so many 
new interests efface each other, that not one is permanent. You will 
forget me, madame, after you have made it impossible for me to 
imitate you. You will have done much to make me unhappy and 
unable to justify myself.” 


I coupled M. de Luxembourg’s name with hers, in order to make 
the compliment less harsh for her; besides, I was so sure of him, 
that I had never for a moment felt any anxiety as to the duration of 
his friendship. None of my apprehensions in regard to his wife ever 
extended to him. I have never felt the least mistrust of his character, 
which I knew was weak, but trustworthy. I had no more fear of a 
coldness on his part than expectation of a heroic attachment. The 
simplicity and familiarity of our intercourse showed how each of 
us depended upon the other. We were both right: as long as I live 
I shall honour and cherish the memory of this worthy gentleman; 
and, whatever attempts may have been made to part him from me, 
I am as certain that he died my friend, as if I had received his last 
sigh. 

During their second stay at Montmorency, in 1760, having come 
to the end of “Julie,” I had recourse to “Émile,” in order to keep 
in with Madame de Luxembourg; but this did not prove so success- 
ful, either because the subject was less to her taste, or because she 
was at last tired of so much reading. However, as she reproached 
me with allowing myself to be cheated by my publishers, she wanted 
me to leave the printing and publication of it to her, that she might 
make a better bargain. I accepted her proposal, expressly stipulating 
that the work should not be printed in France. We had a long dis- 
pute upon this point: I maintained that it was impossible to obtain, 
and even imprudent to ask for tacit permission, and I would not 
hear of its being printed in the kingdom on any other terms; while 
she insisted that there would not be the least difficulty about the 
censorship, under the system which had been adopted by the Govern- 
ment. She found the means of bringing M. de Malesherbes over to 


7 Ca 


MADEMOISELEE DE BOUFFLERS 553 


her views; he wrote me a long letter himself, in order to prove that 
the Profession de foi du vicaire savoyard was just the kind of thing 
to meet with the approval of the human race everywhere, and, under 
the circumstances, even f the Court. I was surprised to find this 
official, who was as a rule so timid, so easy-going in this matter. As 
his mere approval was enough to legalise the printing of a book, I 
could make no further objection. However, in consequence of a 
singular scruple, I still insisted that the work should be printed in 
Holland, and by Néaulme, whom, not satisfied with mentioning 
him, I apprised of my intention. I agreed that the profits of the 
edition should go toa French publisher, and that, when it was ready, 
it should be sold in Paris or anywhere else, since the sale did not 
concern me. These were the exact terms of the agreement made by 
Madame de Luxembourg and myself, after which I handed over the 
manuscript to her. 

She had brought with her on this occasion her grand-daughter, 
Mademoiselle de Boufflers, now Madame la Duchesse de Lauzun. 
Her name was Amélie. She was a charming person. Her face, gen- 
tleness, and timidity were truly maidenly. Nothing could have been 
more amiable or more interesting than her features, nothing tenderer 
or more chaste than the feelings which they inspired. Besides, she 
was a mere child, not yet eleven years of age. Madame la Maréchale, 
finding her too shy, did her best to rouse her. She several times al- 
lowed me to kiss her, which I did with my usual awkwardness. In- 
stead of the pretty things which anyone else in my place would have 
said, I stood mute and utterly confused. I do not know which of us 
was the more bashful, the poor little one or myself. One day I met 
her alone on the staircase of the little chateau; she was coming to 
see Thérése, with whom her governess still was. Not knowing what 
to say to her, I asked her to give me a kiss, which, in the innocence 
of her heart, she did not refuse, as she had already given me one that 
very morning, by her grandmamma’s orders, and in her presence. 
The next day, while reading “Emile” at Madame la Maréchale’s 
bedside, I came upon a passage, in which I have justly censured the 
very thing that I had myself done the day before. She found the 
observation very just, and made some sensible remark upon it, which 
caused me to blush. How I curse my incredible stupidity, which has 


554 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


often caused me to appear vile and guilty, when I have only been 
foolish and embarrassed—a foolishness which is regarded as only 
a false excuse in the case of a man who is known to be not wanting 
in intelligence! I can swear that in this kiss, which was so blamable, 
as in all the rest; Mademoiselle Amélie’s heart and feelings were no 
purer than my own. I can even swear that, if at that moment I could 
have avoided meeting her, I would have done so; for, although I was 
very pleased to see her, I was greatly at a loss to find something 
agreeable to say to her in passing. How is it that a child can intimi- 
date a man whom the power of kings fails to alarm? What is a man 
to do? How is he to behave, if he is utterly destitute of presence of 
mind? If I force myself to speak to people whom I meet, I infallibly 
utter some foolish remark; if I say nothing, then I am a misanthrope, 
a wild animal, a bear. Complete imbecility would have been far more 
favourable to me; but the talents which I lacked in society have made 
those which I possessed the instruments of my ruin. 

At the end of her stay on this occasion, Madame de Luxembourg 
carried out a good work, in which I had some share. Diderot had 
very rashly offended Madame la Princesse de Robeck, a daughter 
of M. de Luxembourg. Her protégé Palissot avenged her by the 
comedy of the Philosophes, in which I was held up to ridicule, and 
Diderot was very severely handled. The author was more merciful 
to me, not so much, I believe, on account of the obligations under 
which he was to me, as for fear of displeasing his patroness’s father, 
who he knew entertained an affection for me. Duchesne, the book- 
seller, with whom I was not acquainted at the time, sent me the 
piece when it was printed, I suspect by Palissot’s instructions, who 
perhaps thought that I should be glad to see a man pulled to pieces, 
with whom I had broken off relations. He was greatly mistaken. 
When I broke with Diderot, whom I believed to be weak and indis- 
creet rather than absolutely wicked, I still preserved in my heart a 
feeling of attachment, even of esteem, for him, and of respect for 
our old friendship, which I am convinced was for a long time as 
sincere on his part as on my own. The case is quite different with 
Grimm, a man whose character is false, who never loved me, who 
is not even capable of loving, and who, with a light heart, without 
any reason for complaint, simply in order to satisfy his spiteful 


7 


ABBÉ MORELLET IMPRISONED 555 


jealousy, has secretly become my bitterest calumniator. He is no 
longer anything to me. Diderot will always be my old friend. My 
tenderest feelings were moved at the sight of this hateful piece; 1 
could not bear to read if and, without finishing it, I sent it back te 
Duchesne, together with the following letter: 


Montmorency, May 2rst, 1760. 


“Sir,—On looking through the piece which you have sent me, I 
have shuddered at finding myself praised. I refuse to accept this 
horrible present. I am convinced that, in sending it to me, you did 
not intend to insult me; but you either do not know, or you have 
forgotten, that I have had the honour of being the friend of a man 
deserving of respect, who is unworthily traduced and calumniated 
in this libellous production.” 


Duchesne handed this letter round. Diderot, who ought to have 
been touched by it, was annoyed. His amour-propre could not par- 
don me the superiority of a generous action, and I heard that his 
wife attacked me on every possible occasion, with a rage which af- 
fected me but little, since I knew that everybody looked upon her 
as a regular “fish-fag.” 

Diderot, in his turn, found an avenger in the Abbé Morellet, who 
wrote a little brochure against Palissot, after the manner of the 
“Petit Prophète,” called “La Vision.” In this pamphlet he very im- 
prudently insulted Madame de Robeck, whose friends caused him 
to be imprisoned in the Bastille; she herself was not of a sufficiently 
revengeful disposition—not to mention that at that time she was a 
dying woman—to have had anything to do with it. 

D’Alembert, who was very intimate with the Abbé Morellet, 
wrote and asked me to beg Madame de Luxembourg to procure his 
release, promising, in token of his gratitude, to praise her in the 
“Encyclopédie.” 14 The following was my reply: 


“Sir,—I have not waited for your letter, before expressing to 
Madame la Maréchale de Luxembourg the pain which the imprison- 

14 This letter, together with several others, disappeared at the Hotel de Luxem- 
bourg, while my papers were deposited there. 


550 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ment of the Abbé Morellet caused me. She knows the interest which 
I take in the matter, she shall also know the interest that you take in 
it; it will be sufficient for her, in order that she herself may take an 
interest in it, to know that he is a person of merit. Further, although 
she and M. le Maréchal honour me with a kindness which is the 
consolation of my life, and although your friend’s name is, in their 
opinion, a recommendation in favour of the Abbé Morellet, I do 
not know how far they may consider it fitting, on this occasion, to 
make use of the influence attached to their position and the personal 
esteem in which they are held. I do not even feel convinced, that the 
act of vengeance in question concerns Madame la Princesse de 
Robeck so much as you appear to think; and, even should you be 
correct, one must not suppose that the pleasure of avenging oneself 
is the exclusive property of philosophers, and that, when they choose 
to be women, women will be philosophers. 

“I will inform you of what Madame de Luxembourg says to me 
when I have shown her your letter. Meanwhile, I think that I am 
sufficiently well acquainted with her, to be able to assure you before- 
hand that, even if she should have the pleasure of contributing to the 
release of the Abbé Morellet, she would certainly refuse to accept 
the tribute of gratitude which you promise to render her in the 
columns of the ‘Encyclopédie, although she might feel herself 
honoured by it, because she does not do good for the sake of praise, 
but only in order to satisfy her goodness of heart.” 


I spared no pains to arouse the zeal and compassion of Madame 
de Luxembourg on behalf of the poor prisoner, and I succeeded. 
She took a journey to Versailles on purpose to see M. le Comte de 
Saint-Florentin; and this journey shortened her stay at Montmor- 
ency, which the Maréchal was obliged to leave at the same time, his 
presence being required at Rouen, whither the King was sending 
him as the Governor of Normandy, in connection with certain pro- 
ceedings in the Parliament, which it was desired to suppress. The 
following is the letter which Madame de Luxembourg wrote to me 
the second day after her departure (Packet D, No. 23): 


“VERSAILLES, Wednesday. 


“M. de Luxembourg left yesterday at six o’clock in the morning. 
I do not yet know whether I shall join him. I am waiting to hear 


PROCURES THE ABBE’S RELEASE 557 


from him, because he does not know himself how long he will be 
there. I have seen M. de Saint-Florentin, who is most favourably 
disposed towards the Abbé Morellet; but he finds that there are 
difficulties, which, however, he hopes to surmount the first time he 
has to see the King, whith will be next week. I have also asked as a 
favour, that he shall not be banished, which was talked of: it was 
intended to send him to Nancy. This, sir, is as much as I have been 
able to do; but I promise you that [ will not leave M+ de Saint-. 
Florentin alone, until the matter is arranged as you desire. And now 
let me tell you how sorry I was to be obliged to leave you so soon, 
but I flatter myself that you have no doubt of it. I love you with all 
my heart, and shall do so as long as I live.” 


A few days later I received the following letter from D’Alembert, 
which caused me real joy (Packet D, No. 26): 


August ist. 


“Thanks to your efforts, my dear philosopher, the Abbé has left 
the Bastille, and his imprisonment will have no further conse- 
quences. He is setting out for the country, and, together with myself, 
sends you a thousand thanks and compliments. Vale et me ama.” 


The Abbé also, a few days afterwards, wrote me a letter of thanks 
(Packet D, No. 29), which did not appear to me to come straight 
and in which he appeared to some extent to depreciate the service 
which I had rendered him; and, some time afterwards, I found that 
he and D’Alembert had in a manner, I will not say supplanted, but 
succeeded me in Madame de Luxembourg’s favour, and that I had 
lost in her esteem as much as they had gained. However, I am far 
from suspecting the Abbé Morellet of having contributed to my loss 
of favour; I esteem him too highly to think that. As for M. d’Alem- 
bert, I say nothing about him here; I will return to him later. 

At the same time I had another affair on hand, which was the 
occasion of the last letter I ever wrote to Voltaire—a letter which 
he exclaimed loudly against as an abominable insult, but which he 
never showed to anyone. I will here supply the omission. 

The Abbé Trublet, with whom I was slightly acquainted, but 
of whom I had seen very little, wrote to me on the 13th of June, 1760 


558 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


(Packet D, No. 11), to inform me that M. Formey, his friend and 
correspondent, had printed in his journal my letter to M. de Voltaire 
about the disaster at Lisbon. The Abbé Trublet wanted to know 
how this publication had been rendered possible; and, with his 
Jesuitical slyness, asked me my opinion of the reprinting of the letter, 
without wanting to tell me his own. As I thoroughly detest cunning 
persons of this sort, I thanked him, as he deserved, but somewhat 
stiffly: he noticed this, but nevertheless it did not prevent him from 
trying to get over me in one or two more letters, until he had found 
out everything he wanted to know. 

I well understood, whatever Trublet might say, that Formey had 
not found the letter printed, and that it had been printed by him 
for the first time. I knew that he was an unblushing pilferer, who, 
without ceremony, earned an income from the works of others, al- 
though he had not yet ventured upon the astounding impudence of 
removing the author’s name from a book already published, putting 
his own to it, and selling it for his own profit.1® 

But how had this manuscript come into his hands? That was 
the question. It was not a difficult one to answer, but I was simple 
enough to be puzzled by it. Although Voltaire was honoured be- 
yond all measure in this letter, he would have had reason to com- 
plain, in spite of his uncivil behaviour, if I had had it printed with- 
out his consent, and I accordingly decided to write to him on the 
matter. Here is the second letter, to which he made no reply, and at 
which, in order to give freer vent to his brutality, he pretended to 
be irritated even to madness: 


MontMorency, June 17th, 1760. 


“Sir,—I never thought to find myself writing to you again. But, 
having learnt that the letter which I wrote to you in 1756 has been 
printed at Berlin, I feel it my duty to give you an account of my 
conduct in regard to it, and I will fulfil this duty in all truthfulness 
and sincerity. 

“This letter, having been really addressed to yourself, was never 
meant to be printed. I communicated its contents, conditionally, to 
three persons to whom the rights of friendship did not permit me to: 


1 In this fashion he afterwards appropriated “Emile.” 


LETTER TO VOLTAIRE” 559 


refuse anything of the kind, and whom these same rights of friend- 
ship still less permitted to abuse their trust by violating their prom- 
ise. These three persons are: Madame de Chenonceaux, Madame 
Dupin’s step-daughter; Madame la Comtesse d’Houdetot; and a 
- German named Grimm“ Madame de Chenonceaux was anxious for 
the letter to be printed, and asked my consent. I told her that it de- 
pended upon you. Your consent was asked; you refused it, and 
nothing more was said about the matter. í 

“Nevertheless, M. Abbé Trublet, with whom I have no sort of 
connection, has just written, with a most friendly mark of attention, 
to inform me, that he has received the sheets of a journal belonging 
to M. Formey, in which he has read this identical letter, accompanied 
by a note, in which the editor, under date of the 23rd October, 1759, 
says that he found it some weeks ago in the Berlin booksellers’ shops, 
and that, since it is one of those pamphlets which soon disappear 
beyond hope of return, he thought it his duty to allot it a place in his 
journal. 

“This, sir, is all that I know about the matter. It is quite certain 
that hitherto this letter has never even been heard of in Paris. It 
is quite certain that the copy, whether in manuscript or print, which 
has fallen into M. Formey’s hands, can only have come to him either 
through you, which is not likely, or through one of the three persons 
whom I have just mentioned. Lastly, it is quite certain that the two 
ladies are incapable of such a breach of confidence. From my re- 
treat, I cannot gain any further information about the matter. You 
have correspondents, by whose assistance it would be easy for you, 
if it were worth the trouble, to trace it back to its source, and learn 
the truth about the facts. 

“In the same letter, M. ?Abbé Trublet informs me that he is 
keeping back the number of the journal, and will not lend it with- 
out my consent, which I certainly will never give. But this copy may 
not be the only one in Paris. My wish is that the letter may not be 
printed there, and I will do my best to prevent it; but, in case I am 
unable to succeed, and, being informed in time, may be able to se- 
cure the prior right, then I will not hesitate to have it printed my- 
self. This appears to me to be only fair and natural. 

“As for your reply to the same letter, it has not been communi- 
cated to anyone, and you may feel assured that it will never be 
printed without your consent,'® which I shall never be so indiscreet 


16 That is to say, during his life-time and mine: and surely, the most scrupu- 


560 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


as to ask for, for I know well, that what one man writes to another, 
is not meant for the public. But if you like to write an answer for 
publication, addressed to me, I promise you that I will faithfully 
add it to my letter, without a single word of reply on my part. 

“I do not love you, sir: you have done me injuries, which I could 
not but feel most deeply—me, your disciple and most enthusiastic 
admirer. You have ruined Geneva in return for the shelter you have 
found there: you have alienated my fellow-citizens from me, in 
return for the eulogies which I have lavished upon you in their 
midst: it is you who have made life in my native country unen- 
durable for me: it is you who will cause me to die in a foreign land, 
deprived of all the consolations of a dying man, and to be thrown 
into a gutter, as the last token of respect: while you will be followed 
to the grave with all the honours that a man can expect. In fact, I 
hate you, since you have so willed it; but I hate you as a man who 
is more worthy loving you, if you had so chosen. Of all the senti- 
ments towards you, with which my heart was filled, the only one 
that survives is the admiration which one cannot refuse to your 
splendid genius, and admiration for your writings. If I can honour 
nothing but your talents, the fault is not mine. I shall never fail in 
the respect that is due to them, or in the behaviour which such 
respect demands. Farewell, sir!” 17 


In the midst of all these petty literary squabbles, which only con- 
firmed me more and more in my resolution, I was the recipient of 
the greatest honour which the profession of letters has ever conferred 
upon me, and of which I felt most proud: M. le Prince de Conti con- 
descended to visit me twice, once at the little chateau, and once at 
Mont-Louis. On both occasions, he selected the time when Madame 
de Luxembourg was not at Montmorency, in order to make it clearer 
that he only came to see me. I have never had any doubt that I owed 


lous behaviour, especially in dealing with a man who tramples it ruthlessly under 
foot, cannot require more. 

Tt will be observed that, although this letter has been written nearly seven 
years, I have neither mentioned it nor shown it to a living soul. This has also 
been the case with the two letters which M. Hume forced me to write to him 
last summer, until he made the noise about them, which everybody knows of. 
The evil that I have to say about my enemies, I say to themselves privately; as 
for the good, when there is any, I say it openly and with a good heart. 


M. LE PRINCE DE CONTI 56x 


his kindness originally to Madame de Luxembourg and Madame de 
Boufflers; but neither have I any doubt that I owe the kindness with 
which he has never ceased to honour me since then, to his own 
feelings and myself.18 

As my apartment at Mont-Louis was very small, and the situation 
of the turret was delightful, I took the Prince there; and he, to 
crown his favours, desired that I would have the honour of playing 
a game of chess with him. I knew that he could beat the Chevalier 
de Lorenzi, who was a much better player than myself. However, 
in spite of the signs and grimaces of the Chevalier and those who 
were present, which I pretended not to see, J won the two games 
which we played. When they were finished, I said to him in a re- 
spectful, but serious tone, “My Lord, I have too much respect for 
your most serene Highness, not to beat you always at chess.” This 
great Prince, so witty and learned, who deserved to be spared from 
flattery, felt—at least, I think so—that I was the only person present 
who treated him as a man, and I have every reason to believe that 
he felt really grateful to me for it. l 

Even if he had been displeased, I could not reproach myself with 
wishing to deceive him in anything, and I certainly have not to re- 
proach myself with having ill-requited his goodness in my heart, 
although I certainly sometimes requited it with a bad grace, whereas 
he himself displayed infinite delicacy .in the manner in which he 
showed it. A few days afterwards, he sent me a hamper of game, 
which I accepted in a proper manner. Some time after that, he sent 
me a second hamper, accompanied by a note from one of his officers 
of the hunt, written by his instructions, informing me that the con- 
tents had been shot by His Highness himself. I accepted it; but I 
wrote to Madame de Boufflers that I would accept no more. This 
letter was generally blamed, and deservedly. To refuse presents of 
game from a Prince of the blood, who, besides, displays such delicacy 
in sending them, shows rather the boorishness of an ill-bred person 
who forgets himself, than the delicate feeling of a proud man, who 
desires to preserve his independence. I have never read over this 


18 Notice the persistency of this blind and stupid confidence, in the midst of all 
the ill-treatment, which ought to have disabused me of it. It never disappeared 
until after my return to Paris in 1770. 


562 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


letter without blushing for it, or without reproaching myself for 
having written it. However, I have not undertaken to write my 
Confessions in order to be silent upon my follies, and the present 
instance disgusts me with myself too much for me to allow myself 
to conceal it. 

If I did not commit the additional folly of becoming his rival, I 
very nearly did so; for, at the time, Madame de Boufflers was still 
his mistress, and I knew nothing about it. She came to see me pretty 
often with the Chevalier de Lorenzi. She was handsome and still 
young. She affected the old Roman spirit, while I was always ro- 
mantic; this was a sufficient similarity. I was nearly caught; I believe 
she saw it. The Chevalier saw it also; at least, he spoke to me about 
it, and in a manner not calculated to discourage me. But this time I 
was prudent—and it was time to be so, at fifty years of age. Full of 
the good advice which I had just given to the grey-beards in my 
letter to D’Alembert, I was ashamed to profit so little by it myself. 
Besides, after learning what I did not know before, I must have lost 
my head entirely, if I had dared to carry my rivalry so high! Lastly, 
being perhaps not yet thoroughly cured of my passion for Madame 
d’Houdetot, I felt that nothing could henceforth take her place in 
my heart, and I bade adieu to love for the remainder of my life. At 
the moment of writing these lines, a young woman, who had her 
designs upon me, has just made dangerous advances to me, and 
that with very significant glances; but, if she had pretended to forget 
my fifty years, I have remembered them. After having extricated 
myself from this snare, I have no longer any fear of falling, and I 
feel that I can answer for myself for the rest of my days. 

Madame de Boufflers had observed the emotion which her pres- 
ence caused me, and could also see that I had triumphed over it. I am 
neither foolish nor vain enough to believe that, at my age, I can 
have inspired her with any fancy for me; but, from certain expres- 
sions which she made use of to Thérése, I believe that I aroused a 
certain feeling of curiosity in her mind. If this is the case, and if she 
has not forgiven me for not having satisfied this curiosity, it must 
be admitted that I was born to be the victim of my weaknesses, since 
victorious love was so fatal to me, and vanquished love even more 
fatal still. 


END OF THE LETTERS 563 


Here ends the collection of letters which has served me as a guide 
in these two books. Henceforth, I can only follow in the footsteps 
of my recollections; which, however, in reference to this cruel period 
of my life, are so vivid,gand have left so strong an impression upon 
me that, lost in the vast ocean of my misfortunes, I am unable to 
forget the details of my first shipwreck, although its results only 
afford me confused recollections. Accordingly, in the following 
book, I can still proceed with tolerable certainty. If I go further, I 
shall have to grope in the dark. 


BOOK XI 


[1761] 


ALTHOUGH “Julie,” which had been in the press for a long time, was 
not yet published at the end of 1760, it was beginning to make a 
great stir. Madame de Luxembourg had spoken of it at Court, 
Madame d’Houdetot in Paris. The latter had even obtained permis- 
sion from me for Saint-Lambert to have it read in manuscript to the 
King of Poland, who was delighted with it. Duclos, to whom I had 
also had it read, had spoken of it to the Academy. All Paris was im- 
patient to see this romance; the booksellers’ shops in the Rue Saint- 
Jacques and the Palais-Royal were besieged by persons making in- 
quiries about it. At last it appeared, and its success, contrary to what 
is usually the case, corresponded to the eagerness with which it had 
been expected. Madame la Dauphine, who was one of the first who 
read it, spoke of it to M. de Luxembourg as a delightful work. 
Opinions were divided amongst men of letters; but amongst the 
general public the verdict was unanimous; the ladies, especially, be- 
came infatuated with the book and the author to such an extent, 
that there were few, even amongst the highest circles, whose con- 
quest I could not have made if I had been so disposed. I possess 
proofs of this, which I do not wish to commit to writing, but which, 
without any need of putting them to the test, confirm my opinion. 
It is singular that this work has met with greater success in France 
than in the rest of Europe, although the French, both men and 
women, are not very well treated in it. Quite contrary to my expec- 
tation, it was least successful in Switzerland, most successful in 
Paris. Do then friendship, love, and virtue, prevail more in Paris 
than elsewhere? Most certainly, no; but there still prevails there that 
exquisite feeling, by which the heart is transported, when these qual- 
ities are portrayed, and which makes us cherish in others the pure, 


564 


PUBLICATIQN OF “JULIE” 565 


tender, and virtuous feelings, which we ourselves no longer possess. 
The corruption of manners is at the present day everywhere the 
same; virtue and morality no longer exist in Europe; but, if there 
be a place where affection for them still exists, it is in Paris that we 
must look for it.t 

Amidst so many prejudices and factitious passions, one must know 
how to analyse properly the human heart, in order to disentangle 
the true feelings of nature. A delicacy of tact is necessary, which can 
only be acquired by intercourse with the great world, in order to 
feel, if I may so venture to say, the delicacies of heart of which this 
work is full. I unhesitatingly place the fourth part of it by the side of 
the “Princesse de Cléves,” and I assert that, if these two works had 
been read only in the provinces, their true value would never have 
been recognised, It is, therefore, not surprising that the book met 
with the greatest success at Court. It abounds in piquant, but veiled 
allusions, which were bound to please, because those at Court are 
more practised in seeing through them. However, a further distinc- 
tion must here be made. The reading of such works is certainly not 
suited to those witty people, whose cunning and finesse is only of 
avail to see through what is bad, and who see nothing at all where 
there is only good to be seen. If, for instance, “Julie” had been pub- 
lished in a certain country which I have in my mind, I am sure no 
one would have read it to the end, and that it would have died at its 
birth. 

I have collected most of the letters, which were written to me on 
the subject of this work, in a packet which is in the hands of 
Madame de Nadaillac. If this collection ever sees the light, it will dis- 
close several curious things, amongst others, a diversity of opinion, 
which shows what it is to have anything to do with the public. The 
feature which has been least observed, and which will always make 
it a work unique of its kind, is the simplicity of the subject and the 
sustained interest which, confined to three persons, is kept up 
through six volumes, without the aid of incidents, romantic adven- 
tures, or improprieties of any kind, either in the characters or in their 
actions. Diderot has paid great compliments to Richardson upon the 
enormous variety of his situations and the number of characters in- 


1 These words were written in 1769. 


566 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


troduced by him. Richardson certainly has the merit of having given 
them all distinctive characteristics; but, in regard to their number, he 
has the fault common to most insipid writers of romance, who make 
up for the barrenness of their ideas by the aid of characters and in 
cidents. It is easy to excite interest by incessantly presenting un- 
heard-of incidents and new faces, who pass like the figures in a 
magic-lantern; but it is far more difficult to sustain this interest 
continually by means of the same obiects, without the aid of won- 
derful adventures. And if, other things being equal, the simplicity of 
the subject adds to the beauty of the work, the romances of Richard- 
son, though superior in so many other things, cannot, in this respect, 
be compared to mine. However, it is dead—I know it, and I know 
the reason; but it will come to life again. 

My only fear was that, owing to its extreme simplicity, the de- 
velopment of the story might prove wearisome, and that I had not 
been able to keep up a sufficiently lively interest to the end. I was 
reassured by an incident which, of itself alone, flattered me more 
than all the compliments which this work has procured me. 

It appeared at the beginning of the Carnival. A book-hawker took 
it to Madame la Princesse de Talmont ? one day when there was a 
ball at the Opera. After supper she dressed herself to go, and, while 
waiting, began to read the new romance. At midnight she ordered 
her horses to be put in, and went on reading. She was informed 
that her carriage was waiting; she made no reply. Her servants, 
seeing that she had forgotten herself, went to tell her that it was two 
o'clock. “There is no hurry yet,” she answered, and still went on 
reading. Some time afterwards, her watch having stopped, she rang 
the bell to know what time it was. When she heard that it was four 
o'clock, she said, “Then it is too late to go to the ball; take out the 
horses,” undressed herself, and spent the rest of the night in reading. 

Since hearing of this incident, I have always wanted to see 
Madame de Talmont, not only to learn from her own lips if it is 
strictly true, but also because I have never thought it possible that 
anyone could feel so lively an interest in “Julie” without possessing 
the sixth sense, that moral sense, with which so few hearts are en- 


*It was not she, but another lady whose name I do not know; but I have been 
assured of the fact. 


ce 5 393 
THE “PAIX PERPETUELLE 567 


dowed, and without which it is impossible for anyone to understand 
my own. 

What made the womeń so favourably disposed towards me was 
their conviction that I had written my own history, and that I my- 
self was the hero of thifromance. This belief was so firmly estab- 
lished, that Madame de Polignac wrote to Madame de Verdelin, 
begging her to persuade me to let her see the portrait of Julie. 
Everyone was convinced that it was impossible to express Sentiments 
so vividly without having felt them, or to describe the transports of 
love so glowingly, unless they came straight from the heart. In this 
they were right. It is quite true that I wrote this romance in a state 
of most feverish ecstasy, but they were wrong in thinking that it 
had needed real objects to produce this condition; they were far from 
understanding to what an extent I am capable of being inflamed by 
beings of the imagination. Had it not been for a few reminiscences 
of my youth and Madame d’Houdetot, the love which I felt and de- 
scribed would have had only the nymphs of the air for its object. I 
did not desire either to confirm or refute an error which was to my 
advantage. It may be seen in the preface, in the form of a dialogue, 
which I had printed separately, how I left the public in suspense on 
that point. Rigid moralists may say that I ought to have declared the 
truth without reserve. For my own part, I do not see what obligation 
there was for me to do so; and I think that I should have shown far 
more stupidity than frankness in making such a declaration, when 
there was no necessity for it. 

Nearly about the same time appeared the “Paix Perpetuelle,” the 
manuscript of which I had given up in the preceding year to a cer- 
tain M. de Bastide, editor of a journal called Le Monde, into which, 
whether I liked it or not, he would have been glad to cram all my 
manuscripts. He was acquainted with M. Duclos, and came in his 
name to try and induce me to help him to fill his journal. He had 
heard “Julie” spoken of, and wanted me to let it appear in it, as 
well as “Emile”; he would also have liked to have the “Contrat 
Social,” if he had had any suspicion of its existence. At length, 
wearied by his importunities, I decided to let him have my extracts 
from the “Paix Perpetuelle” for twelve Jouts. The agreement was, 
that it should be printed in his journal; but, as soon as he became the 


568 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


owner of the manuscript, he thought fit to have it printed by itself, 
after certain passages had been cut out, in accordance with the re- 
quirements of the censorship. What would have been the result, if 
I had added my own criticisms of the work, which, fortunately, 
I did not mention to M. de Bastide, and which were not included 
in our agreement! These criticisms are still unprinted, and I have 
them amongst my papers. If they ever appear, it will be seen how 
Voltaire’s witticisms and self-complacency on this subject must have 
made me laugh—me, who understood so well the extent of this 
poor man’s intelligence in regard to the political matters in which 
he ventured to interfere. 

In the midst of the successful reception of my work by the public 
and the favour of the ladies, I felt that I was losiag ground at the 
Hôtel de Luxembourg, not with M. de Luxembourg, whose kind- 
ness and friendship seemed to increase daily, but with Madame de 
Luxembourg. Since I had found nothing more to read to her, her 
room had not been so freely open to me; and, during her visits to 
Montmorency, although I presented myself with great regularity, 
I hardly ever saw her except at table. My place at her side, even, 
was no longer reserved for me as before. As she no longer offered it 
to me, spoke to me but little, and I had not much to say to her 
either, I was glad to find another place, where I was more at my 
ease, especially in the evening; for I unconsciously made a practice 
of sitting closer to M. le Maréchal. 

In regard to “the evening,” I remember that I have said that I did 
not sup at the chateau, and this was true at the commencement of 
our acquaintance; but, as M. de Luxembourg did not dine at all, 
and did not even appear at table, the result was that, at the end 
of several months, although I was on a very familiar footing in the 
house, I had never been at a meal with him. He was kind enough to 
make a remark to that effect. This decided me to go to supper there 
sometimes, when there were not many guests; and I greatly enjoyed 
myself, seeing that we took our dinner almost in the open, and, as 
is ‘said, sur le bout du banc*; whereas supper was a very lengthy 
meal, because the guests made themselves comfortable, in order to 
rest themselves after a long walk; it was a very good meal, because 


® Without ceremony. 


- E P 


= 


THE MISERIES OF GREATNESS 569 


M. de Luxembourg was somewhat of a gourmand; and a very agree- 
able one, because Madame de Luxembourg did the honours with 
charming grace. Without fhis explanation, it would be difficult to 
understand the concluding portion of one of M. de Luxembourg’s 
letters (Packet C, No. 36), in which he tells me that he recalls 
our walks with great pleasure, especially, he adds, when, on our 
return to the courtyard in the evening, we found no marks of 
carriage wheels; for, as the ruts in the sand were raked over every 
morning, I guessed, from the number of wheel-tracks, how many 
guests had arrived during the afternoon. 

This year (1761) filled to the brim the cup of the afflictions, which 
this worthy gentleman had suffered, since I had had the honour 
of knowing him; as if the evils which destiny was preparing for my- 
self were fated to commence with the man to whom I felt the most 
sincere attachment, and who was most worthy of it. In the first year, 
he lost his sister, Madame la Duchesse de Villeroy; in the second, 
his daughter, Madame la Princesse de Robeck; in the third, his 
only son, the Duc de Montmorency, and his grandson, the Comte de 
Luxembourg, the last and only inheritors of his name and family. 
Outwardly, he endured all these losses with apparent courage; but 
his heart did not cease to bleed inwardly for the rest of his life, and 
his health gradually declined. He must have felt the unexpected 
and tragic end of his son the more keenly, as it happened at the very 
moment when the King had just granted him for his son, and prom- 
ised him for his grandson, the reversion of his commission as Cap- 
tain of the Gardes du Corps. He had the sorrow of seeing, before 
his own eyes, the life of this child, in whom such hopes were centred, 
gradually wasting away, in consequence of the mother’s blind con- 
fidence in the physician who caused the poor child’s death from 
sheer want of nourishment, owing to his being fed upon nothing but 
drugs. Alas! if they had only trusted in me, the grandfather and the 
grandson would both be still alive. I said everything I could; I wrote 
to M. le Maréchal! I remonstrated with Madame de Montmorency 
upon the more than strict diet, which, in her faith in her physician, 
she prescribed for her son. Madame de Luxembourg, whose opinions 
coincided with my own, did not wish to usurp the mother’s author- 
ity. M. de Luxembourg, who was weak and gentle, never cared 


a? 


570 , THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


to oppose anyone. Madame de Montmorency felt a confidence in 
Bordeu, of which her son finally became the victim. How delighted 
the poor child was, when he was able to get permission to come to 
Mont-Louis with Madame de Boufflers, to ask Thérèse for something 
to eat, and to put a little nourishment into his famished stomach! 
How I deplored, in my own heart, the miseries of greatness, when 
I saw the only heir of so large an estate, of so great a name, of so 
many titles and dignities, devour with the greediness of a beggar a 
sorry morsel of bread. But it was no use for me to say or do anything; 
the physician triumphed, and the child starved. 

The same confidence in quacks, which caused the death of the 
grandson, dug the grave of the grandfather, and, in addition to this, 
he was weak-minded enough to attempt to conceal from himself the 
infirmities of old age. M. de Luxembourg suffered at times from 
pains in his great toe; he had an attack while at Montmorency, 
: which prevented him from sleeping, and made him somewhat fever- 
ish. I ventured to pronounce the word “gout”; Madame de Luxem- 
bourg scolded me. The Maréchal’s valet de chambre and surgeon de- 
clared that it was not the gout, and proceeded to dress the part 
afflicted with some healing ointment. Unfortunately, the pain 
abated, and, when it returned, recourse was invariably had to the 
same remedy which had previously given relief; his constitution 
broke up, his sufferings increased, and the remedies in proportion. 
Madame de Luxembourg, who at last saw that it was the gout, 
opposed this senseless treatment. They afterwards concealed his con- 
dition from her, and he died at the end of a few years, through his 
own fault and his persistent efforts to cure himself. But let me not 
so far anticipate misfortunes; how many others have I to relate be- 
fore I come to that! 

It is strange by what fatality all that I could say or do seemed 
doomed to displease Madame de Luxembourg, even when I was 
exceedingly anxious to preserve her goodwill. The blows which M. 
de Luxembourg sustained one after another only made me more at- 
tached to him, and consequently to Madame de Luxembourg; for 
they always seemed to me so sincerely united, that the feelings which 
I entertained for the one naturally extended to the other. M. le 
Maréchal was getting old. His constant attendance at Court, the 


- 7 


ANTAGONISM OF ABBÉ DE BOUFFLERS 571 


duties entailed by it, the continual hunting-expeditions, above all, 
the fatigues of his office during the three months he was on duty, 
would have required the wigour of a young man, and I no longer 
saw anything which could keep up his strength in the position 
which he occupied. Since his dignities would be distributed amongst 
others, and his name would become extinct after his death, there 
was little need for him to continue a laborious life, the chief object 
of which had been to secure the Prince’s favour for his children. 
One day, when we three were alone, and he was complaining of the 
fatigue of his Court duties like a man disheartened by his losses, I 
ventured to speak to him of retiring, and to give him the advice 
which Cineas gave to Pyrrhus. He sighed, but made no decided 
answer. But, the very first time she saw me alone, Madame de Lux- 
embourg scolded me severely for this advice, which seemed to me to 
have alarmed her. She added a remark, the justice of which I felt, 
and which made me abandon the idea of ever referring to the same 
topic again; that the habit of living so long at the Court had be- 
come a real necessity; that, even at that moment, it was a diversion 
for M. de Luxembourg; and that the retirement which I recom- 
mended to him would not be so much a rest for him as an exile, 
in which idleness, weariness, and grief would soon put an end to 
his life. Although she must have seen that she had convinced me, 
although she could depend upon the promise which I made and 
kept, she never seemed to me quite easy in regard to the matter, and 
I remember that, since that time, my #éte-a-tétes with M. le Maréchal 
were less frequent and were nearly always interrupted. 

While my awkwardness and ill-luck thus united to injure me in 
her opinion, the people of whom she saw most, and for whom she 
entertained the greatest affection, did not promote my interests in 
that quarter. The Abbé de Boufflers, especially, who was as brilliant 
as a young man could possibly be, never seemed particularly well- 
disposed towards me; not only is he the only person, in Madame la 
Maréchale’s circle, who has never shown me the slightest marks of 
attention, but I fancied that I observed that, after each of his visits 
to Montmorency, I lost ground with her. Certainly, however, it is 
true that, without any attention on his part, the mere fact of his 
presence was sufficient to account for it, so dull and heavy did my 


572 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


clumsy spropositi * appear by the side of his graceful and refined wit. 
During the first two years, his visits to Montmorency had been very 
rare; and, thanks to the indulgence of Madame la Marquise, I had 
held my ground tolerably well; but, as soon as he made his appear- 
ance with tolerable regularity, I was crushed beyond hope of re- 
covery. 

I should have liked to take refuge under his wing, and to make 
him my friend; but the same awkwardness which made his favour 
a necessity to me prevented me from gaining it; and my maladroit 
efforts in that direction ended by completely ruining me with 
Madame la Maréchale, without being of any service to me in regard 
to him. With his intellect, he might have succeeded in everything; 
but his total incapacity for steady application, and his taste for 
amusement only permitted him to acquire imperfect accomplish- 
ments of every description. By way of compensation, these attain- 
ments were extensive; and that is all that is necessary in the great 
world in which he is anxious to shine. He can compose pretty little 
poems, write pretty little notes, can play a little on the cithern, and 
daub a little in pastil. He undertook to paint Madame de Luxem- 
bourg’s portrait; the result was horrible. She declared that it was 
not in the least like her, which was quite true. The traitorous Abbé 
consulted me; and I, like a fool and a liar, said that it was like her. 
I wanted to flatter the Abbé; but I did not flatter Madame la Maré- 
chale, who scored it down against me; and the Abbé, after his trick 
had succeeded, laughed at me. I learned, through the result of my 
tardy first attempt, never again to attempt to play the sycophant and 
flatterer, invita Minerva.” 

My ability lay in telling useful but hard truths to mankind with a 
certain amount of energy and courage; and I ought to have stopped 
at that. I was not born, I will not say to flatter, but to praise. The 
awkwardness of the praises which I attempted to bestow has done 
we more harm than all the severity of my reproaches. I will here 
quote a terrible example of this, the consequences of which have not 


t Absurdities, blunders. 
Malgré Minerve: specially applied to a poet, who persists in writing verses, in 
spite of his having no talent for it. 


&gt; 
- j 


M. DE CHOISEUL 573 


only decided my destiny for the rest of my life, but will i 
decide my reputation among posterity. 

When the family stayed at Montmorency, M. de Choiseul some- 
times came to supper at the château. He came one day as I was leav- 
ing it. They spoke about me: M. de Luxembourg told him the his- 
tory of my relations with M. de Montaigu at Venice. M. de Choiseul 
said that it was a pity that I had abandoned the diplomatic career, 
and that, if I was inclined to enter it again, it would give him great 
pleasure to find me employment. M. de Luxembourg repeated this to 
me: as I was not accustomed to be spoiled by ministers, I felt it all 
the more; and J am not at all sure that, if my health had permitted 
me to entertain the idea, I should not have made a fool of myself 
again, in spite of my resolutions. Ambition only took possession of 
me during the brief intervals when all other passions left me alone; 
but one of these intervals would have been sufficient to enlist my 
sympathies again. This kindly intention on M. de Choiseul’s part 
gained my affection and strengthened the esteem which some of the 
proceedings of his ministry had caused me to entertain for his tal- 
ents: the pacte de famille,® in particular, appeared to me to indicate 
a statesman of the first rank. He gained my esteem still more from 
the poor opinion I had of his predecessors, not even excepting 
Madame de Pompadour, whom I looked upon as a sort of Prime 
Minister; and when it was currently reported that one of those two 
would drive out the other, I believed that I was offering prayers for 
the glory of France when I prayed for the triumph of M. de Choi- 
seul. I had always had a feeling of antipathy against Madame de 
Pompadour even when I saw her, before she had risen to power, at 
Madame de Popliniére’s, while she was still Madame d’Etioles. 
Since then, I had been annoyed by her silence in the matter of 
Diderot, and the manner in which she had behaved towards me, 
both in regard to the Fétes de Ramire, the Muses Galantes, and the 
Devin du Village, which had by no means brought me advantages 
proportionate to its success: in all these cases I had found very 
little inclination on her part to oblige me: this, however, did not 
prevent the Chevalier de Lorenzi from proposing to me to write 


€ A treaty of defensive alliance, concluded in 1761, between the two branches 
of the house of Bourbon in France and Spain. 


574 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


something in praise of this lady, at the same time giving me to 
understand that it might be useful to me. This proposal made me 
the moré indignant, as I saw clearly that it did not come from him: 
I knew well that this man, who was totally insignificant in him- 
self, never thought or acted except as he was prompted by others. 
I am not sufficiently Bea of putting restraint upon myself to 
have heen able to conceal from him my contempt for his proposition, 
or, from anyone else, my dislike for the favourite, which I am con- 
vinced she knew; all these considerations united my self-interest to 
my natural inclination, in the prayers which I offered for the success 
of M. de Choiseul. Already prepossessed in favour of his abilities, 
which was the extent of my acquaintance with him; full of gratitude 
for his good intentions; in addition, totally ignorant, in my retire- 
ment, of his tastes and manner of life, I regarded him by anticipation 
as the avenger of the public and myself; and, as I was at the time 
engaged in putting the finishing touches to the “Contrat Social,” I 
set down, in a single passage, my opinion of preceding ministries, 
and of that which was beginning to eclipse them all. On this oc- 
casion, I offended against my most firmly established principle; 
and, further, I did not reflect that, when one desires to praise or 
blame strongly in the same article, without mentioning names, it 
is necessary to apportion the praise to those for whom it is intended 
in such a manner that the most sensitive amour-propre cannot 
possibly misunderstand it. In regard to this, I felt so foolishly secure, 
that it never even occurred that it could be possible for anyone to 
be mistaken. It will soon be seen whether I was right. 

It had been one of my misfortunes to be always connected with 
authoresses. I thought that, amongst the great, I should at least be 
free from this. Not at all; my misfortune still pursued me. As far 
as I know, Madame de Luxembourg was never attacked by this 
complaint; but Madame de Boufflers was. She wrote a tragedy 
in prose, which was at first read, sent round, and praised up in 
M. le Prince de Conti’s circle; and, not satisfied with all these 
eulogies, she wanted to ask my opinion also, in order to secure 
my approbation. I gave it, and praised the work in the moderate 
terms which it deserved. I also informed her, as I thought was 
only right, that her piece, entitled L’Esclave Généreux, had a great 


- 


MADAME DU DEFFAND 575 


resemblance to a little known English play, which, however, had 
been translated into French, called Oroonoko." Madame de Boufflers 
thanked me for my opinjpn, but assured me that her piece had not 
the least resemblance to the English. I have never mentioned this 
plagiarism to a single person except herself, and then only to fulfil 
a duty which she herself had imposed upon me; but this has not 
prevented me from often thinking since then of the manner in 
which Gil Blas fulfilled his duty to the preaching archbishop, and 
its results. 

Without mentioning the Abbé de Boufflers, who was not fond 
of me, and Madame de Boufflers, whom I had offended in a 
manner which women and authors never forgive, none of Madame 
la Maréchale’s other friends seemed particularly inclined to be- 
come mine. I may mention M. le Président Hénault, who, as a 
member of the society of authors, was not free from their faults; 
Madame du Deffand and Mademoiselle de Lespinasse, both of them 
on intimate terms with Voltaire and D’Alembert, with the latter 
of whom Mademoiselle de Lespinasse finally lived—of course, in 
a most respectable manner: let no one imagine that I mean any- 
thing else. I had begun by feeling a lively interest in Madame du 
Deffand, whom I pitied on account of the loss of her eyesight; but 
her manner of living, so entirely contrary to mine, that she got up 
about the time that I went to bed; her extravagant passion for 
trifling displays of wit; the importance which she attached to the 
most contemptible rags which appeared, whether complimentary or 
abusive; the despotic violence of her oracular utterances; her ex- 
aggerated prepossessions in favour of or against everything, which 
prevented her from speaking of any subject except hysterically; 
her incredible prejudices, her unconquerable obstinacy, her unrea- 
soning enthusiasm to which she was carried away by the stubborn- 
ness of her impassioned judgments—all this soon discouraged 
me from the attentions which I was ready to pay her. I neglected 
her; she noticed it. This was sufficient to put her in a rage; and, 
although I felt how greatly a woman of this character was to be 
feared, I preferred to expose myself to the scourge of her hatred 
than to that of her friendship. 


7 By T. Southerne (1696), founded upon a novel by Mrs. Aphra Behn. 


576 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


As if it was not enough for me to have so few friends in Madame 
de Luxembourg’s circle, I had enemies in her family—only one, 
certainly, but one who, in the situation in which I now found myself, 
is equal to a hundred. It was certainly not her brother, M. le Duc 
de Villeroy, who not only came to see me, but invited me several 
times to Villeroy; and, as I had answered this invitation with all 
possible politeness and respect, he had taken this vague answer as 
an acceptance, and arranged that M. and Madame de Luxembourg 
should pay him a fortnight’s visit, on which it was proposed that 
I should accompany them. As the care which my health required 
tendered it dangerous for me at that time to change my quarters, 
[ begged M. de Luxembourg to be good enough to make my excuses. 
It may be seen from his answer (Packet D, No. 3) that he did 
so with the best grace in the world; and M. le Duc de Villeroy’s 
kindness towards me showed no alteration. His nephew and heir, 
the young Marquis de Villeroy, did not share the kindly feelings 
with which his uncle honoured me, nor, I must confess, did I enter- 
tain the same respect for him. His frivolous behaviour made him 
unendurable to me, and my coldness brought upon me his dislike. 
One evening, at table, he wantonly insulted me; I came out very 
badly, because I am a fool and utterly without presence of mind, 
and anger, instead of sharpening the little ready wit I may possess, 
entirely deprives me of it. I had a dog which had been given to 
me when it was quite a puppy, almost immediately after my arrival 
at the Hermitage, and which I had named “Duke.” This dog, 
which, although no beauty, was of an uncommon breed, I had 
made my friend and companion; and it certainly deserved the 
name better than the majority of those who had assumed it. It had 
become a favourite at the chateau of Montmorency, owing to its 
sensible and affectionate disposition, and the attachment which 
we felt for each other; but, in a moment of foolish weakness, I 
had changed its name to “Turk,” as if there had not been hundreds 
of dogs called “Marquis,” without any Marquis being offended at 
it. The Marquis de Villeroy, who knew of this change of name, 
pressed me so hard upon the point that I was obliged to relate, in 
the presence of the company, what I had done. What gave offence 
in the story was, not so much that I had given the dog the name 


- MET ; 
KINDNESS OF MME. DE LUXEMBOURG 577 


of “Duke,” as that I had afterwards altered it. The worst thing 
was, that there were several dukes present, amongst others, M. de 
Luxembourg and his son. The Marquis de Villeroy, who was a 
duke presumptive, and Bears that title at the present day, cruelly 
enjoyed the embarrassing position in which he had placed me, and 
the effect produced by it. I was assured, the next day, that his aunt 
had severely scolded him; and it may be imagined how far this , 
reprimand, if he really received it, must have improved my relations 

with him. 

My only protector against all these enemies, both at the Hôtel 
de Luxembourg and at the Temple, was the Chevalier de Lorenzi, 
who professed to be my friend; but he was still more the friend of 
D’Alembert, under whose wings he passed amongst the ladies for 
a great geometrician. He was, besides, the gallant, or rather the 
tame cat, of Madame la Comtesse de Boufflers, who was herself a 
great friend of D’Alembert; the Chevalier de Lorenzi’s very exist- 
ence and thoughts depended upon her. Thus, far from my possessing 
any outside counterpoise to my folly which could keep me in 
Madame de Luxembourg’s good graces, all who approached her 
seemed to work together to injure me in her esteem. However, be- 
sides her kindness in undertaking to see after “Emile,” she showed 
me an additional mark of favour and sympathy, which caused me to 
believe that, even if she was getting tired of me, she still preserved, 
and would always preserve, the friendship which she had so often 
promised to entertain for me to the end of my life. 

As soon as I thought that I could reckon upon this feeling on 
her part, I began to relieve my heart by making a confession of all 
my faults to her; since it is an inviolable principle with me, to show 
myself to my friends exactly as I am, neither better nor worse. I 
informed her of my relations with Thérése, and all their conse- 
quences, not omitting the manner in which I had disposed of my 
children. She received my confessions kindly, even too kindly, and 
spared me the censure which I deserved; and what especially 
touched me was the kindness which she lavished upon Thérése: 
she gave her little presents, sent for her, encouraged her to go and. 
see her, received her most tenderly, and frequently kissed her before 
everybody. The poor girl was transported with joy and gratitude, 


578 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


which I certainly shared; the kindness with which M. and Madame 
de Luxembourg overwhelmed me through her touched me more 
than that which they showed to me directly. 

For a considerable time matters remained on this footing; but 
at last Madame la Maréchale pushed her kindness so far as to ex- 
press a wish to remove and adopt one of my children. She knew 
that I had put a monogram upon the eldest one’s linen; she asked 
me for the duplicate of it, and I gave it to her. In the search she 
employed La Roche, her valet de chambre and confidential servant, 
whose inquiries proved useless; he found out nothing, although 
only twelve or fourteen years had elapsed; if the registers of the 
Foundling Hospital had been regularly kept, or if the inquiry 
had been properly conducted, the mark ought not to have been so 
difficult to discover. However that may be, I was less annoyed at his 
failure than I should have been, if I had followed the child’s career 
from its birth. If, with the assistance of the information afforded, 
any child had been presented to me as mine, the doubt, whether it 
really was so, or whether another had been substituted for it, would 
have tormented my heart with uncertainty, and I should not have 
enjoyed in all its charm the true feeling of nature, which, in order 
to be kept alive, must be kept up by constant familiarity at least 
during infancy. The continued absence of a child whom one does 
not yet know, weakens and at last utterly destroys the feelings of a 
parent; it is impossible to love a child which has been put out to 
nurse as much as one which is brought up at home. This reflection 
may extenuate the effects of my faults, but only aggravates their 
origin. 

It may be useful to observe that, through the medium of Thérése, 
this same La Roche made the acquaintance of Madame le Vasseur, 
whom Grimm still kept at Deuil, close to La Chevrette, and only 
a little distance from Montmorency. After I left, it was through M. 
la Roche that I continued to send this woman the money which I 
never ceased to supply her with, and I believe that he very often took 
presents to her from Madame la Maréchale; thus, although she was 
always complaining, she was certainly not to be pitied. In regard to 
Grimm, as I am not fond of speaking of people whom I feel bound 
to hate, I never mentioned him to Madame de Luxembourg unless 


ARRANGES TO PUBLISH “EMILE” 579 


I was obliged to; but she several times introduced his name without 
telling me what she thought of him, and without ever letting me 
discover whether she was acquainted with the man or not. As re- 
serve with those whom Istove, and who are perfectly frank with me, 
is by no means to my taste, especially in what concerns them. I have 
sometimes reflected since then upon the reserve which she showed 
towards me, but only when such reflection has been rendered natural 
by other events. 

After having waited a considerable time since I had handed 
“Emile” to Madame de Luxembourg, without hearing anything 
about it, I at length was informed that an arrangement had been 
made at Paris with the bookseller Duchesne, and by him with 
Néaulme of Amsterdam. Madame de Luxembourg sent me the two 
copies of the agreement with Duchesne to sign. I recognised the 
writing as that of M. de Malesherbes’ letters, which he did not write 
himself. The certainty that my agreement had been concluded 
with the consent and under the eyes of the magistrate made me sign 
it with confidence. Duchesne gave me 6,000 francs for the manu- 
script, half down, and, I think, 100 to 200 copies. Having signed the 
two documents, I sent them both to Madame de Luxembourg, in 
accordance with her desire; she gave one to Duchesne and kept the 
other herself, instead of sending it back to me, and I have never 
seen it again. 

Although my acquaintance with M. and Madame de Luxembourg 
had interrupted my plans of retirement, they had not caused me to 
renounce them altogether. Even at the time when I was most in 
favour with Madame la Maréchale, I always felt that nothing but 
my sincere attachment to her and her husband could render their 
surroundings endurable; my whole difficulty was to unite this attach- 
ment with a manner of life more agreeable to my taste and less in- 
jurious to my health, which the perpetual restraint and the late 
suppers continually undermined, in spite of all the care which they 
took to avoid exposing me to any risk; for, in this respect, as in 
everything else, they showed the greatest possible attention. For in- 
stance, every evening, after supper, M. le Maréchal, who went ta 
bed early, never failed to take me away with him, whether I liked 
it or not, in order that I might do the same. It was not until just 


580 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


before my catastrophe that he ceased, for some reason unknown to 
me, to show me this attention. 

Even before I perceived any coldness on the part of Madame la 
Maréchale, I was anxious, in order to avoid exposing myself to it, 
to carry out my old plan; but, as I was without the means, I was 
obliged to wait until the agreement of “Emile” was concluded, and 
in the meantime I put the final touches to the “Contrat Social,” and 
sent it to Rey, fixing the price of the manuscript at 1,000 francs, 
which he gave me. I ought not perhaps to omit a little incident which 
has reference to that manuscript. I handed it, carefully sealed, to 
Duvoisin, a minister from the Pays de Vaud, and chaplain at the 
hôtel de Hollande, who sometimes came to see me, and undertook 
to forward it to Rey, with whom he was acquainted. This manu- 
script, written in a very fine hand, was very small, and did not fill 
his pocket. However, as he was passing the barrière,’ it somehow 
or other fell into the hands of the clerks, who, after having opened 
and examined it, afterwards returned it to him, when he claimed 
it in the name of the Ambassador. This gave him the opportunity of 
reading it himself, which, as he ingenuously informed me, he did, 
at the same time praising the work highly, without a word of blame 
or criticism, no doubt reserving to himself the right of playing the 
part of the avenger of Christianity when the work should have ap- 
peared. He resealed the manuscript, and sent it to Rey. Such was 
essentially the story which he told me in the letter in which he gave 
me an account of the matter, and that is all that I have heard about it. 

Besides these two works and my “Dictionnaire de Musique,” at 
which I worked from time to time, I had some other writings of 
less importance, all ready for publication, which I intended to bring 
out, either separately or in a general collection of my works, if I 
ever undertook to produce one. The most important of these, most 
of which are still in manuscript in the hands of Du Peyrou, was an 
“Essai sur l’Origine des Langues,’ which I had read to M. de 
Malesherbes and the Chevalier de Lorenzi, who expressed his ap- 
proval of it. I calculated that all these works together, after all ex- 
penses, would be worth to me at least 8,000 or 10,000 francs, which 
I intended to sink in a life-annuity for myself and Thérèse. After 


8 The gate where the offices of the octroi, or town dues, were. 


GENEROSITY OF HIS PUBLISHER 581 . 


this, we would go and live together in the corner of some province, 
where I would no longer trouble the public with myself, or trouble 
myself about anything further, except how to end my days peace- 
fully, while continuing to do as much good around me as was 
possible, and to write at my leisure the Memoirs which I meditated. 

Such was my scheme, the execution of which was rendered still 
easier to me by the generosity of Rey, which I must not pass by in 


silence. This publisher, of whom I heard so much that was bad at - 


Paris, is nevertheless the only one, of all those with whom I have had 
anything to do, that I have always had reason to be satisfied with.® 
We certainly often quarrelled about the publication of my books; he 
was careless, and I was hasty. But, in financial matters and others 
connected with them, although I never had a regular agreement 
with him, I always found him strictly honourable. He is also the 
only one who has openly admitted that he made a good thing out 
of me; and he has often told me that he owed his fortune to me, 
and offered to share it with me. Being unable to show his gratitude 
to myself directly, he desired to prove it at least in the person of 
my better-half, upon whom he settled an annuity of 300 francs, 
stating in the deed that it was an acknowledgment of the advan- 
tages he owed to me. We settled the matter between us, without 
any show or pretentiousness; and if I had not been the first to let 
everybody know of it, no one would ever have heard of it. I was so 
affected by his behaviour, that from that I became sincerely attached 
to him. Some time afterwards, he asked me to stand godfather to 
one of his children; I consented; and one of my regrets, in the 
condition to which I have been reduced, is that I have been deprived 
of all opportunity of ever making my attachment of any service te 
my goddaughter and her parents. How is it that I, who am so grate- 
ful for the modest generosity of this publisher, feel so little gratitude 
for the noisy attentions of so many distinguished personages, who 
boastfully fill the world with an account of the benefits which they 
claim to have bestowed upon me, the results of which I have never 
felt? Is it their fault, or is it mine? Is it merely vanity on their part, 

® When’'I wrote these lines, I was far from imagining, or conceiving, much lesa 
believing, the frauds which I subsequently discovered in the printing of my 
works, which he was obliged to admit. 


&gt; 


582 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


or ungratefulness on mine? I ask the intelligent reader to consider 
and decide the matter; for myself, I am dumb. 

This pension was a great assistance to Thérése, and a great relief 
for me. But I was far from desiring any direct profit for myself 
from it, any more than from any other presents which she received. 
She has always had the absolute disposal of it. If I kept her money, 
I rendered her a faithful account of it, without ever deducting a 
farthing for our common expenses, even when she was better off 
than I was. “That which is mine is ours,” I said to her, “and that 
which is yours is yours.” I always behaved, in money matters, in 
accordance with this principle, which I often repeated to her. Those 
who are base enough to accuse me of accepting through her hands 
what I refused to accept with my own, no doubt judged my heart 
by their own, and had but little knowledge of me. I would gladly 
eat with her the bread she may earn, but never that which may be 
given to her. I appeal to her own testimony on this point, both now 
and hereafter, when, in the course of nature, she shall have survived 
me. Unfortunately, she knows little about economy in anything, and 
she is careless and extravagant, not from vanity or fondness of 
delicacies, but from sheer thoughtlessness. No one is perfect in this 
world; and, since her excellent qualities must be counterbalanced, I 
prefer that she should have faults rather than vices, although these 
faults are sometimes more prejudicial to us both. The efforts which 
I have made for her sake, as formerly for mamma’s, to put by a 
little hoard which might some day be useful to her, are inconceiv- 
able; but it has always been labour lost. Neither of them ever 
reckoned with herself; and, in spite of all my endeavours, all that I 
earned was immediately gone. Notwithstanding the simplicity with 
which she dresses, Rey’s pension has never been sufficient, and I 
have always been obliged to assist her every year. Neither she nor 
I was born to be rich, and I certainly do not reckon that as one of 
our misfortunes. 

The “Contrat Social” was printed with little delay. It was dif- 
ferent with “Emile,” for the publication of which I was obliged to 

wait, before I could carry out my project of retirement. From time 
to time, Duchesne sent me specimens of type to choose from; and 
after I had made a choice, instead of putting the work in hand, he 


PUBLICATION OF “EMILE” DELAYED 583 


sent me fresh ones. When we had at last settled upon the size and 
type, and several sheets had already been struck off, in consequence 
of a slight alteration which I made in a proof he began all over 
again, and, at the end of six months, we were not so far advanced as 
on the first day. While these experiments were going on, I discovered 
that the book was being printed in France as well as in Holland, 
and in two separate editions. What could I do? The manuscript was 
no longer under my control. Far from having had anything to do 
with the French edition, I had always opposed it; but, at length, 
since it was being brought out, whether I liked it or not, and served 
as a model for the other, I was obliged to glance over it and look 
at the proofs, to prevent my work being mutilated and disfigured. 
Besides, the work was being printed with such definite approval on 
the part of the magistrate, that the undertaking was in some sort 
under his direction; he frequently wrote to me, and even came to see 
me on the subject, on a certain occasion of which I will speak 
presently. 

While Duchesne proceeded at a tortoise-pace, Néaulme, whom 
he kept back, proceeded even still more slowly. The sheets were 
not sent to him regularly as they were printed. He thought that 
Duchesne, that is to say De Guy, who acted for him, was not be- 
having in good faith; and, seeing that the agreement was not being 
carried out, he wrote to me letter after letter full of complaints and 
grievances, which I could no more remedy than my own. His friend 
Guérin, who at that time saw me pretty frequently, was always 
talking to me about the book, but with the greatest reserve. He did 
and he did not know that it was being printed in France; he did 
and he did not know that the magistrate was interesting himself in 
it; he sympathised with me upon the embarrassment the book 
would cause me, while at the same time he seemed to accuse me of 
imprudence, without ever telling me in what it consisted; he equivo- 
cated and shuffled incessantly; he seemed to talk only to make me 
talk. At that time, I fancied myself so secure, that I laughed at the 
cautious and mysterious tone which he adopted in the matter, as 
a habit contracted by constant intercourse with ministerial and 
magisterial offices. Feeling sure that everything connected with the 
work was in order, firmly convinced that it enjoyed not only the 


584 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


approval and protection of the magistrate, but even deserved and 
had obtained the favour of the ministry, I congratulated myself 
upon my courage in acting rightly, and laughed at the faintheart- 
edness of my friends, who seemed anxious about me. Duclos was 
amongst the number, and I confess that my confidence in his up- 
rightness and shrewdness might have alarmed me if I had felt less 
confidence in the usefulness of the work and the honour of its 
patrons. He came to see me on the part of M. Baille, while “Emile” 
was in the press, and spoke to me about it. I read to him the “Sa- 
voyard Vicar’s Profession of Faith”; he listened to it quietly, and, 
as it seemed to me, with great pleasure. When I had finished, he 
said to me: “What, citizen! is this part of a book which is being 
printed in Paris?” “Yes,” I answered; “and it was to be printed at 
the Louvre, by order of the King.” “I admit it,” said he; “but be 
kind enough not to tell anyone that you have read me this extract.” 
This singular way of expressing himself surprised, but did not 
alarm me. I knew that Duclos saw a good deal of M. de Males- 
herbes; and I found it difficult to understand how he could hold 
so different an opinion in regard to the same thing. 

I had lived at Montmorency for more than four years, without 
having enjoyed one single day of good health. Although the air is 
excellent, the water is bad; and this may very well have been one 
of the causes which aggravated my usual complaints. About the 
end of the autumn of 1761 I fell seriously ill, and spent the whole 
winter in almost constant suffering. My physical ailments, increased 
by numerous uneasinesses, made them still more painful to me. For 
some time secret and gloomy forebodings had been disturbing me, 
although I did not know to what they referred. I received several 
curious anonymous letters, and even signed ones which were equally 
curious; one from a councillor of the Parliament of Paris, who, 
dissatisfied with the present constitution of affairs, and prognosti- 
cating no good from its results, wished to consult me as to the 
choice of an asylum in Geneva or Switzerland, to which he and his 
family might retire; another from M. de ——, président à mortier 
in the Parliament of——, who proposed to me to draw up a memo- 
randum and remonstrances for this Parliament, which at that time 
was out of favour with the Court, at the same time offering to 





FOREBODINGS 585 


supply me with all the materials and documents which I might 
require. - 

When I am suffering, I am easily irritated. This was what 
happened when I recemed these letters, and I showed it by my 
answers, in which I flatly refused to do what I was asked. I certainly 
do not reproach myself for refusing, since these letters might have 
been snares set for me by my enemies,!° and what I was asked to. 
do was opposed to the principles from which I was still less than 
ever inclined to depart; but, when I might have refused politely, 
I refused rudely; and therefore in that I was wrong. 

The two letters of which I have just spoken will be found amongst 
my papers. The letter from the councillor did not altogether surprise 
me, because, in common with him and many others, I thought that 
the break up of the constitution threatened France with speedy 
destruction. The disasters of an unfortunate war,!! which were all 
the fault of the Government; the incredible financial disorders; the 
continued disagreements in the administration, which had hitherto 
been conducted by two or three ministers openly opposed, and who, 
in order to injure each other, were running the kingdom; the genera} 
discontent of the people and of all classes in the State; the stub- 
bornness of an obstinate woman, who, ever sacrificing her intel- 
lectual powers, if she possessed any, to her inclinations, almost in- 
variably kept the most capable men out of offices, in order to fill 
them with those who were her favourites; all these things con- 
tributed to justify the forebodings of the councillor, the public, and 
myself. These forebodings several times made me consider whether 
I should not act wisely in seeking a refuge for myself outside the 
kingdom, before the troubles, which seemed to threaten it, broke 
out; but, reassured by my insignificance and peaceful disposition, 
I believed that, in the retirement in which I intended to live, no 
storm could reach me. My only regret was that, when things were 
in this condition, M. de Luxembourg undertook commissions which 
could not fail to make him disliked in his government. I could have 
wished him to prepare a retreat for himself there, ready for all 


was intimately connected 





1 For instance, I knew that the President of 
with the Encyclopaedists and the Holbachians. 
1 The Seven Years’ War. 


586 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


emergencies, in case the great machine should fall to pieces, which 
there seemed reason to fear under existing circumstances; and it 
still seems to me at the present time that there can be no doubt 
that, if the reins of government had not fallen completely into the 
hands of one man, the French.monarchy would now be in its last 
agonies. 

While my condition grew worse, the printing of “Emile” pro- 
ceeded more slowly, and was at last entirely suspended. I was unable 
to learn the reason. Guy did not condescend either to write to me 
again or to answer my letters. I could not procure information 
from anyone, and knew nothing of what was going on, M. de 
Malesherbes being in the country at the time. No misfortune, what- 
ever it may be, ever troubles or overwhelms me, provided that I 
know in what it consists; but I am naturally afraid of darkness; I 
dread and hate its gloomy appearance; mystery always makes me 
uneasy; it is too much opposed to my disposition, which is frank 
to the verge of imprudence. During the daytime, the sight of the 
most hideous monster would, I believe, alarm me but little; but if 
I were to see by night a figure in a white sheet, I should be afraid. 
Thus my fancy, kindled by this prolonged silence, busied itself 
in conjuring up for me a number of phantoms. The more I had at 
heart the publication of my last and best work, the more I tormented 
myself to find out what could be delaying it; and, as I always went 
to extremes in everything, I saw in the suspension of the printing 
the suppression of the book’ Meanwhile, as I was unable to imagine 
the reason or the manner of this interruption, I remained a prey 
to the most cruel uncertainty. I wrote letter after letter to Guy, M. 
de Malesherbes, and Madame de Luxembourg; and as no answers 
came at all, or did not come when I expected them, I was utterly 
confused and almost beside myself. Unfortunately I heard, at the 
same time, that Father Griffet, a Jesuit, had spoken of “Emile,” and 
had even quoted passages from it. In a moment my imagination, like 
a flash of lightning, disclosed the whole iniquitous mystery; I saw 
its progress as clearly and as surely as if it had been revealed to me. 
I imagined that the Jesuits, furious at the tone of contempt in which 
I had spoken of their colleges, had got possession of my work; that 
it was they who were delaying its publication; that, having been in- 


THE TeESUITS? AA 587 


formed by their friend Guérin of my present condition, and fore- 
seeing my speedy death, of which I myself entertained no doubt, 
their object was to delay the printing until that event occurred, with 
the intention of mutilating and altering the work, and, in order to 
serve their own ends, of attributing to me opinions totally different 
from my own. It is astonishing what a crowd of facts and circum- 
stances entered my head to accommodate themselves to this mad 
idea, and to give it an air of probability—nay, to prove and demon- 
strate its truth. I knew that Guérin was completely devoted to the 
Jesuits. I attributed to them all the friendly advances which he had 
made to me. I persuaded myself that it was at their instigation that 
he had urged me to enter into negotiations with Néaulme; that it 
was through the latter that they had got hold of the first sheets of 
my work; and that they had subsequently found means to make Du- 
chesne stop printing, and perhaps to get possession of my manu- 
script, in order to work upon it at their leisure, until my death 
should leave them free to publish their travesty of it. I had always 
felt, in spite of Father Berthier’s show of affection, that the Jesuits 
had no love for me, not only as being an Encyclopaedist, but also be- 
cause my views were even more hostile to their principles and influ- 
ence than the unbelief of my colleagues, since atheistic and religious 
fanaticism, which approach closely in their common intolerance, are 
even capable of uniting, as they have done in China, and as they do 
now against myself; whereas rational and moral religion, which 
takes away all human control over the conscience, deprives of fur- 
ther resource those who claim that power. I knew that the Chancel- 
lor also was a great friend of the Jesuits; I was afraid that the son, 
intimidated by the father, might find himself compelled to abandon 
to them the manuscript which he had taken under his protection. 1 
even imagined that I could see the effect of this abandonment in the 
chicanery which was stirred up against me in regard to the two first 
volumes, in which fresh sheets were required for mere trifles; while 
the two remaining volumes, as was well known, were full of such 
outspoken sentiments, that it would have been necessary to recast 
them entirely, if they had been criticised by the censor like the two 
first. I knew besides—and M. de Malesherbes himself told me— 
that the Abbé de Grave, who had been charged with the inspection 


588 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


of this edition, was another partisan of the Jesuits. I saw nothing but 
Jesuits everywhere, without reflecting that they, on the eve of their 
annihilation, and fully occupied with their own defence, had some- 
thing else to do than to intrigue against the printing of a book in 
which they were`not concerned. I am wrong, however, in saying, 
“without reflection”; I certainly did think of it. M. de Malesherbes 
himself even took care to make the objection, as soon as he heard of 
my fantastic idea; but, owing to another of these caprices, to which 
a man is subject who attempts, in the bosom of obscurity, to judge 
of secret and important affairs of which he knows nothing, I re- 
fused to believe that the Jesuits were in danger, and I regarded such 
rumours as a ruse on their part to lull their adversaries to sleep. 
Their past and ever consistent successes gave me so terrible an idea 
of their power, that I already lamented the degradation of the Par- 
liament. I knew that M. de Choiseul had studied amongst the Jesuits, 
that Madame de Pompadour was not on bad terms with them, and 
that their league with the favourites and ministers had always been 
considered of great service to both parties against their common 
enemies. The Court appeared to be neutral; and feeling convinced 
that, if the society one day met with a severe check, the Parliament 
would never be strong enough to give it, I drew from this inaction 
on the part of the Court the justification of their confidence and the 
augury of their triumph. In short, seeing in all the rumours of the 
day nothing but a feint and snares on their part, and believing that, 
in their position of security, they had time to attend to everything, I 
had no doubt that they would soon crush Jansenism, the Parliament,. 
the Encyclopaedists, and all who had not submitted to their yoke; - 
and that, if they permitted my book to appear, it would not be until 
they had transformed it into a weapon for themselves, by making 
use of my name in order to deceive my readers. 

I felt that I was dying. I can scarcely understand how it was that 
my extravagant notions did not prove my death-blow, so terribly 
was I alarmed at the idea that my memory would be dishonoured in 
a work which was my best and most worthy of me. I never felt such 
dread of death; and I believe that, if I had died then, I should have 
died in a state of utter despair. Even at the present day, when I see 
the blackest and most hideous conspiracy which has ever been en- 


LETTERS TO M. DE MALESHERBES 589 


tered into against a man’s memory advancing without hindrance to 
its accomplishment, I shall die much more peacefully, feeling sure of 
leaving behind me in my writings a witness in my favour which, 
` sooner or later, will triumph over the conspiracies of men. 
[1762.]—M. de Malesherbes, the witness and confidant of my 
agitation, did his utmost to calm it, in a manner which proved his 
inexhaustible goodness of heart. M. de Luxembourg assisted in this 
good work, and went to see Duchesne several times, in order to find” 
out how the edition was progressing. At last the printing was re- 
sumed and proceeded more rapidly; and I have never known why 
it had been suspended. M. de Malesherbes took the trouble to come 
to Montmorency to calm my agitation, and he succeeded. My per- 
fect confidence in his uprightness, having overcome the derange- 
ment of my poor head, rendered effectual every effort on his part to 
restore its equilibrium. After what he had seen of my distress and 
frenzy, it was natural that he should consider that I greatly deserved 
to be pitied. The talk of the philosophical cabal, by which he was 
surrounded, repeated over and over again, came back to his mind. 
When I went to live at the Hermitage, they publicly declared, as I 
have already said, that I should not be able to stand it long. When 
they saw that I persevered, they said that it was due to obstinacy, 
pride, and shame at the idea of giving in, but that I was really 
wearied to death, and was very unhappy. M. de Malesherbes be- 
lieved it and wrote to me. Feeling deeply this mistake on the part of 
a man whom I so highly esteemed, I wrote to him four letters one 
after the other, in which I explained the true reasons for my con- 
duct, and at the same time faithfully described my tastes, my char- 
acter, and all the feelings of my inmost heart. These four letters, 
written offhand, hurriedly, with a single stroke of the pen, and 
which I never even read over, are perhaps the only compositions 
which I have ever written with perfect ease during the whole of my 
life, and, what is even more astonishing, at a time when I was suf- 
fering deeply and was in a state of the utmost depression. Feeling 
my strength giving way, I sighed at the thought that I was leaving 
behind, in the minds of honourable men, so unjust an opinion of 
myself; and, by means of the sketch hastily thrown off in these four 
letters, I attempted, in some degree, to supply the place of the Mem: 


590 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


oirs which I had proposed to write. These letters, which pleased M. 
de Malesherbes, and which he showed to people in Paris, are to a 
certain extent the summary of that which I here set forth in detail, 
and, on this ground, are worthy of being preserved. The copy of 
them, which he had made at my request, and which he sent me 
some years afterwards, will be found amongst my papers. 

From that time the only thing which troubled me, when I thought 
of my approaching death, was the want of a literary friend whom I 
could trust, in whose hands I could deposit my papers, so that, after 
my death, he might pick and choose from them. After my journey 
to Geneva, I had become friendly with Mouitou; I was fond of this 
young man, and should have liked him to close my eyes. I told him 
of my desire, and I believe that he would have performed this act of 
humanity with pleasure, if his affairs and his family had permitted 
him. Deprived of this consolation, I wished at least to give him a 
proof of my confidence, by sending him the “Savoyard Vicar’s Pro- 
fession of Faith” before it was published. He was very pleased with 
it; but, from the tone of his reply, he did not appear to me to share 
the feeling of confidence, with which at that time I awaited its ef- 
fect. He expressed a wish to have something of mine which no one 
else possessed. I sent him a “Funeral Oration upon the late Duke of 
Orleans,” which I had written for the Abbé d’Arty, but which had 
not been delivered because, contrary to his expectation, that duty had 
not been intrusted to him. 

The printing, when it had once been resumed, was quietly con- 
tinued and finished; and I noticed as a singular fact, that, after the 
fresh sheets, which had been stringently exacted for the first two 
volumes, the last two were passed without a word, and no objection 
of any kind was taken to their contents. However, I still felt an un- 
easiness, which I must not omit to mention. After having been 
alarmed at the Jesuits, I became alarmed at the Jansenists and phi- 
losophers. An enemy to everything that comes under the denomina- 
tion of party, faction, and cabal, I have never expected any good 
trom those who belong to them. The “Gossips” had left their former 
abode some time ago, and had established themselves so close to me, 
that, from their room, it was possible to hear everything that was 
said either in mine or on my terrace, and it was perfectly easy to 


- + f 
SUSPICION OB HIS NEIGHBORS 591 


climb, from their garden, the low wall which separated it from my 
turret. I had made this turret my study, and in it there was a table 
covered with proofs and sheets of “Emile” and the “Contrat So- 
cial”; these sheets I stitcfied together as they were sent to me, and 
thus had complete copies of all the volumes long before they were 
published. My thoughtlessness, carelessness, and confidence in M. 
Mathas, in the garden by which I was enclosed, often made me for- 
get to shut my turret at night, and in the morning I found it wide 
open. This would not have caused me the least uneasiness, had I 
not fancied that I noticed that my papers had been disturbed. Hav- 
ing noticed this several times, I became more careful about shutting 
the turret. The lock was bad, and the key would only turn half-way 
in it. A more careful examination showed me that my papers were 
disturbed even more than when I left the door wide open. At last, 
one of my volumes disappeared for a day and two nights, and I was 
utterly unable to find what had become of it until the morning of the 
third day, when I found it on my table again. I neither felt then, nor 
ever have felt, any suspicion of M. Mathas, or his nephew M. Du- 
moulin, as I know that both had a sincere regard for me, and I felt 
every confidence in them. I began to feel less sure about the “Gos- 
sips.” I knew that, although they were Jansenists, they had some 
connection with D’Alembert and lived in the same house. This 
caused me some uneasiness, and made me more careful. I removed 
my papers to my room, and entirely gave up visiting these people, 
as I had also heard that they had exhibited in several houses the first 
volume of “Emile,” which I had been imprudent enough to lend 
them. Although they continued to be my neighbours until I left, I 
held no further communication with them from that time forth. 
= The “Contrat Social” appeared a month or two before “Emile.” 
Rey, whom I had made promise never to introduce any of my books 
secretly into France, applied to the magistrate for permission to in- 
troduce this by way of Rouen, to which place he sent his consign- 
ments by sea. He received no reply; his packages remained at Rouen 
for several months, when they were sent back to him, after an at- 
tempt had been made to confiscate them; but he created such a dis- 
turbance that they were returned to him. Certain persons, out of 
curiosity, procured some copies from Amsterdam, which circulated 


592 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU . 


without making much stir. Mauléon, who had heard and even seen 
something of this, spoke to me about it with an air of mystery which 
surprised me, and would even have made me uneasy, unless, feeling 
sure that I had acted in order in everything, and had done nothing 
with which I could reproach myself, I had reassured myself by my 
grand principle. I entertained no doubt that M. de Choiseul, who 
had already shown himself favourably disposed towards me, and 
appreciated the eulogy which my esteem had caused me to pro- 
nounce upon him in this work, would support me on this occasion 
against the illwill of Madame de Pompadour. 

At that time, I certainly had as much reason as ever to reckon 
upon the kindness of M. de Luxembourg, and his support in case of 
necessity; for he never gave me more frequent or more touching 
proofs of his friendship. During his Easter visit, my melancholy 
state of health did not allow me to go to the chateau; but he never 
let a day pass without paying me a visit, and, seeing chat my suffer- 
ings were incessant, he at last persuaded me to let him send for 
Brother Céme.!” He brought him to me himself, and had the cour- 
age, certainly rare and meritorious in a great nobleman, to remain 
with me during the operation, which was a long and painful one. 
However, it was only a question of being probed; but I had never 
been able to submit to it, even at the hands of Morand, who made 
the attempt several times, but always unsuccessfully. Brother Côme, 
whose skill and lightness of hand was unequalled, at last succeeded 
in introducing a very small probe, after having caused me great suf- 
fering for more than two hours, during which I did my utmost to 
restrain my cries, to avoid distressing the tender-hearted Marquis. 
On the first examination, Brother Côme thought he had discovered 
a large stone, and told me so; on the second, he could not find it. 
After having made a second and third examination, with a care and 
exactitude which made the time seem very long, he declared that 
there was no stone at all, but that the prostate gland was scirrhous 
and abnormally swollen. He found the bladder large and in good 
condition, and he ended by expressing his opinion that I should suf- 

Jean Baseilhac (1703-1781), a great authority on stone and diseases of the 


bladder. He was a member of the religious order, founded by Robert de Molesme, 
in the village of Citeaux, in 1098. 


DETERMINES TO RETIRE 593 


fer greatly, and that I should live for a long time. If the second pre 
diction is fulfilled as completely as the first, my sufferings are not 
nearly at an end. 

Thus, after having been successively treated for so many years for 
complaints which I never had, I ended by learning that my malady, 
incurable without being fatal, would last as long as myself. My im- 
agination, checked by this knowledge; no longer presented to me 
the prospect of a cruel death in the agonies of stone. I ceased to fear 
that the end of a bougie, which had long ago been broken off in the 
urethra, had laid the foundation for the formation of a stone. Freed 
from imaginary evils, more cruel than those which were real, I en. 
dured the latter more patiently. There is no doubt that, since that 
time, I have suffered much less from my malady than I had ever 
done before, and I never remember that I owe this relief to M. de 
Luxembourg, without being stirred to fresh emotion when I think 
of him. 

Thus restored, so to speak, to life, and more than ever occupied 
with my plans for passing what still remained of it, I only waited 
for the publication of “Emile” in order to put them into execution. 
I thought of Touraine, which I had already visited, and which 
pleased me greatly, owing to the mildness of its climate and the 
gentleness of its inhabitants, 


“La terra molle e lieta e dilettosa 


Simile a se gli abitator produce.” * 


I had already mentioned my plan to M. de Luxembourg, who en- 
deavoured to dissuade me from it. I spoke to him of it again, as a 
step upon which I had decided. He then proposed to me the Châ- 
teau of Merlou, fifteen leagues from Paris, as a refuge which might 
possibly suit me, where he and ħis wife would be delighted to see me 
settled. The proposal touched me, and made a favourable impression 

upon my mind. First of all, it was necessary to see the place, and we 
agreed that he should send his valet de chambre with a carriage, on 
a day which was fixed upon, to drive me there. On that day I was 
very unwell, the journey had to be put off, and various disappoint- 


18 The country, agreeable, fertile, and delightful, produces inhabitants like 
itself. 


594 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ments prevented the plan from being carried out. As I subsequently 
heard that Merlou belonged, not to M. de Luxembourg, but to his 
wife, I had less difficulty in consoling myself for not having gone 
there. 

“Emile” at last appeared, without my having heard any more 
about fresh proofs or other difficulties. Before its publication, M. de 
Luxembourg asked me to return all the letters from M. de Males- 
herbes, which had reference to the work. My great confidence in 
both, my feeling of perfect security, prevented me from considering 
the extraordinary, and even alarming, aspect of this request. I gave 
up the letters, with the exception of one or two which had inadver- 
tently been left in some books. Some time previously, M. de Males- 
herbes had observed to me that he would withdraw the letters which 
I had written to Duchesne at the time when I was alarmed about 
the Jesuits; and I must confess that these letters were not very credi- 
table to my intelligence. But I told him that I was not desirous of ap- 
pearing better in any respect than I really was, and that he might 
leave the letters with Duchesne. I do not know whether he did so. 

The publication of this book did not take place with the outburst 
of approval which had followed that of all my other writings. Never 
did a work meet with such praise from private individuals, and so 
little approbation from the public. What those who were most capa- 
ble of judging said and wrote to me about it, confirmed me in the 
opinion that it was the best, as well as the most important, of my 
writings. But all this was told me with the most curious circumspec- 
tion, as if it had been a matter of importance to keep all favourable 
opinion of it secret. Madame de Boufflers, who declared to me that 
the author of such a work deserved statues and the homage of all 
mankind, without any ceremony begged me, at the end of her note, 
to send it back to her. D’Alembert, who wrote to me to the effect 
that the work decided my superiority, and was bound to place me at 
the head of all men of letters, did not sign his note, although he had 
signed all those which he had previously written to me. Duclos, a 
friend on whom I could depend, an upright but cautious man, and 
who thought highly of the work, avoided expressing any opinion of 
it in writing. La Condamine fell upon the “Profession of Faith,” 
and beat about the bush. Clairaut, in his letter, confined himself to 


ad E ai 33 
OPINIONS ABOUT EMILE 595 


the same part of the book, but was not afraid to declare how greatly 
he had been touched by reading it: he told me, in so many words, 
that the perusal of it had warmed his old soul. Of all those to whom 
I sent my book, he was tfie only one who told the world, openly and 
unreservedly, how highly he thought of it. 

Mathas, to whom I had also given a copy before it was on sale, 
lent it to M. Blaire, Parliamentary Councillor, and father of the In- 
tendant of Strasburg. M. de Blaire had a country house at Saint- 
Gratien, and Mathas, who was an old acquaintance, sometimes went 
to see him when he was able. He made him read “Emile” before it! 
came out. M. de Blaire, on giving it back to him, made the follow- 
ing remark, which was repeated to me on the same day: “M. 
Mathas, this is a very fine book; but it will soon be spoken of more 
than is desirable for the author.” When he repeated this to me, } 
merely laughed, and saw nothing more in it than the self-importance 
of a magistrate, who makes a mystery of everything. All the dis- 
turbing expressions, which were repeated to me, made equally little 
impression upon me; and, far from foreseeing in the least the catas- 
trophe which was close at hand, convinced of the beauty and useful- 
ness of my work, certain that I was in order in all respects, sure, as I 
believed I had a right to be, of all the influence of Madame de Lux- 
embourg, and even of the favour of Ministers, I congratulated my- 
self upon the resolution which I had taken—to retire in the midst 
of my triumphs, and when I had just crushed all those who were 
jealous of me. 

One thing alone alarmed me in regard to the publication of the 
work, not so much out of consideration of my own safety as from a 
desire to quiet my conscience. At the Hermitage and at Mont- 
morency, close to my doors, I had seen with indignation the vexa- 
tious annoyances inflicted, owing to the jealous care with which the 
pleasures of princes are guarded, upon the unfortunate peasants, 
who are obliged to put up with the damage caused to their fields by 
the game, not venturing to protect themselves further than by mak- 
ing a noise, and compelled to spend the nights amidst their beans 
and peas, beating kettles, drums, and bells, to keep off the wild 
boars. A witness of the barbarous severity with which M. le Comte 
de Charolois caused these poor people to be treated, I had made an 


596 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


attack upon this cruel behaviour, towards the end of “Emile.” This 
was another violation of my principles, which has not remained un- 
punished. I heard that the officers of M. le Prince de Conti treated 
the peasants upon his estates with hardly less cruelty. I trembled for 
fear that this Prince, towards whom I entertained the deepest feel- 
ings of respect and gratitude, might apply to himself-the attack 
which a feeling of revolted humanity had caused me to make upon 
his uncle, and be offended at it. However, as my conscience com- 
pletely justified me on this point, I quieted myself by its testimony, 
and I was right. At least, I have never heard that this great Prince 
paid the slightest attention to this passage, which was written long 
before I had the honour of his acquaintance. 

A few days before or after the publication of my book—I do not 
exactly remember the time—another work on the same subject ap- 
peared, taken word for word from my first volume, with the excep- 
tion of a few platitudes, scattered over the extract. This book bore 
the name of a Genevese, named Balexsert; and, according to the 
title, it had gained the prize at the Haarlem Academy. I easily under- 
stood that this Academy and this prize had been quite recently 
founded, in order to disguise the plagiarism in the eyes of the public; 
but I also saw that there must have been some previous intriguing, 
which I was at a loss to understand, either through the communica- 
tion of my manuscript, without which the theft would have been 
impossible, or for the purpose of establishing the story of this pre- 
tended prize, for which it had been necessary to find some founda- 
tion. It was not until several years afterwards that I penetrated the 
mystery, in consequence of a word which D’lvernois let fall, and 
saw, as it were between the lines, who it was that had drawn M. 
Belexsert into the affair. 

The dull murmur which precedes the storm began to make itself 
heard. All keen-witted persons saw clearly that, in regard to my 
book and myself, some plot was brewing, which would soon ex- 
plode. As for me, my feeling of security and stupidity were so great, 
that, far from having any idea of my misfortune, I did not even sus- 
pect the cause, after I had felt the effects of it. My opponents began 
by cleverly spreading the idea that, while the Jesuits were severely 
treated, no favouritism could be shown towards books and authors 


ALARMING RUMOURS 597 


who attacked religion. I was reproached for having put my name to 
“Emile,” as if I had not put it to all my other writings, against 
which nothing had been said. It seemed as if people were afraid of 
being forced to take ceftain steps which they would regret, ‘but 
which circumstances rendered necessary, and to which my impru- 
dence had given occasion. These rumours reached my ears, but 
caused me scarcely any uneasiness. It never even occurred to me that 
in the whole affair there could be anything which personally affected 
me—me, who felt myself so completely beyond reproach, so strongly 
supported, and so entirely in order in all respects, and who had no 
fear that Madame de Luxembourg would leave me in difficulties on 
account of an error, which, if it had been committed, was entirely 
due to her. But, as I knew the usual course of things in similar cases, 
that it is the custom to rage against the booksellers while the authors 
ate spared, I was not without some uneasiness in regard to poor 
Duchesne, if M. de Malesherbes should abandon him. 

I remained calm. The rumours increased and soon assumed a dif- 
ferent character. The public, and, above all, the Parliament, ap- 
peared irritated by my calmness. At the end of a few days the excite- 
ment became terrible; the threats changed their object, and were ad- 
dressed directly to myself. Members of Parliament might be heard 
saying quite openly, that it was no good to burn the books; that the 
authors ought to be burnt as well. As for the booksellers, not a word 
was said about them. The first time that these expressions of opin- 
ion, more worthy of an inquisitor of Goa than of a senator, were re- 
peated to me, I had no doubt that they were an invention of the Hol- 
bachians intended to frighten me and drive me out of the country. I 
laughed at this childish trick, and said to myself that if they had 
known the real state of things, they would have sought some other 
means of frightening me; but at length the rumour became so pro- 
nounced, that it was clear that it was serious. M. and Madame de 
Luxembourg had made their second visit to Montmorency some- 
what earlier than usual this year, and were there at the beginning of 
June. I heard very little said about my new books, in spite of the 
stir which they created in Paris; and neither M. nor Madame de 
Luxembourg said a word to me on the matter. 

One morning, however, when I was alone with M. de Luxem- 


598 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


bourg, he asked me, “Have you said anything against M. de Choi- 
seul in the ‘Contrat Social’?” Starting back with surprise, I replied, 
“I? No, certainly not; that I swear to you; on the contrary, I have 
pronounced upon him, with a pen which is not given to flattery, the 
most splendid eulogy that a minister has ever received.” With that, 
I quoted the whole passage to him. “And in ‘Emile’?” he went on 
to ask. “Not a word,” I answered; “there is not even a single word 
in it which refers to him.” “Ah!” said he, with more vivacity than 
usual, “you ought to have done the same thing in the other book, or 
to have made yourself clearer.” “I thought that I had done so,” I 
answered; “I esteemed him highly enough for that.” He was on the 
point of speaking again; I saw that he was ready to unbosom him- 
self; but he checked himself and remained silent. Oh! the misery of 
a courtier’s diplomacy, which, even in the best of hearts, overpowers 
friendship itself! 

This conversation, although brief, enlightened me upon my situa- 
tion, at least, in regard to certain things, and made me understand 
that it was certainly I who was attacked. I deplored this unheard-of 
fatality, which turned to my disadvantage all the good that I said 
and did. However, believing that I had Madame de Luxembourg 
and M. de Malesherbes to protect me in this matter, I did not see 
how it would be possible for my enemies to thrust them aside and 
reach me; for, in addition, I felt from that moment that it would no 
longer be a question of equity and justice, and that no one would 
trouble himself to examine whether I was really right or wrong. 
However, the storm roared louder and louder. Even Néaulme him- 
self, in his wearisome chatter, showed me how greatly he regretted 
having had anything to do with this work, and the certainty which 
he seemed to entertain of the fate which threatened both the book 
and its author. One thing, however, still comforted me. I found 
Madame de Luxembourg so calm, so contented, so cheerful even, 
that she must have known what she was about, since she did not 
show the least anxiety on my account, did not utter a word of sym- 
pathy or apology, and regarded the turn the affair was taking with 
as much coolness as if she had nothing to do with it, and had never 
taken the least interest in myself. The only thing that surprised me 
was, that she said nothing at all to me, It appeared to me that she 


WARNED TO LEAVE FRANCE 599 


ought to have said something. Madame de Boufflers seemed more 
uneasy. She came to and fro in an agitated manner, showed great 
activity, assured me that M. le Prince de Conti was also exerting 
himself to ward off the blew which was being prepared for me, and 
which she attributed simply to the present state of affairs, in which 
it was of importance to the Parliament not to give the Jesuits an op- 
portunity of accusing it of indifference in religious matters. She 
seemed, however, to have little confidence in the success of the 
Prince’s efforts or her own. The drift of all her conversations, which 
were more alarming than reassuring, was the same: to induce me to 
leave the country and retire to England, where she offered to find 
me several friends, amongst others the celebrated Hume, with whom 
she had long been acquainted. Seeing that I persisted in remaining 
calm, she adopted a line which was more calculated to shake my 
resolution. She gave me to understand that, if I was arrested and ex- 
amined, I should be obliged to mention Madame de Luxembourg, 
and that her friendship for me certainly deserved that I should not 
expose myself to the danger of being forced to compromise her. I 
replied that she might make herself easy, and that in such a case I 
would certainly not compromise her. She answered, that such a reso- 
lution was easier to take than to keep, and in this she was right, es- 
pecially in my case, since I was quite determined never to perjure 
myself, or speak falsely before the judges, whatever risk there might 
be in telling the truth. 

Seeing that, although this observation had made a certain impres- 
sion upon me, I could not yet bring myself to decide upon flight, she 
spoke to me of the Bastille for a few weeks, as a means of escaping 
from the jurisdiction of the Parliament, which does not interfere 
with State prisoners. I made no objection to this singular favour, 
provided that it was not solicited in my name. As she said no more 
about it, I afterwards assumed that she had only proposed the idea 
in order to try me, and that an expedient, which would have put an 
end to everything, was not desired. 

A few days afterwards, M. le Maréchal received from the curé of 
Deuil, a friend of Grimm and Madame d’Epinay, a letter, contain- 
ing the information, which he declared came from a trustworthy 
source, that the Parliament intended to proceed against me with ex- 


600 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


treme severity, and that, on a certain day, which he mentioned, a 
warrant would be issued for my apprehension. I regarded this as an 
invention on the part of the Holbachians; I knew that the Parlia- 
ment paid great attention to forms, and that it would be an infringe- 
ment of them all, to commence on this occasion with a warrant of 
arrest, before it had been judicially established whether I acknowl- 
edged the book and was really its author. I said to Madame de Bouf- 
flers: “It is only in the case of those crimes which disturb the public 
safety, that a warrant is issued, upon a simple information, for the 
arrest of the accused, for fear they may escape punishment. But, 
when it is desired to punish an offence like mine, which deserves 
honours and rewards, the custom is, to proceed against the book, 
and to avoid attacking the author as much as possible.” Upon this, 
she pointed out to me a very subtle distinction, which I had forgot- 
ten, in order to prove to me that it was a favour to me to issue a war- 
rant, instead of summoning me to be heard. On the following day, I 
received a letter from Guy, in which he informed me that, having 
been with M. le Procureur-général the same day, he had seen upon 
his desk the rough draft of a “Requisition” 14 against “Emile” and 
its author. Observe that the said Guy was a partner of Duchesne, 
who had printed the work, and also, having no anxiety on his own 
account, gave this information to the author out of charity. One may 
imagine how likely it all appeared to me! It was so simple, so natu- 
ral, that a bookseller, when admitted to an audience of the procur- 
eur-général, should quietly read the manuscripts and rough drafts 
scattered over his desk! Madame de Boufflers and others assured me 
that it was true. In consequence of the absurdities which were being 
continually dinned into my ears, I was inclined to believe that every- 
body had gone mad. 

Feeling sure that, under all this, there was some secret which was 
being withheld from me, I quietly awaited the issue of events, hav- 
ing full confidence in my upright behaviour and innocence through- 
out the affair, and being only too happy, whatever persecution might 
await me, to be summoned to the honour of suffering for the truth’s 
sake. Far from being afraid, and keeping myself concealed, I went 


* Réquisitoire: A demand for surrender. 


THE STORM BREAKS 60r 


every day to the chateau, and took my usual walk in the afternoon, 
On the 8th of June, the day before the issue of the decree, I took it in 
company with two professors belonging to the Oratory, Father 
Alamanni and Father Mamdard. We took some provisions with us 
to Champeaux, where we enjoyed a hearty meal. We had forgotten 
to take glasses, and, supplied their place with stalks of rye, through 
which we sucked the wine from the bottles, eagerly picking out the 
thickest stalks, in order to see which could suck the hardest. I-have 
never been so gay in my life. 

I have mentioned how I suffered from sleeplessness in my youth. 
Since then, I had accustomed myself to read in bed every night, until 
I found my eyes getting heavy. Then I put out my candle, and tried 
to doze for a few minutes, which did not last long. My usual eve- 
ning reading was the Bible, and in this manner I have read the 
whole of it through at least five or six times. On this particular eve- 
ning, finding myself more wakeful than usual, I continued my read- 
ing for a longer time, and read the whole book, which ends with 
the history of the Levite of Ephraim—the Book of Judges, if I am 
not mistaken, for I have never looked at it since then. This history 
greatly affected me, and I was pondering over it in a half-dreamy 
state, from which I was suddenly roused by a noise and a light. The 
latter was carried by Thérése, who was showing the way to M. la 
Roche, who, seeing me start up abruptly, said to me, “Do not be 
alarmed: I come from Madame la Maréchale, who has written to 
you herself, and also sends you a letter from M. le Prince de Conti.” 
Inside Madame de Luxembourg’s letter I found another, which had 
been brought to her by a special messenger from the Prince, con- 
taining the information that, in spite of all his efforts, it had been 
decided to proceed against me with the utmost rigour of the law. 
“The excitement,” so he wrote, “is very great: nothing can avert the 
blow: the Court demands it, the Parliament wills it: at seven o’clock 
to-morrow morning the warrant of arrest will be issued, and exe- 
cuted immediately. I have obtained an assurance that, if he makes 
his escape, he will not be pursued; but, if he persists in his wish to 
allow himself to be taken, then he will be arrested.” La Roche be- 
sought me, in Madame de Luxembourg’s name, to get up and go 


602 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


and consult with her. It was two o'clock: she had just gone to bed. 
“She is waiting for you,” he added, “and will not go to sleep until 
she has seen you.” I hurriedly dressed myself, and hastened to her. 

For the first time in her life she appeared to me agitated. Her anx- 
iety touched me. In this moment of surprise, in the middle of the 
night, I myself was not free from excitement, but when I saw her I 
forgot myself, and thought only of her and the melancholy part 
which she would play if I allowed myself to be taken; for, while I 
felt that I had courage enough never to speak anything but the truth, 
even though it was bound to injure and ruin me, I did not feel that 
I had sufficient presence of mind or cleverness, or even, perhaps, suf- 
ficient firmness, to avoid compromising her, if I was hard pressed. 
This decided me to sacrifice my reputation for the sake of her peace 
of mind, and, on this occasion, to do for her, that which nothing 
would have induced me to do for myself. The moment my mind 
was made up, I told her, as I did not wish to depreciate the value of 
my sacrifice, by allowing it to be purchased from me. I am convinced 
that she could not have been mistaken as to my motives, but she did 
not say a single word to me which showed that she appreciated 
them. I was so shocked at this indifference that I even hesitated 
whether I should not draw back, but M. de Luxembourg appeared 
upon the scene, and Madame de Boufflers arrived from Paris a few 
moments afterwards. They did what Madame de Luxembourg 
ought to have done. I allowed myself to be flattered, I was ashamed 
to go back from my word, and the only question remaining was, 
where I should go, and when I should start. M. de Luxembourg 
proposed that I should stay a few days at his house, incognito, which 
would give me more time to consider and decide upon my course of 
action. 1 would not agree to this, any more than to the suggestion 
that I should go secretly to the Temple. I persisted in my intention of 
setting out the same day, rather than remain in concealment any- 
where. 

Feeling that I had secret and powerful enemies in the kingdom, I 
thought that, in spite of my attachment for France, I ought to leave 
it to make sure of not being disturbed. My first impulse was to re- 
tire to Geneva, but a moment’s reflection was sufficient to dissuade 
me from committing so great an act of folly. I knew that the French 


DECIDES TO GO TO’ SWITZERLAND 603 


Ministry, which had even greater power in Geneva than in Paris, 
would not leave me in peace in one of these two cities any more than 
in the other, if it was determined to persecute me. I knew that the 
“Discours sur lInégalite” had aroused against me, in the Council, a 
feeling of hatred, which was the more dangerous, as that body did 
not venture to show it openly. Lastly, I knew that when the “Nou- 
velle Héloïse” appeared it had been eager to prohibit it, at the ur- 
gent request of Doctor Tronchin; but, finding that no one imitated 
its example, not even in Paris, it was ashamed of its blunder and 
withdrew the prohibition. I had no doubt that, finding the present 
opportunity more favourable, it would do its best to profit by it. I 
knew that, in spite of all appearances, a secret jealousy prevailed 
against me in the hearts of all the Genevese, which only waited for 
an opportunity to satisfy itself. Nevertheless, patriotism called me 
back to my country, and if I could have ventured to hope that I 
could live there in peace, I should not have hesitated for a moment; 
but, since neither honour nor reason allowed me to take refuge 
there as a fugitive, I resolved only to retire to its neighbourhood, and 
to wait in Switzerland until I saw what course would be taken in 
regard to me at Geneva. It will presently be seen that this state of un- 
certainty did not last long. 

Madame de Boufflers strongly disapproved of this resolution, and 
made fresh efforts to persuade me to cross over to England. She did 
not shake my determination. I have never liked England or the Eng- 
lish, and all the eloquence of Madame de Boufflers, far from over- 
coming my dislike, only seemed to increase it, without my knowing 
why. 

Being determined to set out the same day, as soon as morning 
came, I had already started, as far as everybody else was concerned; 
La Roche, whom [ sent to fetch my papers, would not tell even 
Thérése whether I had left or not. Ever since I had decided some day 
to write the Memoirs of my life, I had accumulated a number of let- 
ters and papers, so that he was obliged to make several journeys. 
Those papers which had already been sorted were laid aside, and I 
spent the rest of the morning in sorting the others, intending only to 
take away with me such as might be useful and to burn the rest. M. 
de Luxembourg was kind enough to help me in this task, which 


604 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


took up so much time, that we were unable to finish it in the morn- 
ing, and I had not time to burn anything. He offered to sort the 
papers which remained, and to burn the rubbish himself, without 
leaving anyone else to do it, and to send me all that he put aside. I 
accepted his offer, very glad to be freed from this anxiety, so that I 
might be able to spend the few hours which still remained to me to- 
gether with those who were so dear, whom I was on the point of 
leaving for ever. He took the key of the room where I left the papers, 
and, at my earnest entreaty, sent for my poor “aunt,” who was con- 
sumed by most cruel anxiety to know what had become of me and 
what was going to become of me, and was expecting the officers of 
justice to arrive at any moment, without knowing what she was to 
do or what she was to say to them. La Roche brought her to the cha- 
teau, without telling her anything; she believed that I was already 
far away; when she saw me, she uttered a piercing cry, and flung 
herself into my arms. Oh, friendship, union of hearts, intercourse, 
and intimacy! During this sweet and cruel moment all the happy, 
tender, and peaceful days which we had spent in company, crowd- 
ing together, made me feel the more keenly the anguish of our first 
separation, after we had rarely lost sight of each other for a single 
day, during a period of nearly seventeen years. M. de Luxembourg, 
who witnessed our embrace, was unable to restrain his tears, and left 
us alone. Thérése did not want to leave me. I represented to her the 
difficulties in the way of her following me at this moment, and the 
necessity for her remaining to dispose of my effects and to collect my 
money. When a warrant of arrest is issued against a man, it is the 
custom to seize his papers, to set a seal upon his belongings, or to 
make an inventory of them and appoint some one to take charge of 
them. It was very necessary that she should remain, to observe what 
took place, and do the best she could. I promised her that she should 
soon rejoin me; M. le Maréchal confirmed my promise; but I re- 
fused to tell her where I was going, so that, if questioned by those 
who came to arrest me, she might be able to declare with truth her 
ignorance on this point. When I embraced her at the moment of 
separation, I was conscious of a most singular emotion, and I said 
to her, with a fervour, which was, alas! only too prophetic: “My 
child, you must arm yourself with courage. You have shared the 


FAREWELLS ae of 605 


prosperity of my happy days; it now remains for you, since you de- 
sire it, to share my misery. You must expect nothing but insults and 
affliction if you follow me. The lot, which begins for me on this mel- 
ancholy day, will attend me until my last hour.” 

Nothing further remained for me to do, except to think about my 
departure. The officers of justice were to have arrived at ten o'clock. 
It was four o’clock in the afternoon when I started, and they had not | 
yet arrived. It had been settled that I should travel by the post; I 
had no conveyance. M. le Maréchal made me a present of a cabrio- 
let,1° and lent me horses and a postillion as far as the first post, 
where, thanks to the arrangements he had made, no difficulty was 
made about providing me with horses. 

As I had not dined at table, and had not shown myself in the cha- 
teau, the ladies came to say good-bye to me in the entresol, where I 
had spent the day. Madame la Maréchale embraced me several 
times, with every appearance of melancholy; but I no longer per- 
ceived in her embraces the heartiness of those which she had lav- 
ished upon me two or three years before. Madame de Boufflers also 
embraced me and spoke very kindly to me. Madame de Mirepoix, 
who was present, also embraced me, which considerably surprised 
me. This lady is extremely cold, formal, and reserved, and, as it 
seems to me, not altogether free from the haughtiness which is natu- 
ral to the house of Lorraine. She had never paid much attention to 
me. Whether it was that, flattered by the unexpected honour, I was 
inclined to attach greater value to it, or that she really mingled with 
her embrace a little of that pity which is natural to generous hearts, 
I found in her movements and looks a certain earnestness, which 
deeply affected me. On thinking of it afterwards, I have often sus- 
pected that she, knowing the lot to which I was condemned, had 
been unable to resist a momentary feeling of sympathy for my 
destiny. 

M. le Maréchal did not open his mouth; he was as pale as death. 
He persisted in accompanying me as far as the conveyance, which 
was waiting for me at the watering-place. We crossed the garden 
without uttering a word. I had a key of the park, with which I 
opened the gate; after which, instead of putting it back into my 


1 A light two-wheeled carriage. 


606 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


pocket, I gave it to him without a word. He took it with surprising 
eagerness, of which I have been unable to avoid thinking frequently 
since then. I have rarely in my life experienced a more bitter mo- 
ment than that of this separation. Our embrace was long and silent; 
we both felt that it was a last farewell. 

Between La Barre and Montmorency I met, in a hired coach, four 
men dressed in black, who saluted me with a smile. From what 
Thérèse afterwards told me concerning the appearance of the ofh- 
cers, the hour of their arrival, and the manner in which they be- 
haved, I have always been convinced that it was they whom I met; 
especially as I subsequently heard that, instead of the warrant hav- 
ing been issued against me at seven o'clock, as I had been informed, 
it had not been put in force until midday. I had to pass right 
through Paris. There is not much facility for concealment in an open 
carriage. In the streets, I saw several persons who saluted me as if 
they knew me, but I did not recognise one of them. The same eve- 
ning I turned aside to pass Villeroy. At Lyons, travellers had to go 
before the town-major. This might have been embarrassing for a 
man who desired neither to lie nor to change his name. I went with 
a letter from Madame de Luxembourg, to ask M. de Villeroy that I 
might be excused from this duty. M. de Villeroy gave me a letter, 
which I did not make use of, since I did not pass through Lyons. 
This letter may still be found, sealed up, amongst my papers. M. le 
Duc pressed me to sleep at Villeroy, but I preferred to take the high 
road again, and I accomplished two more stages the same day. 

My conveyance was uncomfortable, and I was too unwell to make 
long-day journeys. Besides, my appearance was not sufficiently im- 
posing to ensure my being well served; and everybody knows that, 
in France, post-horses only feel the whip upon the postillions’ shoul- 
ders. By feeing the guides handsomely, I thought I could supply the 
place of threatening words and gestures; but this only made matters 
much worse. They took me for a poor wretch travelling on commis- 
sion, who was journeying by post for the first time in his life. From 
that time I was supplied with nothing but the most sorry nags, and 
became the laughing-stock of the postillions. I ended, as I ought to 


*° Courriers: those who make use of post-horses. 


REFLECTIONS | 607 


have begun, by being patient and saying nothing, and let them go on 
as they pleased. 

In abandoning myself to the reflections upon all that had recently 
happened to me, which presented themselves to my mind, I had 
ample resources agains€ weariness during my journey; but this 
suited neither the bent of my mind nor the inclinations of my heart. 
It is astonishing how easily I forget misfortunes, when once they are 
past, however recent they may be. The recollection of them grows 
weaker and finally disappears without difficulty as soon as they have 
happened, to the same extent as the thought of them, as long as they 
are in the future, alarms and troubles me. My cruel imagination, 
which tortures itself incessantly in anticipating misfortunes which 
do not yet exist, distracts my memory, and prevents me from recall- 
ing to mind those which are past. No further precautions are possi- 
ble against what has happened, and it is useless to trouble oneself 
about it. In a manner I exhaust my misfortunes in advance. The 
greater my suffering in foreseeing them, the more easily I forget 
them; while, on the contrary, incessantly occupied with the thought 
of my past happiness, I recall it and, so to speak, chew the cud of it 
to such an extent that, when I desire it, I am able to enjoy it over 
again. It is due to this happy frame of mind, I am convinced, that I 
have never known that spiteful disposition which ferments in a re- 
vengeful heart, which never forgets affronts received, and worries it- 
self with all the evil it would like to inflict upon its enemy by way of 
requital. Naturally hot-tempered, I have felt angry, even enraged, in 
the impulse of the moment; but a desire for vengeance has never 
taken root in my heart. I think too little about the offence to think 
much about the offender. I only think of the injury which I have re- 
ceived from him on account of that which I may still receive from 
him; and, if I were sure that he would inflict no further injury upon 
me, that which he has already inflicted would be immediately for- 
gotten. Forgiveness of offences is constantly preached to us. This is, 
no doubt, a most beautiful virtue, but it is not meant for me. I do 
not know whether my heart can conquer its hatred, for it has never 
felt any; and I think too little about my enemies to have the merit of 
forgiving them. I will not say to what extent they torment them- 
selves, in order to torment me. I am at their mercy, they have abso- 


608 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


lute power, they make use of it. There is only one thing beyond 
their power, which I defy them to do. Although they torment them- 
selves about me, they cannot compel me to torment myself about 
them. 

The day after my departure, I had so completely forgotten all that 
had recently happened—the Parliament, Madame de Pumpadour, 
M. de Choiseul, Grimm, D’Alembert, their plots, and their accom- 
plices—that I should never have thought of it again, had it not been 
for the precautions which I was obliged to take. In place of all this, 
I recalled to mind the subject of my iast reading on the eve of my 
departure. I also recalled the Idylls of Gessner,!7 which his trans- 
lator, Hubert, had sent me some time ago. These two remembrances 
took so strong a hold upon me, and became so blended in my 
‘thoughts, that I determined to try and combine them, by treating, 
after the manner of Gessner, the theme of the Levite of Ephraim. 
This idyllic and simple style appeared little suited for so fearful a 
subject, and it was hardly to be imagined that my present situation 
would furnish me with many cheerful ideas to relieve its sombre- 
ness. However, I made the attempt, simply to amuse myself in my 
chaise, and without any hope of succeeding. No sooner had I be- 
gun, than I was astonished at the agreeable turn of my ideas, and the 
ease with which I expressed them. In three days, I wrote the three 
first cantos of this little poem, which I subsequently finished at Mo- 
tiers; and I am convinced that I have never written anything in my 
life which is pervaded by a more touching gentleness of character, a 
fresher colouring, a more simple delineation, a more faithful char- 
acteiisation, a more old-fashioned simplicity in every respect—and 
that in spite of the horrible nature of the subject, which is essentially 
abominable; so that, in addition to everything else, I had the credit 
of overcoming a further difficulty. The “Levite d’Ephraim,” if it is 
not the best of my works, will always be my favourite. I have never 
read it again, I never shall read it again, without being sensible of 
the approval of a heart free from bitterness, which, far from being 
soured by misfortune, finds consolation for it with itself, and, in it- 
self, the means of compensation for it. If all those great philosophers 
who, in their works, profess themselves so superior to that adversity 


“A celebrated Swiss poet and landscape-painter (1730-1788). 


EMOTION ON ENTERING BERNE 609 


which they have never experienced, were gathered together and 
placed in a position similar to mine—if, in the first outbursts of the 
indignation of insulted honour, a similar task were set them to ac 
complish, it would soon be seen how they would acquit themselves. 

When leaving Montmorency for Switzerland, I had made up my 
mind to go and stay at Yverdun with my good old friend Roguin, 
who had been living there in retirement for some years, and had 
invited me to go and see him. On the road, I heard that Lyons would 
be out of my way, and this prevented me from passing through it. 
But, on the other hand, I was obliged: to pass Besançon, a fortified 
town, which, consequently, exposed me to the same inconvenience. 
I accordingly decided to turn to the left, and travel by way of Salins, 
under pretence of visiting M. de Mairan, M. Dupin’s nephew, who 
held a post at the salt-works, and from whom I had frequently re- 
ceived pressing invitations to go and see him. The expedient was 
successful; I did not find M. de Mairan, and, highly pleased at hav- 
ing avoided delay, I continued my journey, without a word being 
said to me by anyone. 

On entering the territory of Berne I ordered a halt. I got out of 
the carriage, flung myself upon the ground, kissed and embraced it, 
and, in my delight, cried out: “O Heaven, protector of virtue, I offer 
my praise to thee! I set foot in a land of liberty.” Thus it is that, in 
the blind confidence of my hopes, I have always been seized with 
passionate fondness for that which was destined to bring misfortune 
upon me. The surprised postillion thought I was mad. I got into the 
carriage again, and, a few hours afterwards, I had the pure and 
lively satisfaction of being pressed in the arms of the worthy Roguin. 
Ah! let us take breath for a few moments with this worthy host! I 
must recover my courage and strength; I shall soon have need of 
both. 

‘It is not without reason that, in this narrative, I have described in 
detail all the circumstances which I have been able to recollect. Al- 
though they may not seem very clear in themselves, they may throw 
light upon the course of events, when the reader once holds the 
thread of the plot; for instance, although they do not give the first 
idea of the problem which I have to propose, they afford consider 
able assistance in solving it. 


610 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


If we assume that, in order to carry out the plot which was di- 
rected against me, my removal was absolutely necessary, then, in or- 
der to bring it about, everything was bound to happen almost ex- 
actly as it did. But if, instead of allowing myself to be terrified by 
Madame de Luxembourg’s nocturnal embassy and disturbed by her 
anxiety, I had continued to hold out as I had begun; and if, instead 
of remaining at the chateau, I had returned from it to my bed and 
slept quietly until morning, would the warrant have been put into 
execution just the same? This is an important question, upon the 
answer to which depends the answer to many others; and, in order 
to investigate it, it is important to observe the hour of the decree of 
arrest that was threatened and the hour of its actual issue. This is a 
homely but expressive example of the importance of the most tri- 
fling details in the exposition of facts, the secret causes of which are 
investigated, in order to discover them by a process of induction. 


BOOK XII 


Here commences the work of darkness, in which, for eight years 
past, I have been entombed, without ever having been able, in spite 
of all my efforts, to penetrate its frightful obscurity. In the abyss of 
misfortune in which I am submerged, I feel the strokes of the blows 
which are directed against me. I perceive their immediate instru- 
ment, but I cannot see either the hand which guides them or the 
means which it employs. Shame and misfortune fall upon me as if 
of themselves, and unawares. When my heart, torn with grief, gives 
vent to lamentation, I seem like a man who complains without rea- 
son, and the authors of my ruin have discovered the incomprehen- 
sible art of making the public the accomplice of their plot, without 
their suspecting it or perceiving its effect. Therefore, while narrating 
the events which concern me, the treatment which I have suffered, 
and all that has happened to me, I am not in a position to trace them 
back to the moving spirit, or to assign the causes, while stating the 
facts. These first causes are all indicated in the three preceding 
books. All the interests that concern me and all the secret motives 
are there set forth. But it is impossible for me to explain, even con- 
jecturally, how these various causes are combined in order to bring 
about the strange events of my life. If, amongst my readers, there 
are any sufficiently generous to desire to fathom these mysteries and 
discover the truth, let them carefully read again the three preceding 
books, let them make use of the information within their reach in 
dealing with each fact they read of in what follows, let them go back 
from intrigue to intrigue, from agent to agent, until they come to 
the prime movers of all. I know well what will be the result of their 
inquiries, but I myself am lost in the dark and tortuous windings of 
the subterranean paths which will lead them to it. 
During my stay at Yverdun I made the acquaintance of M. Ro- 
&gt; guin’s whole family; amongst others of his niece, Madame Boy de 
611 


612 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


la Tour, and her daughters, whose father, as I think I have already 
mentioned, I had known at Lyons. She had come to Yverdun on a 
visit to her uncle and sisters. Her eldest daughter, who was about 
fifteen years of age, delighted me by her intelligence and her excel- 
lent character. I became most tenderly attached to the mother and 
daughter. M. Roguin intended the latter to marry his nephew, the 
colonel, a man already somewhat advanced in years, who also dis- 
played great affection for myself; but, although the uncle was mad 
for this marriage, although the nephew also strongly desired it, and 
I took a lively interest in satisfying the wishes of both, the great dis- 
parity of age and the extreme repugnance of the young girl caused 
me to support the mother in preventing the marriage, which did not 
take place. The colonel subsequently married Mademoiselle Dillan, 
one of his relatives, a lady whose beauty and character were after my 
own heart, and who has made him the happiest of husbands and 
fathers. In spite of this, M. Roguin has never been able to forget that 
on this occasion I opposed his wishes. I am consoled for this by the 
certainty that I fulfilled the holiest duty of friendship, both towards 
himself and his family, which does not consist in always making 
oneself agreeable, but in always advising for the best. 

I did not long remain in doubt as to the reception which awaited 
me at Geneva, in case I felt inclined to return there. My book was- 
burned there, and a warrant was issued against me on the 18th of 
June, that is to say, nine days after it had been issued in Paris. In 
this second decree, so many incredible absurdities were heaped to- 
gether, and the ecclesiastical edict was so distinctly violated, that at 
first | refused to believe the news when it reached me, and, when it 
was actually confirmed, I trembled lest so manifest and crying an 
infringement of every law, commencing with that of common sense, 
should turn Geneva upside down. But I need not have disturbéd 
myself; everything remained quiet. If there was any disturbance 
amongst the people, it was only directed against me, and I was pub- 
licly treated by all the town-gossips and cuistres* like a pupil threat- 
ened with a flogging for having said his catechism badly. 

These two decrees gave the signal for the cry of execration which 
went up against me throughout Europe with unexampled fury. All 


*See p. 399. The meaning “pedant” is more suitable here. 


EXECRATED THROUGHOUT EUROPE 613 


the newspapers, journals, and pamphlets sounded a most terrible 
note of alarm. The French especially—that gentle, polite, and gener- 
ous people, who so pride themselves on their good-breeding and 
respect for the unfortunate—suddenly forgetting their favourite 
virtues, distinguished th€mselves by the number and violence of the 
insults with which they vied with one another in overwhelming me. 
I was called an infidel, an atheist, a lunatic, a madman, a wild beast, 
a wolf. The next manager of the Journal de Trévoux? made a side 
attack upon my pretended wolfishness, which was a fairly convinc- 
ing proof of his own. In short, it almost seemed as if people in Paris 
were afraid of coming into collision with the police, if, when pub- 
lishing a book upon any subject whatever, they omitted to interlard 
it with insults against myself. Seeking in vain for the cause of this 
universal animosity, I was ready to believe that all the world had 
gone mad. What! the compiler of the “Paix Perpetuelle” the pro- 
moter of discord! the editor of the “Vicaire Savoyard” an infidel! 
the author of the “Nouvelle Héloïse” a wolf! the author of “Emile” 
a madman! Good heavens! what then should I have been if I had 
published the work upon “L’Esprit,’ or something of the same 
kind? And yet, in the storm which burst upon the head of the 
author? of this book, the public, instead of uniting its voice to that 
of his persecutors, avenged him by its eulogies. Compare his book 
and mine, the different reception which they have met with, the 
manner in which the two authors have been treated in the different 
countries of Europe, and then find, if possible, reasons for these dif- 
ferences which can satisfy a sensible man. That is all I ask, then I 
will say no more. 

I was so comfortable at Yverdun that I decided to stay there, at 
the earnest entreaty of M. de Roguin and all his family. The kind- 
ness of M. de Moiry de Gingins, bailli of this town, also encouraged 
me to remain within his jurisdiction. The colonel pressed me so 
strongly to accept a lodging in a little detached building, between 
the court and garden of his house, that I consented; and he imme- 
diately set about furnishing and providing it with everything neces- 


2 A Jesuit newspaper. 
3 Montesquieu. 


614 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


sary for my humble wants. Roguin, the banneret,* was so assiduous 
in my behalf, that he never left me for a moment during the day. I 
highly appreciated all his kindness, but I was sometimes consider- 
ably bored by it. The day of my installation in my new abode was 
already settled, and I had written to Thérése to rejoin me, when sud- 
denly I heard that a storm was brewing against me in Berne, which 
was attributed to the extreme religionists, and of which I have 
never been able to discover the origin. The Senate, aroused by no one 
knows whom, seemed determined not to leave me in peace in my 
retreat. Directly the bailli heard of this excitement, he wrote on my 
behalf to several members of the Government, reproaching them 
for their unreasoning intolerance, and calling it a shame on their 
part to wish to refuse a persecuted and worthy man the refuge 
which so many bandits found in their States. Shrewd persons have 
conjectured that the warmth of his reproaches rather exasperated 
than soothed their minds. However that may be, neither his reputa- 
tion nor his eloquence could ward off the blow. Having received an 
intimation of the order which he had to make known to me, he gave 
me a hint of it beforehand, and I decided to leave on the following 
day, before the same arrived. My difficulty was, to know where to 
go. Geneva and France were closed to me, and I clearly foresaw that, 
in this matter, everyone would be eager to imitate his neighbour’s 
example. 

Madame Boy de la Tour proposed to me to take up my quarters in 
an empty furnished house, belonging to her son, in the village of 
Motiers, in Val-de-Travers, in the county of Neufchatel. I only had 
to cross a mountain to get there. The offer was the more opportune, 
since, in the territory of the King of Prussia, I should naturally be 
sheltered from persecution; at least, religion could not be alleged as 
an excuse for it. But a secret objection, which it did not become me 
to express, was calculated to make me hesitate. The innate love of 
justice, by which my heart was always consumed, united to my 
secret liking for France, had inspired me with aversion for the King 
of Prussia, who, in his principles and conduct, appeared to me to 
trample underfoot all respect for natural law and human obligations. 


“ Banneret: a feudal lord who had a sufficient number of vassals to raise a 
standard. 


ROUSSEAU AND THE KING OF PRUSSIA 615 


Amongst the framed engravings, with which I had decorated the 
walls of my turret at Montmorency, was a portrait of this Prince, 
underneath which I had written a distich, which concluded as 


follows: 
o 


“Il pense en philosophe, et se conduit en roi.” ® 


This line, which, proceeding from any other pen, would have been 
high praise, contained, coming from mine, a meaning which was 
by no means ambiguous, and which, besides, was only too clearly 
explained by the line which preceded it. My numerous visitors had 
all seen this distich. The Chevalier de Lorenzi had even copied it 
for D’Alembert, and I had no doubt that the latter had taken care 
to make use of it to present me in a favourable light to the King.” I 
had further aggravated my first offence by a passage in “Emile,” in 
which, under the name of Adrastus, King of the Daunians, I had 
sufficiently indicated whom I had in view. I knew that the remark 
had not escaped the critics, since Madame de Boufflers had on sev- 
eral occasions mentioned the subject. I therefore felt sure of being 
inscribed in red ink on the registers of the King of Prussia; and sup- 
posing, besides, that his principles were such as I had ventured to 
attribute to him, my writings and their author could not fail to meet 
with his disapproval; for it is well known that the wicked and 
tyrants have always conceived a deadly hatred towards me, even 
without knowing me, on a simple perusal of my works. 

However, I ventured to throw myself upon his mercy, and I be- 
lieved that I was running but little risk. I knew that the baser pas- 
sions only overmaster the weak, and have but little hold upon minds 
of a strong stamp, such as I had always recognised in his. I argued 
that it was part of his plan of government to show himself magnani- 
mous on such an occasion, and that it was not beyond the reach of 
his character to be so in reality. I argued that the desire of a mean 
and easy vengeance would never for a moment counterbalance in 


5 He thinks as a philosopher, and acts as a king. 

6 “La gloire, l'intérêt, voilà son Dieu, sa loi.” From a note in the Firmin-Didot 
edition we learn that this line did not really precede the one quoted above. The 
latter was underneath the portrait, the other verse was written at the back. 

* This must be meant ironically, if the text be correct. 


616 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


him the love of glory; and, putting myself in his place, I thought it 
not impossible that he might take advantage of circumstances to 
overwhelm with the weight of his generosity the man who had ven- 
tured to think ill of him. I accordingly went to settle at Motiers, with 
a confidence, the value of which I considered him capable of appre- 
ciating. I said to myself, When Jean Jacques raises himself to the 
level of Coriolanus, will Frederic show himself lower than the 
Volscian general? 

Colonel Roguin insisted on crossing the mountain with me, to see 
me installed at Motiers. A sister-in-law of Madame Boy de la Tour, 
by name Madame Girardier, who found the house which I was to 
occupy a great convenience to herself, was not particularly pleased 
at my arrival. However, she let me take possession politely enough, 
and I took my meals with her, until Thérése arrived, and my little 
establishment was set in order. 

Since my departure from Montmorency, feeling certain that I 
should henceforth be a wanderer upon the face of the earth, I hesi- 
tated about allowing her to join me and share the wandering life 
to which I saw myself condemned. I felt that, owing to this catas- 
trophe, the relations between us would be altered, and that what 
had hitherto been a favour and a kindness on my part would hence- 
forth be the same on hers. If her attachment remained proof against 
my misfortunes, she would be greatly distressed by them, and her 
grief would only add to my woes. If, on the other hand, my mis- 
fortune cooled her affection for me, she would look upon it as a 
sacrifice if she remained constant to me; and, instead of feeling the 
pleasure which I felt in sharing my last crust of bread with her, she 
would only be sensible of her own merit in consenting to follow me 
whithersoever destiny might force me to go. 

I must speak without reserve. I have never concealed either my 
poor mamma’s faults or my own. I must not show greater favour 
to Thérése either; and, pleased as I am to render honour to one who 
is so dear to me, neither do I wish to conceal her faults, if so be that 
an involuntary change in the heart’s affections is really a fault. I had 
long since observed that her affection for me had cooled. I felt that 
she no longer was towards me what she had been in our best days; 
and I felt it the more, as I was always the same towards her. I was 


COLDNESS OF THERESE 617 


conscious again of an unpleasantness, the effects of which I had 
formerly felt when with mamma; and the effect was the same with 
Thérèse. Let us not look for perfections which are not to be found 
in nature; it would be the same with any other woman whatsoever. 
The course of action I hfd taken in regard to my children, however 
rational it had appeared to me, had not always left my heart in peace. 
While thinking over my “Traité de Education,” I felt that I had 
neglected duties from which nothing could excuse me. My remorse 
at length became so keen, that it almost extorted from me a public 
confession of my error at the beginning of “Emile”; and the allusion 
itself is so obvious in a certain passage, that it is surprising to me 
how anyone, after having read it, can have had the courage to re- 
proach me. My situation, however, was at that time the same, and 
even aggravated by the animosity of my enemies, who only sought 
to find me at fault. I was afraid of a repetition; and, not desiring to 
run the risk of it, I preferred to condemn myself to strict continence, 
than to expose Thérése to the risk of finding herself in the same con- 
dition again. Besides, I had observed that intercourse with women 
distinctly aggravated my ill-health; the corresponding vice, of which 
I have never been able to cure myself completely, appeared to me to 
produce less injurious results. These two reasons combined caused 
me to form resolutions which I had sometimes been very inconsistent 
in keeping, but in which I had persevered with greater firmness for 
the last three or four years. Since then I had observed a coldness on 
the part of Thérèse; she had the same attachment for me from a 
feeling of duty, no longer from love. This naturally made our inter- 
course less pleasant, and I thought that, feeling sure that I should 
continue to look after her wherever she might be, she would per- 
haps prefer to remain in Paris than to wander through the world 
with me. However, she had exhibited such grief at our separation, 
she had exacted from me such positive promises that we should come 
together again, she had so strongly expressed a desire to that effect 
since my departure, both to the Prince de Conti and M. de Luxem- 
bourg, that, far from having the courage to speak to her of separa- 
tion, I could scarcely bear to think of it myself; and, when I once 
felt how utterly impossible it was for me to do without her, my only 
thought was to call her back to me immediately. I accordingly wrota 


618 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


to her to set out; she came. It was hardly two months since I had 
left her; but it was our first separation, after the many years we had 
been together. We had both felt it cruelly. What a shock, when we 
embraced each other! How sweet are tears of tenderness and joy! 
How my heart revels in them! Why have I been permitted to shed 
so few! 

On my arrival at Motiers, I had written to Lord Keith, Marshal 
of Scotland, Governor of Neufchatel, to inform him that I had taken 
refuge in His Majesty’s territory, and to ask him for his protection. 
He replied with the well-known generosity which I expected from 
him. He invited me to go and see him. I went with M. Martinet, 
lord of the manor of Val-de-Travers, who stood high in his Excel- 
lency’s esteem. The venerable appearance of this illustrious and 
virtuous Scotchman made a powerful impression upon my heart, 
and that very moment was the commencement of that strong at- 
tachment between us, which on my part has always remained the 
same, and would still be the same on his, had not the traitors, who 
have robbed me of all the consolations of life, profited by my ab- 
sence to deceive him, weakened as he is by old age, and to misrepre- 
sent me in his eyes. 

George Keith, hereditary Marshal of Scotland, and brother of the 
celebrated General Keith, who, after a glorious life, died an honour- 
able death, had left his native land when a young man, having been 
outlawed for his attachment to the house of Stuart, with which the 
unjust and tyrannical spirit which he found in it, and which was 
always its ruling characteristic, soon disgusted him. He lived for 
some time in Spain, the climate of which suited him, and at last, 
like his brother, attached himself to the King of Prussia, who was 
a judge of men and received them as they deserved. He was amply 
repaid for this reception of them by the great services rendered him 
by Marshal Keith, and by what was even more valuable, his sincere 
friendship. The great soul of this worthy man, thoroughly proud 
and republican, could only bow to the yoke of friendship; but to 
this it bowed so completely that, although his principles were very 
different, he no longer saw anyone but Frederic from the moment 
he became attached to him. The King intrusted him with important 
commissions, and sent him to Paris and Spain; and, finally, seeing 


LORD KEITH 619 


that, already advanced in years,he needed repose, he bestowed upon 
him the government of Neufchâtel, where he spent the rest of his 
life in retirement, occupied with the delightful task of rendering 
this little country happy. 

The inhabitants of Neufchatel, who are fond of nothing but 
trifles and tinsel, who are no judge of genuine goods, and think that 
talent consists in long phrases, when they saw a man who was un- 
emotional and unaffected, took his simplicity for pride, his frankness 
for rudeness, and his conciseness for stupidity, and revolted against 
his beneficent measures, because, desiring to be useful without 
cajolery, he did not know how to flatter those whom he did not 
esteem. In the ridiculous affair of Petitpierre, who was driven out 
by his brother clergymen, because he had refused to believe that they 
were eternally damned, the Marshal, who had opposed their en- 
croachments, found the whole country, whose part he took, up in 
arms against him; and, at the time of my arrival, this foolish excite- 
ment was not yet allayed. He was, at least, still regarded as a man 
who allowed himself to be prejudiced;-and, of all the imputations 
brought against him, this was perhaps the least unjust. My first 
feeling, on seeing this venerable old man, was one of emotion at the 
leanness of his body, already emaciated by old age; but when I lifted 
my eyes towards his animated, frank, and noble features, this was 
succeeded by a feeling of respect mingled with confidence, which 
overcame every other sentiment. To the brief compliment which I 
paid him when I presented myself, he replied by speaking of some- 
thing else, as if I had been there a week. He did not even bid us sit 
down. The starchy lord of the manor remained standing, but I saw 
in my lord’s keen and penetrating eye something so genial and 
friendly, that, feeling at my ease at once, without further ceremony 
I went and sat down on the sofa by his side. From the familiar tone, 
which he immediately assumed, I felt that this freedom on my part 
was agreeable to him, and that he said to himself, “This is no 
Neufchatelois.” 

Singular effect of strong similarity of character! At an age when 

' the heart has already lost its natural warmth, that of this good old 
: man warmed towards me in a manner which surprised everyone. 


8 Prétintaille: literally, some kind of dress trimming. 


620 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


He came to see me at Motiers, under pretence of shooting quails, and 
spent two days without touching a gun. We became so friendly— 
that is the correct word—that we could not do without each other. 
The chateau of Colombier, where he lived in the summer, was six 
leagues distant from Motiers: I went at least every fortnight to spend 
twenty-four hours there, and then returned like a pilgrim, with my 
heart always full of him. The emotions of which I was formerly 
sensible during my journeys from the Hermitage to Eaubonne were 
certainly very different, but they were not sweeter than those with 
which I approached Colombier. What tears of tenderness I have 
often shed on my way, while thinking of the paternal kindness, the 
amiable virtues, and the gentle philosophy-of this worthy old man! 
{ called him my father, and he called me his child. These sweet 
names give a partial idea of the attachment which united us, but 
they do not give an idea of the need of each other which we felt, 
and of our continued desire to be together. He insisted upon putting 
me up at the chateau of Colombier, and for a long time pressed me 
to take up my quarters perfnanently in the apartment which I oc- 
cupied. At last, I told him that I was freer at my own house, and that . 
I preferred to spend my time in going to see him. He approved of 
my frankness, and said no more about the matter. O my good lord! 
O my worthy father! how my heart is still stirred by emotion when 
I think of you! Oh! the barbarians! What a blow have they dealt 
me in separating you from me! But, no, no, great man: you are, and 
always will be, the same for me, who am ever the same! They have 
deceived you, but they have not altered you. 

My Lord Marshal is not entirely free from faults: he is a wise man, 
but still a man. Although gifted with the most penetrating intellect, 
the most delicate tact that a man can possibly possess, and the most 
profound knowledge of men, he sometimes allows himself to be 
deceived, and cannot be undeceived. His temper is curious; there is 
something whimsical and strange in his turn of mind. He appears 
to forget people whom he sees every day, and remembers them at 
the moment when they least expect it, and his attentions seem out 
of place. His presents are given capriciously, without regard to their 
suitability. On the spur of the moment he sends or gives whatever 
occurs to him, without discrimination, whether it be very valuable 


KINDNESS OF LORD KEITH 621 


or absolutely worthless. A young Genevese, who desired to enter the 
service of the King of Prussia, presented himself before him; my 
lord gave him, instead of-a letter, a little bag full of peas which he 
commissioned him to deliver to the King, who, on receipt of this 
singular letter of recommendation, immediately gave a place to the 
bearer. These lofty geniuses have a language of their own, which 
vulgar minds will never understand. These little oddities, resembling 
the caprices of a pretty woman, only served to render my Lord 
Marshal more interesting. I was quite sure, and I have since found 
it to be the case, that they had exercised no influence either upon his 
feelings or upon the attention which friendship imposes upon him 
in serious matters. But it is true that, in conferring an obligation, he 
exhibits the same singularity as in his manners. I will quote a single 
instance of this in regard to a matter of trifling importance. As the 
journey from Motiers to Colombier was too much for me to make 
in a day, I generally broke it by starting after dinner, and sleeping 
at an inn at Brot, about halfway. The landlord, named Sandoz, 
who wanted to solicit at Berlin a favour which was of the greatest 
importance to him, begged me to induce his Excellency to ask it on 
his behalf. I gladly consented. I took him with me, left him in the 
antechamber, and mentioned his business to my lord, who made no 
reply. The morning passed, and on walking through the hall on my 
way to dinner, I saw poor Sandoz, who was utterly tired of waiting. 
Thinking that my lord had forgotten him, I spoke about him again 
before we sat down to table. Not a word, as before. I found this man- 
ner of hinting to me that I was troublesome somewhat severe, and I 
held my tongue, pitying poor Sandoz in my own mind. On return- 
ing home the next day, I was greatly surprised by his profuse thanks 
for the kindly reception and the good dinner which his Excelleacy 
had given him, besides taking charge of his papers. Three weeks 
later, my lord sent him the rescript for which he had asked, made 
out by the minister and signed by the King, and this without having 
said a single word or made an answer to either myself or Sandoz in 
regard to the matter, with which I believed he did not wish to have 
anything to do. 

I should like to speak incessantly of George Keith. It is with him 
that my last happy recollections are connected; the rest of my life 


622 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


has been nothing but sorrow and affliction. The remembrance of it 
has been so melancholy, and comes back to me so confusedly, that 
it is no longer possible for me to introduce any order into my narra- 
tive. I shall be obliged, from this time forth, to arrange the facts 
haphazard, as they present themselves to me. 

I was soon reliéved of my uneasiness in regard to my asylum, by 
the answer of the King to the Marshal, in whom, as may be imag- 
ined, I had found a powerful advocate. His Majesty not only ap- 
proved of what I had done, but also—for I must conceal nothing— 
commissioned him to give me twelve Jouts. The worthy Marshal, 
embarrassed by such a commission, and not knowing how to acquit 
himself of it delicately, endeavoured to soften the affront by chang- 
ing the money into provisions, and informing me that he had been 
ordered to supply me with wood and coal to start my housekeeping; 
he even added, perhaps on his own initiative, that the King would 
be pleased to have a small house built for me, according to my own 
taste, if I would choose a site for it. This last offer touched me 
greatly, and made me forget the stinginess of the other. Without 
accepting either, I looked upon Frederic as my benefactor and pro- 
tector, and conceived so sincere an attachment to him, that from 
that time forth I took as much interest in his reputation as I had 
hitherto found injustice in his success. When peace was concluded 
shortly afterwards, I testified my joy by an illumination, which 
showed very good taste. This was a row of garlands, with which I 
decorated the house in which I was living, and upon which, it is 
true, I spent, in a spirit of revengeful pride, almost as much money 
as he had wanted to give me. Peace being concluded, I imagined 
that, since his military and political reputation was at its height, he 
intended to secure for himself one of a different kind, by reviving 
the prosperity of his States, through the restoration of commerce 
and husbandry; by creating a new soil and peopling it anew; by 
continuing at peace with all his neighbours, and making himself 
the umpire of Europe, after having been its terror. He could lay 
down the sword without risk, in the full confidence that he would 
not be obliged to take it up again. Seeing that he did not disarm, I 
was afraid that he would not know how to use his advantages 
aright, and that he was only half a great man. I ventured to write to 


ASSUMES THE ARMENIAN COSTUME 623 


him on this subject, and adopted the tone of familiarity best adapted 
to please men of his stamp, in order that the holy voice of truth, 
which so few kings are born to hear, might reach him. It was only 
in confidence, between our two selves, that I took this liberty. I did 
not even communicate may secret to the Marshal, and I sent him my 
letter to the King, carefully sealed. My lord sent the letter without 
inquiring about its contents. The King made no reply; and, some 
time afterwards, when the Marshal went to Berlin, he merely told 
him that I had severely scolded him. I understood from this that 
my letter had been ill received, and that my outspoken zeal had been 
looked upon as pedantic awkwardness. At bottom, this may have 
been really the case. Perhaps I did not say what I ought to have said, 
and had not adopted the tone which I ought to have adopted. I can, 
only answer for the feeling which made me take the pen into my 
hand. 

Shortly after my establishment at Motiers-Travers, having re- 
ceived every possible assurance that I should be left in peace, I as- 
sumed the Armenian costume. This was not a new idea of mine; 
it had often occurred to me in the course of my life, and it often 
occurred to me again at Montmorency, where the constant use of 
bougies, which frequently compelled me to keep my room, made 
me sensible of the advantages of a long garment. The chance af- 
forded by an Armenian tailor, who frequently came on a visit to a 
relation at Montmorency, tempted me to take advantage of it, in 
order to assume this new costume, in spite of what people might 
say, to which I paid but little heed. However, before adopting this 
new outfit, I desired to have the advice of Madame de Luxem- 
bourg, who strongly advised me to do so. I accordingly procured a 
little Armenian wardrobe; but the storm, which was roused against 
me, made me put off wearing it until the times were calmer, and it 
was not until several months later that, being obliged by fresh at- 
tacks of my complaint to have recourse to bougies, I thought that I 
might, without risk, assume this dress at Motiers, especially after 
having consulted the pastor of the place, who told me that I could 
wear it even in church without giving offence. I accordingly put on 
the jacket, caftan, fur cap, and girdle; and, after having been present 
at divine service in it, I saw no impropriety in wearing it in the 


Nie ESAD Se sy DeeVVsVIvNo Vs BM Ve eee 


presence of my Lord Marshal. His Excellency, when he saw me thus: 
attired, said, by way of compliment, “Salaam alek;’® this ended the 
matter, and I never afterwards wore any other dress. 

Having entirely abandoned literature, I only thought of leading 
a quiet and peaceful life, as far as it depended upon myself. When 
alone, I have never known what it is to feel weary, even when I am 
entirely unemployed; my imagination fills up every void, and is 
alone sufficient to occupy me. It is only the idle gossip of a room, 
when people sit opposite each other, moving nothing but their 
tongues, that I have never been able to endure. When walking or 
moving, I can put up with it; the feet and eyes are at least employed; 
put, to remain with folded arms, talking about the weather and the 
flies buzzing round, or, what is worse, exchanging compliments, 
that is to me unendurable torture. That I might not live quite like a 
savage, I took it into my head to learn to make laces. I took my 
cushion with me on my visits, or, like the women, I worked at my 
_ door, and talked with the passers-by. This made the empty chatter 
endurable, and enabled me to spend my time without weariness 
amongst my neighbours, several of whom were agreeable enough 
and not destitute of intelligence. One of them, named Isabelle d’Iver- 
nois, the daughter of the procureur-général of Neufchâtel, appeared 
to me deserving of my particular friendship, of which she has had 
no reason to complain, for I gave her some very useful advice, and 
rendered her considerable services on important occasions; so that 
now, a respected and virtuous mother of a family, she perhaps owes 
her insight, her husband, her life, and her happiness to me. On my 
part, I am indebted to her for much gentle consolation, especially 
during a very dull winter, when, whilst my maladies and suffer- 
ings were at their height, she came to spend, with Thérése and my- 
self, long evenings which she knew how to make seem short by her 
cheerful disposition and our mutual confidences. She called me 
“papa,” I called her “daughter”; and these names, which we still 
give each other, will, I hope, never cease to be as dear to her as to 
me. To make some use of my laces, I presented them to my young 
friends on their marriage, on condition that they brought up their 


? “Peace be with you”—a form of salutation only interchanged between Mus- 
sulmans. 


' 


M. DU PEYROU 623 


children. Her eldest sister received one by virtue of this, and de- 
served it; Isabelle also had one, and, as far as good intentions went, 
equally deserved it; but she has not had the happiness of being able 
to carry them out. Wio sending them these laces, I wrote a letter 
to each, the first of which has travelled about the world; the second 
did not obtain such celebrity; the progress of friendship is not ac- 
companied by so much noise. 

Amongst the connections which I formed in my neighbourhood, 
into the details of which I do not propose to enter, I must not omit 
to mention Colonel Pury, who had a house on the mountains, where 
he was in the habit of coming to spend the summer. I was not very 
anxious to make his acquaintance, because I knew that he was in 
bad odour at the Court, and on bad terms with my Lord Marshal, 
whom he never visited. However, as he called upon me and showed 
me great civility, I was obliged to return his call. We continued 
to visit, and sometirhes dined with each other. At his house I made 
the acquaintance of M. du Peyrou, with whom I became so intimate 
that I cannot avoid saying something about him. 

M. du Peyrou was an American, son of a commandant of Suri- 
nam, whose widow married his successor, M. de Chambrier of Neuf- 
chatel. Being left a widow for the second time, she came to settle 
with her son in her husband’s native country. Du Peyrou, an only 
son, very rich, and the darling of his mother, had been brought up 
with great care, and had made good use of his education. He had 
acquired a great deal of partial knowledge, a certain taste for the 
arts, and he specially prided himself on having cultivated his rea- 
soning powers. His manner, cold and philosophical, resembling that 
of a Dutchman, his tawny complexion, his silent and reserved dis- 
position, strongly favoured this opinion. He was deaf and gouty, 
although still young. This rendered all his movements very deliber- 
ate and solemn; and, although he was fond of arguing, sometimes 
even at length, as a rule he spoke little, because he could not hear. 
His whole appearance inspired me with respect. I said to myself: 
Here is a thinker, a wise man, such as one might be happy to have 
for a friend. To complete his conquest of me, he often addressed me, 
without ever paying me a compliment. He rarely spoke to me about 
himself, me, or my books. He was not without ideas, and everything 


626 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


that he said was fairly accurate. This accuracy and precision at- 
tracted me. His mind possessed neither the loftiness nor delicacy of 
that of my Lord Marshal, but it was just as simple; and thus, in one 
respect, he always represented him. I did not become infatuated 
with him, but was attracted to him by a feeling of esteem; and this 
esteem gradually led to friendship. In his case, I entirely forgot the 
objection which I had made to Baron d’Holbach—that he was too 
wealthy; and I believe that I was wrong. I have learned to doubt 
whether a man, who is the possessor of a large fortune, whoever he 
may be, can be sincerely fond of my principles and their originator. 

For a considerable time I saw little of Du Peyrou, because I never 
went to Neufchatel, and he only came once a year to see Colonel 
Pury on his mountain. Why did I never go to Neufchatel? For a 
childish reason, which I must not conceal. 

Although, under the protection of the King of Prussia and my 
Lord Marshal, I at first escaped persecution in my retreat, I did not 
escape the hostility of the public, the municipal magistrates, and the 
clergy. After France had given the signal, it was no longer good 
taste not to offer me some kind of insult at least: these persons would 
have been afraid of seeming to disapprove of the conduct of my 
persecutors, if they did not imitate them. The chief class of Neuf- 
chatel, that is to say, the society of the clergy of the town, gave the 
first impulse, by attempting to stir up the State Council against me. 
This attempt having proved unsuccessful, the clergy turned to the 
municipal authorities, who immediately prohibited my book, and, 
treating me on every occasion with scant politeness, gave me to 
understand, even in so many words, that, if I had desired to take up 
my abode in the town, it would not have been allowed. They filled 
the columns of their Mercure with absurdities and the most insipid 
cant, which, although it only excited the ridicule of sensible persons, 
none the less provoked the people and stirred them up against me. 
All this, however, to listen to them, ought not have prevented me 
from being extremely grateful to them for allowing me to live at 
Motiers, where they had no authority; they would willingly have 
“measured out the air to me by the pint, on condition that I paid a 
heavy price for it. They desired that I should feel under a great 
obligation to them for the protection which the King granted me in 


WRITES TO M. DE MONTMOLLIN 627 


spite of them, and of which they were persistently working to de- 
prive me. At last, finding that they could not succeed, and having 
done me all the harm they could, and abused me with all their 
might, they made a virtue of their impotence, by exalting their kind- 
ness in suffering me to remain in their country. My only answer 
ought to have been—t6 laugh in their face; instead of this, I was 
silly enough to feel annoyed, and foolish enough to make up my 
mind never to go to Neufchâtel: a resolution which I kept for nearly 
two years, as if I were not showing such creatures too much honour 
by taking any notice of their conduct, for which, whether good or 
bad, they cannot be considered responsible, since they never act 
except under compulsion! Besides, uncultivated and narrow minds, 
which know no other object of esteem but reputation, power, and 
money, are far from even suspecting that any respect is due to talent, 
and that there is any dishonour in insulting it. 

A certain village maire, who had been deprived of his office for his 
malpractices, once said to the lieutenant of Val-de-Travers, who was 
my Isabelle’s husband, “This Rousseau is said to be a man of great 
talent: bring him to me, that I may see whether it is true.” As- 
suredly, the displeasure of a man who adopts such a tone ought not 
to trouble those who are the objects of it. 

Judging from the manner in which I was treated at Paris, Geneva, 
Berne, and Neufchâtel, I expected no greater consideration from 
the pastor of the place. However, I had been recommended to him 
by Madame Boy de la Tour, and he had received me very kindly; 
but, in this country, where flattery is universal, courtesies go for 
nothing. But, after my solemn reunion with the Reformed Church, 
and living in a Protestant country, I could not, without breaking 
my vows and failing in my duties as a citizen, neglect the public 
profession of the religion which I had again adopted: I therefore at- 
tended divine service. On the other hand, I was afraid that, by pre- 
senting myself at the Lord’s table, I might expose myself to the insult 
of a refusal; and it was highly improbable that, after the stir that had 
been created at Geneva by the Council and at Neufchatel by the 
clergy, he would quietly administer the Holy Communion to me in 
his church. As the time of Communion was near, I decided to write 
to M. de Montmollin—this was the minister's name—in order to 


628 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


prove my good intentions, and to inform him that, at heart, I had 
always been a member of the Reformed Church. I told him at the 
same time that, in order to avoid all disputes about the articles of 
faith, I declined to listen to any special explanation upon points of 
dogma. Having thus set myself right in this quarter, I remained 
quiet, not feeling the least doubt that M. de Montmollin would re- 
fuse to admit me without the preliminary discussion, with which I 
absolutely declined to have anything to do, and that the matter 
would thus be settled, without any blame being attached to me. 
But nothing of the kind happened. At the moment when I least ex- 
pected it, M. de Montmollin came to tell me, not only that he was 
willing to admit me to the Communion, under the condition for 
which I had stipulated, but, more than this, that he and his elders 
considered it a great honour to have me as one of the members of 
their flock. I was never so surprised in my life, and nothing has 
ever afforded me greater consolation. It appeared to me a most 
gloomy fate, to live always isolated in the world, especially in time 
of adversity. In the midst of so many proscriptions and persecutions, 
I found the greatest consolation in being able to say to myself, At 
least I am amongst my brethren; and I went to Communion with a 
heart greatly moved and affected to tears, which was perhaps the 
preparation most acceptable to God that one could take to His table. 

Some time afterwards, my lord sent me a letter from Madame de 
Boufflers, which—so at least I imagine—came through D’Alembert, 
who was acquainted with him. In this letter, the first that this lady 
had written to me since my departure from Montmorency, she 
severely scolded me for having written to M. de Montmollin, and, 
above all, for having communicated. I was the less able to under- 
stand what was the object of her reprimand, since, from the time of 
my journey to Geneva, I had always openly proclaimed myself a 
Protestant, and had publicly attended the Hôtel de Hollande,'® and 
no one in the world had made any objection. It seemed highly amus- 
ing that Madame la Comtesse de Boufflers should desire to interfere 
with the direction of my conscience in matters of religion. However, 
as I did not doubt that her intentions—although I utterly failed to 


1° The chapel of the Reformed Chureh. 


THE DECREE OF CENSURE 629 


understand them—were the best possible, I took no offence at this 
remarkable attack, and I replied to her without irritation, at the 
same time quietly explaining my reasons. 

Meanwhile, the printed abuse against me continued as before, and 
its kindly authors reprgached the authorities with treating-me too 
leniently. This chorus of yelping, the leaders of which continued 
to act under cover, was somewhat ill-omened and alarming. For my 
part, I let them yelp, without troubling myself. I was assured that a 
decree of censure had been obtained from the Sorbonne;?! I refused 
to believe it. How could the Sorbonne interfere in the matter? Did 
the members desire to settle that I was not a Catholic? Everybody 
knew this already. Did they desire to prove that I was not a good 
Calvinist? What did it matter to them? That would be to take a 
singular responsibility upon themselves, and to pose as the substi- 
tutes of our ministers. Before I had seen the document, I believed 
that it was being circulated in the name of the Sorbonne, in order 
to insult its members; I felt even more convinced of this after I 
had read it. At last, when I was unable to doubt its genuineness 
any longer, nothing was left for me to believe except that the proper 
place for the Sorbonne was a lunatic asylum. 

[1763.]—Another document affected me more, because it pro- 
ceeded from a man whom I had always esteemed, and whose firm- 

ess I admired, while pitying his blindness. I am speaking of the 
etter!? written by the Archbishop of Paris against me. 

I thought it incumbent upon me to reply to it. I could do so 
without lowering myself; it was a case almost similar to that of the 
King of Poland. I have never been fond of brutal quarrels, a la Vol- 
taire. I can only fight in a dignified manner, and, before I con- 
descend to defend myself, I must be assured that he who attacks me 
will not dishonour my blows. I had no doubt that this mandatory 
letter was the work of the Jesuits; and, although they were them- 
selves in very great distress at the time, I recognised in it their an- 
cient maxim—that of crushing the unfortunate. I was thus enabled 


u A famous school of theology at the time. 
12 Mandement: an episcopal letter. 


630 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


to follow my own established principle—that of honouring the 
author whose name the work bore, and of pulverising the work 
itself; and this I think I did with great success. 

I found my stay at Motiers very agreeable; nothing but an as- 
sured means of livelihood was wanting to make me decide to end 
my days there; but living was rather expensive, and all my former 
schemes had been upset by the break-up of my old household and 
the establishment of a new one, by the sale or dispersal of my effects, 
and by the expenses which I had been obliged to incur since my 
departure from Montmorency. I saw my little capital dwindling 
daily; two or three years would be sufficient to consume what was 
left, while I saw no means of replacing it, unless I began to write 
books again—a fatal profession, which I had already abandoned. 

Convinced that my situation would soon alter, and that the public, 
recovering from its madness, would put the authorities to the blush, 
my only desire was to make my means last until this happy alteration 
took place, which would make it easier for me to take my choice of 
such means of subsistence as might present themselves, With this 
object, I again took up my “Dictionnaire de Musique,” which, after 
ten years’ labour, was already far advanced, and only needed a final 
revision, and to be copied out fairly. My book, which had recently 
been sent on to me, furnished me with the means of finishing this 
work: my papers, which were sent at the same time, enabled me to 
start upon my Memoirs, to which I intended henceforth to devot 
my sole attention. I began by copying some letters in a collection, 
to serve as a guide to my memory in the order of events and dates. 
I had already picked out those which I intended to keep for this 
purpose, and they were arranged in an almost unbroken series for 
the last ten years. However, while arranging them for copying, 
I found a gap which surprised me. This embraced a period of nearly 
six months, from October, 1756, to the following March. I perfectly 
remembered having included in my collection a number of letters 
from Diderot, Deleyre, Madame d’Epinay, Madame Chenonceaux, 
and others, which bridged over this gap and could no longer be 
found. What had become of them? Had anyone touched my papers 
during the few months they had remained at the Hôtel de Luxem- 
hourg? This was inconceivable: for I had seen M. de Luxembourg 


HIS PAPERS TAMPERED WITH 631 


himself take the key of the room-in which T had deposited them. 
As several letters from ladies, and all those from Diderot, were un- 
dated, and as I had been obliged to fill in these dates from memory 
and, as it were, groping in the dark, in order to arrange these letters 
in order, I at first thought that I had made some mistakes in dates, 
and I went over all the fétters which were undated, or in which I had 
myself inserted the dates, to see if I could not find those which were 
needed to fill up the gap. This attempt was unsuccessful: I found 
that the gap was a real one, and that the letters had certainly been 
abstracted. By whom and for what reason? This was beyond my 
powers of comprehension. These letters, prior to my great quarrels, 
and belonging to the time of my first infatuation for “Julie,” were of 
no interest to anybody. They contained, at most, some bickerings 
of Diderot, some bantering from Deleyre, some assurances of friend- 
ship from Madame de Chenonceaux, and even from Madame 
d’Epinay, with whom I was then on the best possible terms. To 
whom could these letters be of any importance? What was intended 
to be done with them? It was not until seven years later that I sus- 
pected the frightful purpose of this theft. 

Having settled the fact of this deficiency, I proceeded to examine 
my rough copies, to see whether I could discover any further loss. 
I found several missing, and this, as I had a very bad memory, 
made me imagine I should find it the same with my multitudinous 
papers. Those which I missed were the rough copy of “La Morale 
Sensitive,” and the extract of the “Adventures de Mylord Edouard.” 
The absence of the latter, I confess, caused me to suspect Madame 
de Luxembourg. It was her valet de chambre, La Roche, who had 
forwarded my papers, and I could not think of anyone else who 
could feel any interest in this fragment; but how could the other 
have interested her; or the letters which had been abstracted, of 
which no use could be made, even with the worst intentions to in- 
jure me, unless they were fraudulently altered? As for M. de Luxem- 
bourg, of whose invariable uprightness and genuine friendship I felt 
assured, I could not for a moment suspect him. I could not even fix 
the suspicion upon Madame la Maréchale. The most reasonable sup- 
position that I could think of, after long racking my brains to dis- 
cover the thief, was to fix the guilt upon D’Alembert, who, having 


632 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


already made his way into Madame de Luxembourg’s good graces, 
might have found means to rummage amongst these papers, and 
to abstract whatever he pleased, whether manuscripts or letters, 
either with the intention of stirring up some annoyance against me, 
or of appropriating to himself what might be useful to him. I 
imagined that, misled by the title of “La Morale Sensitive,” he ex- 
pected to find in it the sketch of a real treatise upon Materialism, 
which he might have been able to use against me in a manner which 
may easily be imagined. Feeling sure that he would soon be unde- 
ceived on examining the rough copy, and having made up my mind 
to abandon literature altogether, I troubled myself little about these 
petty larcenies, which were, perhaps, not the first committed by the 
same hand which I have endured without complaining.** I soon 
thought no more of this disloyalty, as if no similar act had ever been 
committed against me, and I began to arrange the materials which 
had been left to me, in order to work at my Confessions. 

I had long believed that the society of the clergy at Geneva, 
or, at least, the citizens and burgesses, would protest against the 
infringement of the edict involved in the decree against myself. All 
remained quiet, at least in outward appearance, for a general feeling 
of discontent prevailed, which only waited for an opportunity of 
manifesting itself. My friends, or those who called themselves such, 
wrote letter after letter, urging me to go and put myself at their 
head, and assuring me of a public apology on the part of the Coun- 
cil. The fear of the disorder and disturbance, which my presence 
might cause, prevented me from yielding to their entreaties; and, 
faithful to the vow I had formerly made—never to mix myself up 
in any civil quarrel in my own country—I preferred to let the 
offence against justice remain as it was and to exile myself from 
my native land for ever, than to enter it again by violent and danger- 


**T had found, in his “Eléments de Musique,” several things which had been 
taken from my article in the “Encyclopédie,” which had been sent to him several 
years before the publication of his “Eléments.” I do not know what share he may 
have had in a work entitled “Dictionnaire des Beaux-arts,” but I have found in 
it articles copied word for word from mine, long before these same articles were 
printed in the “Encyclopédie.” 


““LETTRES ÉCRITES DE LA CAMPAGNE” 633 


ous means. I had certainly expected, on the part of the burgesses, 
legal and peaceful remonstrances against an infringement which 
greatly concerned them. But nothing of the kind took place. Those 
at their head were less anxious for the real redress of wrongs than 
for an opportunity of making themselves necessary. They intrigued, 
but kept silence, and allowed the gossips and hypocrites to prate, 
who were put forward by the Council to render me odious in the 
eyes of the people, and to cause its insolence to be attributed to re- 
ligious zeal. 

After having waited in vain, for more than a year, for someone to 
protest against an illegal procedure, I at last made up my mind; and, 
finding myself abandoned by my fellow-citizens, I determined to 
renounce my ungrateful country, in which I had never lived, from 
which I had received no kindness or assistance, and by which, as 
the reward of the honour which I had endeavoured to bestow upon 
it, I found myself, by unanimous consent, so unworthily treated, 
seeing that those who ought to have spoken had never uttered a 
word. I accordingly wrote to the chief syndic for that year, who was, 
I believe, M. Favre, a letter in which I solemnly renounced my bur- 
gess rights, at the same time being careful to observe in it the be- 
coming and moderate language, which I have always employed, 
when acting in accordance with the dictates of my pride, as I have 
frequently been compelled to do by the cruelty of my enemies, in 
time of misfortune. 

This step at last opened the eyes of the citizens; feeling that they 
had acted against their own interests in abandoning my defence, 
they took it up when it was too late. They had other grievances, 
which they added to mine, and made them the subject of several 
very well-reasoned remonstrances, which they extended and 
strengthened, in proportion as the rude and discouraging refusals of 
the Council, which felt itself supported by the French ministry, made 
them feel more strongly the design which had been formed for 
keeping them in a state of subjection. These disputes called forth 
various pamphlets, which decided nothing, until there suddenly 
appeared the “Lettres écrites de la Campagne,” a work written in 
support of the Council with infinite skill, and which for a time re- 


634 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


duced to silence and crushed the party of remonstrance.* This 
work, a lasting memorial of the rare talents of its author, was the 
production of the Procureur-général Tronchin, an enlightened and 
talented man, who had a profound knowledge of the laws and con- 
stitution of the Republic Silust terra. 

[1764.]—The party of remonstrance, recovering from their first 
defeat, undertook to reply, and in time acquitted themselves toler- 
ably well. But all turned their eyes towards me, as the only person 
capable of entering the lists against such an adversary, with any 
hope of overthrowing him. I confess that I thought the same; and, 
urged on by my old fellow-citizens, who represented it to me as 
my duty to assist them with my pen in a difficulty of which I had 
been the cquse, I undertook the refutation of the “Lettres écrites de 
la Campagne,” and parodied its title by that of “Lettres écrites de 
la Montagne,” which I gave to mine. I conceived and carried out this 
undertaking so secretly, that, at a meeting which took place at 
Thonon between myself and the party of remonstrance, in order to 
discuss their affairs, and at which they showed me the outline of 
their reply, I did not say a word about my own, which was already 
written; for I was afraid that some obstacle might be thrown in 
the way of its being printed, if either the magistrates or my private 
enemies got the least wind of it. I could not, however, prevent the 
work becoming known in France before it was published; but it was 
thought better to let it appear than to let me understand too clearly 
how my secret had been discovered. I will afterwards state what I 
have been able to learn positively about the matter, which is not 
much; I will say nothing about my own conjectures. 

At Motiers I had almost as many visitors as at the Hermitage and 
Montmorency, but, for the most part, of a very different kind. Those 
who had hitherto come to see me had been people who, being con- 
nected with me by common talents, tastes, and principles, made 
them the excuse for their visits, and immediately introduced subjects 
on which I was able to converse with them. At Motiers this was no 
longer the case, especially as far as the French were concerned. My 
Visitors were officers or others who had no taste for literature, the’ 


“Le parti représentant—The term “représentant” was specially applied to 
the citizens of Geneva who advocated public liberty. 


MYSTERIOUS VISITORS 635 


majority of whom had never eyen‘read my works, and who, never- 
theless, according to their own account, had travelled thirty, forty, 
sixty, a hundred leagues to see me and admire the illustrious, fa- 
mous, very famous man, the very great man, and so forth. From 
that time people never ceased to fling in my face the coarsest and 
most shameless flatteries, from which the esteem of those who came 
to see me had hitherto protected me. As the majority of these vis- 
itors did not condescend to mention their names or position, as their 
knowledge and mine had no common object, as they had neither 
read nor even glanced over my works, I did not know what to talk 
to them about. I waited for them to speak, since it was their place 
to know and to inform me what was the object of their visit. It may 
be imagined that this did not lead to conversations particularly in- 
teresting to me, although they may have been so to them, according 
to what they wanted to know; for, as I was never mistrustful, J 
expressed myself without reserve upon all the questions which they 
thought fit to put to me; and they left me, as a rule, quite as well 
informed as myself in regard to all the details connected with my 
situation. 

Such a visitor, for instance, was M. de Feins, equerry to the Queen. 
and a captain of cavalry in the Queen’s regiment, who was so perse- 
vering as to spend several days at Motiers, and even to accompany 
me on foot as far as La Ferriére, leading his horse by the bridle, 
without having anything else in common with me, except that we 
both knew Mademoiselle Fel, and both played at cup-and-ball. Be» 
fore and after M. de Feins, I received another much more extra- 
ordinary visit. Two men arrived on foot, each leading a mule carry. 
ing his scanty baggage. They put up at the inn, and, after rubbing 
down their mules themselves, asked to see me. From the general 
appearance of these muleteers, the villagers took them for smugglers; 
and the report immediately spread that some smugglers had come 
to pay me a visit. But the manner in which they accosted me at 
once informed me that they were persons of quite a different sort; 
but, although they were certainly not smugglers, they might well 
have been adventurers, and this uncertainty kept me on my guard 
for some time. However, they very soon allayed my suspicions. One 
of them was M. de Montauban, called the Comte de la Tour du 


636 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Pin, a gentleman from Dauphiné; the other was M. Dastier, from 
Carpentras, an old soldier, who had put his cross of Saint-Louis in 
his pocket, to avoid displaying it. These gentlemen, who were both 
very amiable, were also very good company; their conversation was 
interesting and agreeable. Their manner of travelling, so greatly to 
my taste, and so little in keeping with that of French gentlemen, 
made me feel a kind of attachment for them which intercourse with 
them could not fail to strengthen. The acquaintance did not even 
end there. It still continues, and they have paid me several visits 
since then, but not on foot, although that was well enough for the 
first introduction. But the more I have seen of these gentlemen, the 
less sympathy I have found between their tastes and mine, the less 
I have felt that their principles were mine, that they were familiar 
with my writings, or that there was any real sympathy between us. 
What, then, did they want of me? Why did they visit me with such 
an equipage? Why did they remain several days? Why did they 
return several times? Why were they so anxious to have me for their 
guest? At that time it never occurred to me to ask myself all these 
questions. I have often put them to myself since. 

Touched by their friendly advances, my heart surrendered with- 
out reflection, especially to M. Dastier, whose manner, being more 
frank and open, pleased me most. I even continued to correspond 
with him; and, when I wanted to get the “Lettres de la Montagne” 
printed, I thought of applying to him, in order to put those, who 
were waiting for my parcel on the route to Holland, on the wrong 
scent. He had often spoken to me, and perhaps designedly, of the 
liberty enjoyed by the press at Avignon, and had offered his serv- 
ices, if I ever wanted to get anything printed there. I availed myself 
of this offer, and sent him my first sheets, one after the other, by 
post. After he had kept them for a considerable time he sent them 
back, at the same time informing me that no printer would venture 
to undertake the work; and I was obliged to go back to Rey, taking 
the precaution of sending my sheets one after the other, and not 
letting the succeeding ones go until I had been advised of the receipt 
of those which preceded them. Before the publication of the work, 
I learned that it had been seen in the ministerial offices; and 
D’Escherny, of Neufchâtel, spoke to me of a book called “De 


SEGUIER DE SAINT-BRISSON 634 


PHomme de la Montagne,” which he had been told by Holbach 
was written by me. I assured him, as was quite true, that I had 
never written a book called by this name. When the letters appeared 
he was furious, and accused me of falsehood, although I had told 
him the simple truth. This is how I was convinced that my manu- 
script was known. Feeling sure of Rey’s trustworthiness, I was 
obliged to transfer my suspicions elsewhere; and the most rational 
conjecture, and the one to which I was most inclined to adhere, 
was that my packets had been opened in the post. 

Another person, whose acquaintance I made almost at the same 
time, at first merely through the medium of correspondence, was 
M. Laliaud, of Nimes, who wrote to me from Paris, asking me to 
send him my profile in silhouette, which he said he required for a 
bust of myself in marble, which he was having made by Le Moine, 
with the intention of placing it in his library. If this was a piece of 
flattery, simply intended to disarm me, it was completely successful. 
I imagined that a man who desired to have my bust in marble in 
his library must be full of my works, and consequently of my 
principles, and that he must love me, because his soul was in unison 
with mine. This idea was bound to attract me. I have seen M. 
Laliaud subsequently. I have found him eager to render me several 
trifling services, and to meddle with my humble affairs. But, beyond 
that, I doubt whether any single work of mine has been included in 
the very limited number of books which he has read in the course 
of his life. I am ignorant whether he has a library, and whether it 
is a piece of furniture which he is likely to use; and as for the 
bust, it is limited to a poor figure in clay, executed by Le Moine, 
from which he has had a hideous portrait engraved, which neverthe- 
less passes current under my name, as if it had some resemblance 
to me. 

The only Frenchman whose visits seemed to be due to a partiality 
for my sent#ments and writing, was a young officer of the Limousin 
regiment, by name Séguier de Saint-Brisson, who cut a brilliant 
figure in Paris and in the world, and perhaps still does, through 
the amiability of his talents and his pretentions to wit. He had come 
- to see me at Montmorency during the winter preceding my catastro- 
phe. I found in him a liveliness which pleased me. He afterwards 


638 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


wrote to me at Motiers; and, whether it was that he wanted to 
flatter me, or that his head was really turned by “Emile,” he told 
me that he intended to leave the service, in order to live independ- 
ently, and that he was learning the trade of a carpenter. He had an 
elder brother, a captain in the same regiment, the favourite of 
the mother, who, being a violent devotee, and under the thumb 
of some hypocritical abbé, treated her younger son very badly, ac- 
cusing him of irreligion, and even of the unpardonable offence of 
being intimate with myself. These were the grievances which in- 
duced him to break with his mother, and adopt the resolution of 
which I have just spoken—all, to play the little “Emile.” 

Alarmed at this impetuous eagerness, I hastened to write to him, 
to try and dissuade him from carrying out his resolution, and I 
made my exhortations as forcible as I could. He listened to them; 
he returned to his duty as a son, and withdrew from his colonel’s 
hands the resignation which he had handed in, and which the 
former had prudently not accepted, in order to allow him time to 
think better of it. Saint-Brisson, cured of these follies, committed 
another, which was not quite so outrageous, but which was hardly 
more to my taste; he became an author. He produced two or three 
pamphlets one after the other, which showed a certain amount of 
talent, but in regard to which I shall never have to reproach my- 
self with having praised them in sufficiently encouraging terms to 
induce him to follow such a career. 

Some time afterwards, he came to see me, and we made an ex- 
cursion together to the island of Saint-Pierre. I found him, during 
this journey, somewhat different from what he had been at Mont- 
morency. There was something affected about him, which at first 
did not particularly offend me, but which I have often thought of 
since then. He came to see me once again at the Hôtel de Saint- 
Simon, when I was passing through Paris on my way to England. 
There I heard—which he had not told me before—that he went 
into fashionable society, and that he frequently saw Madame de 
Luxembourg. He gave no sign of life when I was at Trye, and 
did not send me any message through Mademoiselle Séguier, who 
was my neighbour, and who never seemed particularly well dis- 
posed towards me. In a word, M. Saint-Brisson’s infatuation 


M. D’IVERNOIS 639 


suddenly came to an end, like my connection with M. de Feins, but, 
whereas the latter owed me nothing, the former owed me some- 
thing, unless the follies which I had prevented him from committing 
were only a joke on his pet which really may very well have been 
the case. 

I also had as many and even more visitors from Geneva. The 
Delucs, father and son, successively chose me for their nurse. The 
father fell ill on the road; the son was already ill when he started 
from Geneva; both came to recruit themselves at my house. Clergy- 
men, relatives, bigots, persons of all sorts, came from Geneva and 
Switzerland, not for the purpose of admiring or making fun of me, 
like those who came from France, but to scold and catechise me. The 

only one whom I was glad to see was Moultou, who came to spend 
three or four days with me, and whom I should have been glad to 
keep longer. The most obstinately persistent of all, and the one 
who finally conquered me by his importunities, was one M. 
d'Ivernois, a Genevese merchant, a French refugee, and a relative 
of the procureur-général of Neufchâtel. This M. d’Ivernois came 
twice a year from Geneva to Motiers on purpose to see me, stayed 
with me from morning till evening several days in succession, ac- 
companied me on my walks, brought me hundreds of little presents, 
wormed himself into my confidence in spite of myself, interfered in 
all my affairs, without our having any ideas, tastes, sentiments, or 
knowledge in common. I doubt whether, in the whole course of 
his life, he has ever read through a single book of any kind, or 
whether he even knows the subjects of which my works treat. 
When I began to collect plants, he accompanied me on my botanical 
excursions, although he had no taste for such amusement, and we 
had not a word to say to each other. He even had the courage to 
spend three whole days with me ¢éte-d-téte in a public-house at; 
Goumoins, from which I had hoped to drive him away by dint of 
boring him and making him feel how greatly he bored me; but ] 
was never able to discourage his incredible persistency, or to discover 
the reason of it. 

Amongst all these acquaintances, which I only made and kept 
up under compulsion, I must not omit the only one which has been 
agreeable to me, and which aroused a real interest in my heart; I 


640 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


refer to a young Hungarian, who came to reside at Neufchâtel, and 
afterwards at Motiers, some months after I was settled there myself. 
In the district he was called the Baron de Sauttern, under which 
name he had been accredited from Zurich. He was tall and well- 
built, his features were pleasant, his manners gentle and affable. 
He told everybody, and also gave me to understand, that he had 
come to Neufchatel solely to see me, and to train his youth to virtue 
by intercourse with me. His expression, his tone, his manners, 
appeared to me in agreement with his words; and I should have 
considered myself failing in a most important duty, if I had refused 
to receive a young man in whom I saw nothing but amiability, and 
whose motive in seeking my acquaintance was so worthy of respect. 
My heart is incapable of surrendering itself by halves. He soon 
possessed my entire friendship and my entire confidence; we became 
inseparable. He accompanied me on all my walking excursions, 
and greatly enjoyed them. I took him to my Lord Marshal, who 
showed him the greatest kindness. As he was not yet able to express 
himself in French, he spoke and wrote to me in Latin; I answered 
him in French, but this mixture of the two languages did not make 
our conversations less fluent or lively in any respect. He spoke to 
me of his family, his affairs, his adventures, and the Court of Vienna, 
with the domestic details of which he appeared to be intimately 
acquainted. In short, for nearly two years, during which we lived 
on terms of the closest intimacy, I invariably found in him a gentle- 
ness of character which nothing could alter, manners not only polite 
but refined, great personal cleanliness, and extreme propriety of 
language; in short, all the characteristics of a well-bred man, which 
made me esteem him too highly not to regard him with affection. 

At the time of my greatest intimacy with him, D’Ivernois wrote 
to me from Geneva, warning me against the young Hungarian 
who had come to settle in my neighbourhood; adding that he had 
been assured that he was a spy sent by the French ministry to 
watch me. This warning was calculated to cause me the more un- 
easiness, since, in the country where I was, everybody advised me 
to keep on my guard because I was being watched, and it was 
designed to entice me into French territory, and then to pounce 
upon me. 


THE BARON DE SAUTTERN 644 


In order to shut, once for all, the mouths of these silly monitors, 
I proposed to Sauttern, without saying a word to him beforehand, 
a walk to Pontarlier. He agreed to go. When we reached Pontarlier, 
I gave him D’Ivernois’ létter to read, and then, fervently embracing 
him, said, “Sauttern needs no proof of my confidence; but the public 
needs a proof that I knéw who is worthy of it.” This embrace was 
very sweet. It was one of those enjoyments of the soul which perse- 
cutors can never know, and of which they cannot deprive the 
oppressed. 

I will never believe that Sauttern was a spy, or that he betrayed 
me; but he deceived me. When I opened my heart to him without 
reserve, he was firm enough to keep his own shut, and to deceive 
me with his lies. He invented some story, which caused me to 
believe that his presence was required in his own country. I exhorted 
him to set out without delay. He did so, and, when I thought he 
was already in Hungary, I heard that he was at Strasburg. This was 
not the first time that he had been there. He had caused dissension 
in a family in the town, and the husband, knowing that I was in 
the habit of seeing him, wrote to me. I had spared no efforts to 
bring the wife back to the path of virtue, and Sauttern to his duty. 
When I thought that their separation was complete, they came to. 
gether again, and the husband was obliging enough to take the 
young man into his house again. After that I had nothing more to 
say. I discovered that the pretended Baron had imposed upon me 
with a heap of lies.. His name was not Sauttern at all, but Sautter- 
sheim. As for the title of Baron, which had been bestowed upon 
him in Switzerland, I could not reproach him on that score, be- 
cause he had never assumed it. But I have no doubt that he way 
really a gentleman, and my Lord Marshal, who was a judge of 
men, and who had been in his country, always looked upon and 
treated him as one. 

As soon as he had left, the. servant at the inn where he took his 
meals declared that she was in the family way by him. She was so 
dirty a slut, and Sauttern, who was generally esteemed and looked 
up to in the district as a well-conducted and respectable young man, 
was known to take such pride in cleanliness, that this impudent 
assertion disgusted everybody. The most attractive women in the 


642 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


district, who had in vain lavished their fascinations upon him, were 
furious. I was beside myself with indignation. I did all I could to 
get the shameless hussy arrested, offering to pay all expenses and 
go bail for Sauttersheim. I wrote to him, firmly convinced not 
only that this pregnancy was not his work, but that it was in reality 
only pretended, and that the whole affair was a joke on the part 
of his enemies and my own. I wanted him to return to the district, 
to confound the jade, and those who had prompted her. I was sur- 
prised at the feebleness of his reply. He wrote to the pastor of the 
girl’s parish, and tried to hush up the affair. I accordingly ceased to 
trouble myself about the matter, feeling greatly astonished that a 
man whose tastes were so low could have been sufficiently master of 
himself to impose upon me by his reserve during our closest inti- 
macy. 

From Strasburg, Sauttersheim went to Paris to seek his fortune, 
but only found misery. He wrote to me, confessing his sins. My 
heart was moved at the recollection of our old friendship. I sent him 
some money. The following year, when passing through Paris, I 
saw him again. He was in much the same circumstances, but on 
very friendly terms with M. Laliaud. I have never been able to 
learn how he made his acquaintance, or whether it was recent or of 
long standing. Two years later, Sauttersheim returned to Strasburg, 
from which place he wrote to me, and where he died. Such is, in 
brief, the story of my connection with him, and of his adventures; . 
but, while deploring the unhappy lot of this unfortunate young 
man, I shall always believe that he was a gentleman by birth, and 
that his irregular life was the result of the situations to which he 
was reduced. 

Such were my acquisitions, in the way of connections and friend- 
ships, at Motiers. I should have needed many such to compensate 
for the cruel losses which I suffered at the same time! 

First, I lost M. de Luxembourg, who, having suffered great torture 
at the hands of his physicians, at last fell a victim to them, who 
treated his gout, which they persistently refused to acknowledge, 
as a malady which they were able to cure. 

If we can believe the written account of La Roche, Madame la 
Maréchale’s confidential servant, M. de Luxembourg’s case is a 


DEATH OF M. DE LUXEMBOURG 643 


cruel and memorable example, how deplorable are the miseries of 
greatness. i 

I felt the loss of this worthy gentleman the more keenly, as he 
was the only friend I had in France; and the gentleness of his 
character was so great, that it made me altogether forget his rank 
and associate with him #æs an equal. Our relations did not come to 
‘an end after my retirement, and he continued to write to me as 
before. I fancied, however, that absence or my misfortunes had 
somewhat cooled his affections. It is difficult for a courtier to pre- 
serve the same attachment for anyone whom he knows to be out 
of favour with the authorities. Besides, I came to the conclusion that 
the great influence which Madame de Luxembourg possessed over 
him had not been favourable to me, and that she had taken ad- 
vantage of my absence to injure me in his esteem. She herself, in 
spite of affected demonstrations of friendship, which became less 
and less frequent, was at less pains every day to conceal the altera- 
tion in her feelings towards me. She wrote toeme four or five times 
in Switzerland, at intervals, after which she left off writing alto- 
gether; and it needed all my preconceived opinions, all my con. 
fidence, all my blindness, which still clung to me, to prevent me 
from seeing that her feelings towards me were something more 
than simple coolness. 

Guy, the bookseller, and partner of Duchesne, who, after me, was 
a frequent visitor at the Hôtel de Luxembourg, wrote to inform 
me that my name was down in M. le Maréchal’s will. In this there 
was nothing singular or incredible; accordingly, I did not doubt 
what he said. This made me deliberate how I should behave in 
regard to the legacy. After careful consideration, I decided to accept 
it, whatever it might be, and to pay this respect to an honourable 
man, who entertained a true friendship for me, in spite of his rank, 
which is rarely accessible to such a feeling. I have been relieved of 
this duty, since I have never heard this legacy, whether the story 
was true or false, mentioned again; and, to tell the truth, I should 
have been grieved to violate one of my great moral principles, by 
profiting by the death of anyone who had been dear to me. During 
our friend Mussard’s last illness, Lenieps proposed to me that we 
should take advantage of the gratefulness, which he showed for our 


544 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


attentions to him, to suggest to him gently that he should leave us 
something in his will. “Ah! my dear Lenieps,” I said to him, “let 
us not degrade, by thoughts of self-interest, the melancholy but 
sacred duties which we are discharging towards our dying friend.” 
I hope that I may never be mentioned in anyone’s will, least of all, 
in that of a friend. It was about the same time that my Lord Marshal 
spoke to me about his will, and what he intended to do for me, on 
which occasion I made the answer which I mentioned in the first 
part of these confessions. 

My second loss, more painful and irreparable, was that of the best 
of women and mothers, who, already burdened with years, and 
overburdened with misery and infirmities, left this valley of tears 
for the abode of the blessed, where the pleasing recollection of the 
good we have done in this world below is its everlasting reward. Go, 
gentle and kindly soul, to join Fénélon, Bernex, Catinat, and those 
who, like them, have opened their hearts to genuine charity. Go, 
taste the fruit of youfown, and prepare for your pupil the place 
which he one day hopes to occupy by your side! Happy, amidst all 
your misfortunes, since Heaven, by putting an end to them, has 
spared you the cruel spectacle of his! Afraid of saddening her heart 
by the narrative of my early disasters, I had not written to her at 
all after my arrival in Switzerland; but I wrote to M. de Conzié for 
news of her, and it was from him that I learned that she had ceased 
to alleviate the sufferings of others, and that her own were over. I, 
also, shall soon cease to suffer; but, if I did not believe that I should 
see her again in the next world, my feeble imagination would refuse 
to entertain the idea of the perfect happiness to which I look for- 
ward, | ; 

My third and last loss—for I had then no more friends to lose— 
was that of my Lord Marshal. I did not lose him by death; but, 
tired of serving ungrateful masters, he left Neufchatel, and I have 
| never seen him again. He still lives, and will, I hope, survive me; he 
still lives, and, thanks to him, all my ties upon earth are not broken; 
there is still left a man worthy of my friendship, the real value of 
which consists even more in that friendship which one feels than 
in that which one inspires; but I have lost the delight with which 
his friendship filled me, and I can now do no more than reckon 


ILL-WILL OF ABBE DE MABLY 645 


him amongst those whom I still love, but with whom I have no 
further connection. He went to England to receive the King’s 
pardon, and to redeem his property which had been confiscated. 
We did not separate without arranging to meet again, the prospect 
of which appeared to afford him as much pleasure as myself. He 
intended to settle at Keigh Hall, near Aberdeen, and it was agreed 
that I should visit him there; but the prospect was too delightful 
for me to hope that it would ever be realised. He did not stay in 
Scotland. The tender entreaties of the King of Prussia brought him 
back to Berlin, and it will presently be seen how I was prevented 
from going there to rejoin him. 

Before his departure, foreseeing the storm which was about to 
be raised against me, he sent me, of his own accord, letters of 
naturalisation, which seemed to be a very safe precautionary 
measure, to make it impossible for me to be driven out of the 
country. The Corporation of Couvet in Val-de-Travers imitated 
the Governor’s example, and granted me the rights of a native, 
free of charge, like the first. Thus, being a full citizen in every 
respect, I was protected against legal expulsion, even by the Prince; 
but my enemies have never been able to use legal means in persecut- 
ing a man who, more than any other, has always shown the greatest 
respect for the laws. 

Amongst the losses which I suffered at this time, I do not think 
that I ought to reckon that of the Abbé de Mably. Having lived 
at his brother’s house, I had become slightly acquainted with him, 
but never intimate; and I have some reason to believe that his 
feelings towards me had changed since I had acquired greater 
celebrity than himself. But it was after the publication of the “Lettres 
de la Montagne” that I had the first indication of his ill-will. A letter 
to Madame Saladin, which was attributed to him, was circulated in 
Geneva, in which he spoke of the work as the seditious vapourings 
of a violent demagogue. My esteem for the Abbé, and the high 
opinion which I entertained of his abilities, did not allow me to 
believe for an instant that this extravagant letter was written by him. 
I decided to act as my frankness prompted me. I sent him a copy 
of the letter, informing him that it was attributed to him. He made 
no reply. This silence on his part surprised me; but my astonish. 


46 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


ment may be imagined, when Madame de Chenonceaux informed 
me that he had really written the letter, and that my own had greatly 
embarrassed him. For, even if he had been right, that was no 
excuse for a step which was bound to create a stir, and was taken 
publicly and with a light heart, without obligation or necessity, 
with the sole object of still further overwhelming, at the height 
of his misfortunes, a man towards whom he had always shown 
goodwill, and who had never done him any injury. Some time 
afterwards appeared the “Dialogues de Phocion,” which appeared 
to me a barefaced and shameless compilation from my works. When 
I read the book, I felt that the author had made up his mind in 
regard to me, and that, from that time forth, I should have no 
bitterer enemy. I believe that he was never able to forgive me for 
having written the “Contrat Social,” which was far above his 
powers, or for the “Paix Perpetuelle,” and that he only wanted me 
to make a selection from the Abbé de Saint-Pierre’s writings, be- 
cause he thought that I should not be so successful in it. 

The further I advance in my narrative, the less I am able to 
preserve its proper order and sequence. The unsettled condition of 
the rest of my life has not left events time to arrange themselves 
in succession in my head. They have been too numerous, too mixed 
up, too disagreeable to be able to be related without confusion. 
The only strong impression which they have left upon my mind is 
that of the horrible mystery in which their causes are enveloped, and 
of the deplorable condition to which they have reduced me. My 
narrative can only proceed at haphazard, as the ideas come back to 
me. I remember that, during the time of which I am speaking, being 
absorbed in my Confessions, I was so imprudent as to talk about: 
them to everybody, never once imagining that anyone had any 
interest or desire, and, still less, the power, to throw obstacles in 
the way of this undertaking; and, even had I thought so, I should 
not have shown any greater discretion, since my disposition renders 
it absolutely impossible for me to conceal any of my thoughts or 
feelings. As far as I can judge, the fact of this undertaking becom- 
ing known was the real cause of the storm which was raised with 

the object of driving me out of Switzerland, and delivering me into 
the hands of those who might prevent me from carrying it out. 


COMPLETE EDITION OF HIS WORx«S 647 


I had another work in view, which was regarded with little less 
disfavour by those who were afraid of the first: this was a general 
edition of my works. Such an edition appeared ta me necessary, in 
order to establish the authenticity of the books bearing my name, 
which were really by me, and to put the public jn a position to be 
able to distinguish then? from the pseudonymous writings, which 
my enemies attributed to me, in order to discredit and degrade me. 
In addition to that, this edition would be a simple and honourable 
way of insuring a means of subsistence; in fact, it was the only one, 
for I had abandoned bookmaking, my Memoirs could not be pub- 
lished during my lifetime, I did not earn a penny in any other man- 
ner, and was always spending money; so that I saw that I should be 
at the end of my resources as soon as the profits of my last writings 
were exhausted. These considerations had strongly inclined me to 
bring out my “Dictionnaire de Musique,” which was as yet incom- 
plete. It had brought me in 100 louis in ready money and an annuity 
of 100 crowns; but it was easy to see that 100 louis would not long 
last a man, who spent more than sixty every year; and an income of 
100 crowns was nothing for one, upon whom beggars and others 
swooped down incessantly like a flock of starlings. 

A company of Neufchatel business-men offered to undertake the 
collected edition, and a printer or bookseller of Lyons, named 
Reguillat, somehow or other managed to thrust himself among them 
in the capacity of manager. An agreement was concluded on rea- 
sonable and satisfactory terms, considering the object I had in view, 
My printed works and others still in manuscript were enough to fill 
six volumes quarto. I further agreed to exercise a general supervi- 
sion over the edition, in return for which I was to receive an annuity 
of 1,600 French livres, and 1,000 crowns down. 

[1765.]—The agreement was concluded, but not signed, when 
the “Lettres écrites de la Montagne” appeared. The terrible outburst 
against this infernal work and its abominable author alarmed the 
company, and the enterprise fell through. I should compare the 
effect of this last work to that of the “Lettre sur la Musique Fran- 
çaise,” only that this letter, while bringing hatred upon me and ex. 
posing me to danger, at least left me in possession of esteem and re 
spect. But, after this last work, the inhabitants of Geneva and Ver. 


648 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


sailles seemed to be astonished that a monster like myself was per- 
mitted to live. The Little Council, egged on by the French Resident, 
and instructed by the Procureur-général, issued a declaration con- 
cerning my work, in which, after stigmatising it in most outrageous 
terms, that body declared that it was not even worthy of being 
burned by the hands of the executioner, and added, with a clever- 
ness bordering on burlesque, that it would be impossible for anyone 
to answer it without disgracing himself, or even to mention it. I 
wish I could give a copy of this curious document, but, unfortu- 
nately, I have not got it, and I do not remember a single word of it. 
I sincerely wish that some one of my readers, animated by a desire 
for truth and justice, would read the whole of the “Lettres écrites de 
la Montagne” over again. I venture to assert that he will recognise 
the stoical moderation which characterises this work, after the vio- 
lent and cruel insults which people had just vied with one another 
in heaping upon the author. But, being unable to reply to the abuse, 
because it contained none, or to the arguments, because they were 
unanswerable, my enemies had recourse to the expedient of pretend- 
ing to be too indignant to answer; and it is certainly true that, if 
they took irrefutable arguments for insults, they must have felt 
themselves greatly insulted! 

The party of remonstrance, far from complaining of this hateful 
declaration, followed the path which it marked out for them, and, 
instead of glorying in the “Lettres de la Montagne” as a trophy of 
victory, they covered them up to serve as a shield, and were too 
cowardly to render either honour or justice to this work, which was 
written in their defence and at their solicitation, or even to quote or 
mention it, although they secretly drew all their arguments from it, 
and the careful manner in which they have followed the advice given 
at the end of the work has been the sole cause of their salvation and 
their victory. They had imposed this duty upon me: I had fulflled 
it. I had served the country and their cause to the end. I begged 
them to abandon mine, and only think of themselves in their quar- 
rels. They took me at my word, and I interfered no further in their 
affairs, except to exhort them without ceasing to make peace, as I 


had no doubt that, if they persisted, they would be crushed by 


EFFECT OF THE “LETTRES” 649 


France. This has not happened. I understand the reason, but this is 
not the place to mention it. + ` . 

The effect of the “Lettres de la Montagne” at Neufchatel was at 
first insignificant. I sent a copy of it to M. de Montmollin. He was 
glad to have it, and read it without finding any fault with it. He was 
ill like myself; he paidgne a friendly visit when his health was re- 
established, and said nothing about the book. However, the excite- 
ment was beginning. The book was publicly burnt—I do not know 
where.!® From Geneva, from Berne, and, perhaps, from Versailles, 
the focus of disturbance soon shifted to Neufchâtel, especially Val: 
de-Travers, where, even before the clerical party had given any signs 
of movement, they had begun to hound on the people by underhand 
means. I venture to say that I ought to have been loved by the peo- 
ple of that country, as I have been by all those amongst whom I have 
lived. I bestowed alms freely, left none of the needy in my neigh- 
bourhood without assistance, never refused to render any service 
within my power which was consistent with justice, perhaps even 
making myself too familiar with everybody, and, as far as I was 
able, I refused every distinction which might have aroused jealousy. 
All this, however, did not prevent the people, secretly stirred up by 
someone unknown to me, from gradually becoming infuriated 
against me, and publicly insulting me in broad daylight, not only in 
the country and on the roads, but in the open street. Those to whom 
I had rendered the greatest services were the most virulent; and even 
people to whom I continued to render them, although they did not 
venture to show themselves, urged on the rest, and seemed anxious 
to avenge themselves in this manner for the humiliation of being 
under an obligation to me. Montmollin seemed to see nothing and 
did not as yet show himself; but, as a celebration of the Communion 
was close at hand, he paid me a visit to advise me not to present my- 
self, at the same time assuring me that he was not at all angry with 
me, and that he would leave me undisturbed. I thought this a curi- 
ous kind of compliment. It reminded me of Madame de Boufflers’ 
letter, and I could not imagine to whom it could be a matter of such 
importance whether I communicated or not. As I considered it 


15 At Paris, together with Voltaire’s “Dictionnaire Philosophique.” 


650 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


would be an act of cowardice to give way to him, and, besides, did 
not desire to give the people a fresh excuse to raise the cry of “infi- 
del” against me, I bluntly refused to do what he asked, and he went 
home highly displeased, at the same time giving me to understand 
that I should be sorry for it. 

He could not refuse to admit me to Communion on his authority 
alone; that of the Consistory, which had admitted me, was also 
necessary: and, as long as the Consistory had said nothing, I could 
present myself boldly, without fear of being refused. Montmollin 
procured from the clergy the commission of summoning me before 
the Consistory to give an account of my belief, and of excommunt- 
cating me, in case I refused to appear. This excommunication, again, 
could only be pronounced by a majority of the votes of the Con- 
sistory. But the peasants who, under the name of Elders, composed 
this assembly, being under the presidency and, as may be supposed, 
the rule of their minister, would naturally have no other opinion but 
his, especially upon theological questions, which they understood 
still less than he did. I was accordingly summoned, and decided to 
appear. 

What a lucky circumstance, and what a triumph would it have 
been for me, if I had been able to speak, and, so to say, had carried 
my pen in my mouth! With what overwhelming superiority, with 
what ease should I have overthrown the poor minister in the midst 
of his six peasants! Greed of authority had caused the Protestant 
clergy to forget all the principles of the Reformation: all that I 
needed, in order to remind him of this, and to reduce him to silence, 
was to explain my first “Lettres de la Montagne,” for which they had 
been foolish enough to censure me. My text was ready, I had only to 
expand it, and my enemy was reduced to silence. I should not have 
been so silly as to confine myself to the defensive: it was easy enough 
for me to take the offensive without his even perceiving it, or being 
able to protect himself against it. The wretched persons who com- 
posed the clerical caste, as thoughtless as they were ignorant, had 
themselves placed me in the most favourable position I could have 
desired, for crushing them as I pleased. But—I should have been 
obliged to speak, and to speak on the spot, to find ideas, turns of ex- 
pression, and suitable words on the spur of the moment, never to 


ATTEMPTS AT EXCOMMUNICATION 651 


lose my presence of mind or coolness, never to be flustered for a mo- 
ment. What could I hope fronr myself—I who felt so strongly my 
inability to express myself impromptu? I had been most humiliat- 
ingly reduced to silence at Geneva, in the presence of an assembly 
which was entirely favourable to me, and had made up its mind be- 
forehand to approve of eerything that I said. Here, it was quite the 
contrary: I had to do with a person who was prepared to cavil, who 
substituted cunning for knowledge, who would lay a hundred traps 
for me before I perceived one, and was fully determined to put me 
in the wrong, at whatever cost. The more I considered my position, 
the more perilous it seemed to me; and, convinced that it would be 
impossible for me to extricate myself with success, I bethought my- 
self of another expedient. I pondered over a speech which I pro- 
posed to deliver before the Consistory, in order to challenge its au 
thority and to relieve myself from the necessity of replying. The mat 
ter was very simple: I wrote the speech, and proceeded to learn it by 
heart with unequalled enthusiasm. Thérése, hearing me muttering 
and incessantly repeating the same phrases, in the endeavour to 
cram them into my head, laughed at me. I hoped in the end to know 
my speech by heart. I knew that the lord of the manor, as the 
Prince’s official, would be present at the meeting of the Consistory, 
and that, in spite of the bottles of wine distributed by Montmollin, 
and his intrigues, most of the Elders were well disposed towards me, 
I had on my side reason, truth, justice, the King’s protection, the au» | 
thority of the Council of State, and the wishes of all good patriots 
who were affected by the establishment of this inquisition; in fact, 
everything contributed to my encouragement. 

_ The day before the time appointed, I knew my speech by heart; I 
recited it without a mistake. I went over it again all night in my 
head: in the morning I had forgotten it: I hesitated at each word, I 
fancied myself already in the presence of the illustrious assembly; I 
was confused, I stammered, I lost my head; at last, almost at the mo- 
ment of starting, my courage failed me entirely. I remained at home, 
I determined to write to the Consistory, hastily giving my reasons 
for not appearing, and alleging as an excuse my ill-health, which, 
considering the state I was in, would really have made it almost im» 
possible for me to go through the whole sitting. 


652 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


The minister, embarrassed by my letter, put off the matter to an- 
other sitting. In the meantime, he and his creatures made every ef- 
fort to seduce those of the Elders who, following the dictates of their 
own conscience rather than his, were not of the same opinion as he 
and the clergy were. However powerful his arguments drawn from 
his cellar must have been for people of this kind, he could not win 
over any others except the two or three who were already devoted to. 
him, and who were called his dmes damnées. The Prince’s officer and 
Colonel de Pury, who was very energetic in the matter, kept the 
others to their duty; and, when Montmollin wanted to proceed to 
the excommunication, the Consistory, by a majority of votes, flatly 
vetoed it. Reduced to the last resource of stirring up the people, he 
proceeded, with the aid of his colleagues and others, to work openly 
and with such success, that, in spite of the frequent and strongly- 
worded rescripts of the King, in spite of all the orders of the Coun- 
cil of State, I was at last obliged to leave the country, to avoid ex- 
posing the Prince’s officer to the risk of being assassinated, in conse- 
quence of his efforts to defend me. 

My only recollections of the whole affair are so confused, that it is 
impossible for me to introduce any order or connection into the ideas. 
which come back to me; I can only produce them, scattered and iso- 
lated, as they present themselves to my mind. I remember that some 
sort of negotiations had taken place with the clergy, in which Mont- 
mollin had been the mediator. He had pretended that it was feared 
that, by my writings, I should disturb the tranquillity of the country, 
which would be held responsible for allowing me to write. He had 
given me to understand that, if I undertook to lay aside my pen, the 
past would be winked at. I had already made this engagement with 
myself, and I had no hesitation in making it with the clerical party, 
but conditionally, and only as far as matters of religion were con- 
cerned. He managed to get two copies of the agreement made, in 
consequence of some alteration which he required. The condition 
was rejected, and I demanded the return of what I had written; he 
gave me back one of the duplicates, and kept the other, pretending 
that he had lost it. After this, the people, openly egged on by the 
clergy, laughed the King’s rescripts and the orders of the Council of 
State to scorn, and became utterly uncontrollable. I was preached at 


ATTEMPTS AT PROTECTION 653 


from the pulpit, called the Antichrist, and chased in the country 
like a were-wolf. My Armenian costume ‘was sufficient description 
for the people: I felt the disadvantage of it cruelly, but to abandon it 
under the circumstances appeared to me an act of cowardice. I could 
not make up my mind to do this, and I calmly walked about the 
country in my caftan and fur cap, pursued by the hue and cry of the 
rabble, and sometimes by their stones. Several times, when passing 
in front of the houses, I heard those inside say, “Bring me my gun: 
let me fire at him.” I did not walk any faster, and this only increased 
their fury; but they always confined themselves to threats, at least as 
far as firearms were concerned. 

During the whole time of this excitement, I nevertheless, on two 
occasions, had great cause for satisfaction, which afforded me genu- 
ine pleasure. The first was, that, through my Lord Marshal, I was 
enabled to perform an act of gratitude. All the respectable inhabit 
ants of Neufchâtel, indignant at the treatment which I received and 
the intrigues of which I was the victim, were greatly incensed against 
the clerical party, being well aware that it was under foreign influ- 
ence, and that it was merely the tool of others, who kept themselves 
in the background while urging it on to act; and they began to fear 
that the precedent established in my case might result in the estab- 
lishment of a veritable inquisition. The magistrates, and particularly 
M. Meuron, who had succeeded M. d’Ivernois in the office of 
procureur-général, did all they could to protect me. Colonel de Pury, 
although merely a private individual, did even more and succeeded 
better. It was he who found the means of making Montmollin knock 

“under in his Consistory, by keeping the Elders to their duty. As he 
had considerable reputation, he made the most use of it to check the 
outbreak; but he only had the authority of the laws, justice, and rea- 
son, to oppose to that of money and wine. The odds were against 
him, and in this respect Montmollin triumphed. However, appreci 
ating his zeal and efforts on my behalf, I was anxious, if possible, to 
do him a service in return, and in some degree to discharge my ob- 
ligations to him. I knew that he was very anxious to become a coun- 
cillor of State; but, having offended the Court in the matter of the 
minister Petitpierre, he was out of favour with the Prince and the 
Governor. However, I ventured to write on his behalf to my Lord 


654 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


Marshal; I ven mentioned the position which he was anxious to ob- 
tain, and ny efforts were so successful that, contrary to general ex- 
pectation, it was almost immediately bestowed upon him by the 
King. Thus destiny, which has always placed me too high and too 
low at the same time, continued to toss me from one extreme to the 
other; and, while the people covered me with mud, I appointed a 
councillor of State. 

Another thing that caused me great pleasure was a visit from 
Madame de Verdelin and her daughter, whom she had brought to 
the baths of Bourbonne, whence she came on to Motiers, and spent 
two or three days with me. By her constant attentions and trouble on 
my behalf, she had finally overcome the feelings of dislike which I 
had so long entertained towards her; and my heart, vanquished by 
her tenderness, returned to the full the friendship which she had so 
long exhibited towards me. I felt touched by this visit, especially con- 
sidering my circumstances at the time, when I greatly needed the 
consolations of friendship, to support my courage. I was afraid that 
she would feel deeply the insults which I suffered from the people, 
and I should have liked to spare her the sight of them, to avoid dis- 
tressing her; but this was impossible; and, although her presence 
put some check upon their insolence during our walks, she saw 
enough to be able to judge what took place on other occasions. It was 
during her stay, in fact, that I began to be subjected to nightly at- 
tacks in my own house. One morning, her lady’s-maid found a num- 
ber of stones in front of my window which had been thrown at it 
during the night. A large, heavy bench, which stood in the street 
by the side of my door and was securely fixed, was torn up, removed, 
and set up on end against the door; so that, unless someone had seen 
it, the first person who had opened the door to go out would have 
been knocked down. Madame de Verdelin knew all that was going 
on; for, in addition to what she could see for herself, her confidential 
servant made himself very well known in the village, talked to 
everybody, and was even seen in conversation with Montmollin. 
However, she did not appear to take any notice of anything that hap- 
pened, never mentioned Montmollin or anyone else, and only replied 
briefly to remarks which I sometimes made about him. She only 
seemed to be convinced that England would be the best place for me 


HUME 655 


to stay in. She spoke much of Hume, who was in Paris at the time, 
of his friendship for me, and of his desire to be of service to me in his 
country. It is time to say something about M. Hume. 

He had acquired a great reputation in France, especially amongst 
the Encyclopaedists, through his commercial and political treatises, 
and, lastly, by his “History of the House of Stuart,” the only one of 
his writings of which I had read something in the Abbé Prévost’s 
translation. Not having read his other works, I felt convinced, from 
what I had heard of him, that he united a genuine republican spirit 
with the paradoxical English prejudices in favour of luxury. In ac- 
cordance with this opinion, I looked upon the whole of his apology 
for Charles I. as a marvel of impartiality, and I entertained as high 
an opinion of his virtue as of his genius. The desire of making the 
acquaintance of this singular man and gaining his friendship, had 
greatly increased the temptation to cross over to England, which the 
earnest entreaties of Madame de Boufflers, his intimate friend, had 
aroused in me. On my arrival in Switzerland, I received from him, 
through her, an extremely flattering letter, in which after praising 
my talents most highly, he gave me a pressing invitation to cross over 
to England, and offered to use all his influence and that of his friends 
to make my stay agreeable. I went on the spot to my Lord Marshal, 
Hume’s friend and fellow-countryman, who confirmed my good 
opinion of him, and told me a literary anecdote about him, which 
struck me as much as it had struck him. Wallace, who had written 
against Hume on the subject of the population of the ancient world, 
was absent while his book was being printed. Hume undertook to 
revise the proofs and superintend the publication of the work. Such 
conduct was after my own heart. In the same manner, I had sold 
copies of a song which had been written against me, at six sous each. 
I accordingly had every reason to be prejudiced in favour of Hume, 
when Madame de Verdelin came and spoke strongly of the friend- 
ship which he professed to entertain for me, and of his eagerness to 
do me the honours of England, to use her own expression. She 
strongly urged me to take advantage of Hume’s enthusiasm and to 
write to him. As I had no liking for England, and did not wish to 
adopt this course until I was actually obliged, I refused either to 
write or to make any promise; but I left it to her discretion to do 


656 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


whatever she thought fit, to keep Hume favourably disposed towards 
me. When she left Motiers, she left me fully persuaded, from all that 
she had said to me concerning this famous man, that he was one of 
my friends, and that she was a still greater friend of his. 

After her departure, Montmollin pushed on his intrigues, and the 
people became uncontrollable. However, I continued to take my 
walks quietly, undisturbed by their hue and cry; the taste for botany, 
which I had begun to acquire through Doctor d’Ivernois, gave a new 
interest to my walks, and made me roam the country collecting 
plants, undisturbed by. the shouts of the rabble, whose fury was only 
increased by my indifference. One of the things which most affected 
me was, to see the families of my friends,1® or people who called 
themselves such, openly join the ranks of my persecutors; such as the 
D’Ivernois, even the father and brother of my Isabelle not excepted; 
Boy de la Tour, a relation of the lady friend with whom I lodged, 
and Madame Girardier, her sister-in-law. This Pierre Boy was such a 
booby, so stupid, and behaved so brutally that, to avoid getting in a 
rage, I took it upon myself to treat him with ridicule. I wrote, in the 
style of the “Petit Prophète,” a little pamphlet of a few pages, en- 
titled “The Vision of Peter of the Mountain, named the Seer,” in 
which I found opportunities of humorously attacking the miracles 
which at that time formed the chief excuse for my persecution. Du 
Peyrou had this fragment, which only met with moderate success in 
the district, printed at Geneva; since the inhabitants of Neufchâtel, 
with all their wit, are little able to appreciate Attic salt or humour, 
as soon as it becomes at all refined. 

I took more pains about another composition, which belongs to 


** This fatality had commenced from the time of my stay at Yverdun; for 
when Roguin, the banneret, died, a year or two after I left that town, old Papa 
Roguin was honest enough to inform me, with regret, that it had been proved, 
from his relation’s papers, that he had entered into the plot to expel me from 
Yverdun and the State of Berne. This clearly proved that the plot was not, as 
people wished it to be believed, a matter of hypocrisy, since Roguin the banneret, 
far from being a devotee, pushed his materialism and unbelief even to intoler- 
ance and fanaticism. Besides, no one at Yverdun had so completely taken posses- 
sion of me, or lavished upon me, in such an abundance, affection, praise, and 
flattery, as this same Roguin. He loyally followed the favourite system of my 
persecutors. 


i 
LIBEL BY M. VERNES 657 


the same period, the manuscript of which will be found amongst my 
papers. I must here give some account of the subject of it. 

When the fury of decrees and persecutions was at its height, the 
Genevese had particularly distinguished themselves by joining in the 
hue and cry with all their might. My friend Vernes, amongst others, 
with a truly theological, generosity, chose just this moment to pub- 
lish some letters against me, in which he claimed to prove that I was 
not a Christian. These letters, written in a conceited style, were none 
the better for it, although it was stated positively that Bonnet, the 
naturalist, had assisted in their composition, for the said Bonnet, al- 
though a materialist, is notwithstanding most intolerantly orthodox, 
the moment it is a question of myself. I certainly did not feel tempted 
to answer this production; but, as the opportunity presented itself of 
saying a few words about it in the “Lettres de Ja Montagne,” I in- 
serted a somewhat contemptuous note, which made Vernes furious. 
He filled Geneva with his cries of rage, and D’Ivernois informed me 
that he was out of his mind. Some time afterwards an anonymous 
pamphlet appeared, which seemed to be written with the water of 
Phlegethon? instead of ink. In this letter I was accused of having 
exposed my children in the streets, of taking about with me a sol- 
diers’ trollop, of being worn out by debauchery, rotten with the pox, 
and similar politenesses. It was easy for me to recognise my man. On 
reading this libellous production, my first thought was to estimate 
at its true value everything that is called renown and reputation 
amongst men; when I saw a man treated as a whoremonger who had 
never been in a brothel in his life, and whose greatest fault was a 
constant timidity and shyness, like that of a virgin; when I saw that 
I was supposed to be eaten up by the pox—I, who had not only never 
had the slightest attack of any venereal disease, but who, according 
to the physicians, was so formed that it would have been impossible 
for me to contract it. After careful consideration, I came to the con- 
clusion that I could not better refute this libel than by having it 
printed in the town in which I had lived longest. I sent it to Du- 
chesne to be printed just as it was, with a prefatory notice, in which 
I mentioned M. Vernes, and a few brief notes, in order to explain the 
facts. Not content with having this pamphlet printed, I sent it to 


17 One of the rivers of the infernal regions. 


658 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


several persons, amongst others to Prince Louis of Wurtemburg, 
who had shown great civility to me, and with whom I was in cor- 
respondence at the time. The Prince, Du Peyrou, and others, seemed 
to doubt whether Vernes was the author of the libel, and blamed me 
for having mentioned his name without due investigation. In con- 
sequence of their remonstrances, I regretted what I had done, and 
wrote to Duchesne to suppress the pamphlet. Guy wrote to me that 
this had been done. I do not know whether this was true- I have 
found him out in so many lies on so many occasions, that one more 
would be nothing surprising; and at that time I was surrounded by 
that profound darkness, which it is impossible for me to penetrate, 
so as to arrive at any kind of truth. 

M. Vernes bore the imputation with an equanimity which was 
more than surprising in a man, if he had not deserved it, after his 
previous outburst of rage. He wrote to me two or three cautiously 
worded letters, the object of which seemed to me to be, to endeavour 
to find out, from my answers, how much I knew, and whether I had 
any proof against him. I wrote two short answers, dry, and severe in 
the meaning they conveyed, but couched in most polite terms, at 
which he was not at all annoyed. I did not answer his third letter at 
all, since I saw that he wanted to draw me into correspondence; and 
he sent D’Ivernois to speak to me. Madame Cramer wrote to Du 
Peyrou that she was certain that the libel was not the work of Vernes. 
All this failed to shake my own conviction; but, since it was possible 
that I was mistaken, and in this case owed Vernes an apology, I sent 
him a message by D’Ivernois that I would make him a most hand- 
some one, if he could inform me of the real author of the libel, or, at 
least, prove to me that it was not himself. I did more, feeling that, 
after all, if he was not guilty, I had no right to demand that he 
should prove anything to me; I resolved to explain, in a tolerably 
lengthy memoir, the reasons for my conviction, and to submit them 
to the decision of an umpire, whem Vernes could not refuse. No 
one would guess who was the umpire that I chose: it was the Council 
of Geneva. I declared, at the end of the memoir, that if the Council, 
after having examined it and made such inquiries as it might con- 
sider necessary, and which it was easy for it to carry out successfully, 


ACTS OF VIOLENCE 659 


was of the opinion that M. Vernes was not the author of the libel, I 
would from that moment sincerely abandon my belief that he was, 
and would go and throw myself at his feet, and ask his pardon until 
I had obtained it. I venture to say, that never did the ardour of my 
zeal for justice, never did the uprightness and generosity of my soul, 
never did my confidemce in this love of justice, which is natural to 
the hearts of all, display themselves more fully or more clearly than 
in this memoir, at the same time prudent and affecting, in which I 
unhtesitatingly accepted my most implacable enemies as umpires be- 
tween the slanderer and myself. I read the pamphlet to Du Peyrou; 
he advised me to suppress it, and I suppressed it. He recommended 
me to wait for the proofs which Vernes promised. I waited, and am 
still waiting for them; he advised me to remain silent while I was 
waiting; I remained silent, and shall remain silent for the rest of my 
life, blamed for having brought against Vernes a serious imputation, 
that was false and not proved, although, in my own mind, I am as 
firmly convinced and persuaded that he is the author of the libel as 
of my own existence. My memoir is in Du Peyrou’s hands. If it ever 
sees the light, my reasons for thinking so will be found there, and 
the soul of Jean Jacques, which my contemporaries refused to under-: 
stand, will then, I hope, be understood. 

It is time to proceed to the final catastrophe at Motiers, and my de- 
parture from Val-de-Travers, after a residence of two years and a 
half, and eight months of unshaken firmness in enduring most un- 
worthy treatment. It is impossible for me to recall clearly the details 
of this unpleasant period of my life; but they will be found in the 
account of it published by Du Peyrou, of which I shall have to speak 
later. 

After Madame de Verdelin’s departure, the excitement became 
more violent; and, in spite of the repeated rescripts of the King, in 
spite of the frequent orders of the Council of State, in spite of the 
efforts of the lord of the manor and the magistrates of the place, the 
people seriously regarded me as the Antichrist; and, finding all their 
clamours useless, seemed at last inclined to proceed to acts of vio- 
lence. In the streets, stones already began to roll after me, which had 
been thrown from too great a distance to be able to reach me. At last, 


660 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


on the night after the fair at Motiers, at the beginning of September, 
I was attacked in the house where I lived in a manner which im- 
perilled the lives of the inmates. 

At midnight, I heard a loud noise in the gallery which ran along 
the back part of the house. A shower of stones, thrown against the 
window and the door which led to this gallery, fell into it with such 
a noise that my dog, who slept in the gallery, and at first commenced 
to bark, was terrified into silence, and ran into a corner, where he 
scratched and gnawed the boards in his endeavours to escape. Hear- 
ing the noise, I got up. I was on the point of leaving my room to go 
into the kitchen, when a stone thrown by a powerful hand, smashed 
the window of the kitchen, flew across it, burst open the door of my 
room, and fell at the foot of my bed; and, if I had been a second 
sooner, I should have had it in my stomach. I concluded that the 
noise had been made in order to attract my attention, and the stone 
thrown to receive me when I left my room. I dashed into the kitchen. 
There I found Thérése, who had also got up and ran trembling to- 
wards me. We stood close against a wall, out of the line of the win- 
dow, to avoid being hit by the stones, and to think of what we should 
do; for to go out to call for help would have been certain death. 
Fortunately, the servant of a worthy old man, who lodged below me, 
got up at the noise, and ran to cal] the lord of the manor, who 
lived next door. He jumped out of bed, threw on his dressing-gown, 
and immediately came with the watch, who, on account of the fair, 
were making the round, and were close at hand. When he saw the 
havoc, he grew pale with affright; and, at the sight of the stones, of 
which the gallery was full, he exclaimed, “Good God! it is a regular 
quarry!” On going below, we found that the door of a small yard 
had been broken open, and that an attempt had been made to get 
into the house through the gallery. When inquiry was made, why 
the watchmen had neither perceived nor prevented the disturbance, 
it was found that, although those of another village ought properly 
to have done duty, those from Motiers had persisted in taking this 
watch out of their turn. On the following day, the lord of the manor 
sent in his report to the Council of State, who, two days afterwards, 
commissioned him to institute an inquiry into the matter, and to 
offer a reward, under promise of secrecy, to those who informed 


WALPOLE 661 


against the guilty parties. In the meantime, he was to set a guard, at 
the Government expense, to protect my house and his own, which 
adjoined it. The next day, Colonel de Pury; Meuron, the procureur- 
général; Martinet, the lord of the manor; Guyenet, the receiver of 
taxes; D’Ivernois, the treasurer, and his father—in a word, all the 
persons of importancegsin the. district, came to see me, and united 
their entreaties to induce me to bow to the storm, and to leave, at 
least for a time, a parish in which I could no longer live with safety 
or honour. I even noticed that the lord of the manor, terrified by the 
fury of the frenzied populace, and alarmed lest it might extend to 
him, would have been very glad to see me leave at once, that he 
might be relieved from the responsibility of protecting me, and 
might be able to leave the place himself, as in fact he did, after my 
own departure. I accordingly yielded, and even with little reluctance; 
for the sight of the hatred of the people caused me such heart- 
breaking anguish, that I could no longer endure it.1® 

More than one place of refuge was open to me. Madame de Verde- 
lin, after her return to Paris, had mentioned, in several of her letters, 
a certain M. Walpole, whom she called My Lord, who took a great 
interest in me, and offered me a refuge on one of his estates, of which 
she gave me a most delightful description, and entered into details, 
in regard to board and lodging, which showed me how far my Lord 
Walpole had interested himself together with her in this plan. My 
Lord Marshal had always recommended to me England or Scot- 
land, where he also offered me a refuge on his estates, but he offered 
me another, which tempted me far more, at Potsdam, in his neigh- 
bourhood. He had recently informed me of a conversation which the 
King had held with him concerning me, and which amounted to an 
invitation; and Madame la Duchesse de Saxe-Gotha felt so sure of 
my accepting it, that she wrote to me, pressing me to pay her a visir 
on the way, and to stay a few days with her; but I felt so strongly at. 
tached to Switzerland, that I could not make up my mind to leave ir; 
as long as it was possible for me to live there, and I took advantage. 
of this opportunity to carry out a plan which had occupied my atten- 

Tt is said that Thérèse was really responsible for this disturbance; and that, 
being tired of the place, it was got up by her to bring about Rousseau’s removal 


from it. 


662 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


tion for several months, and which I have hitherto been unable to 
mention, for fear of interrupting the thread of my narrative. 

This plan was, to go and settle in the island of Saint-Pierre, a 
domain belonging to the hospital of Berne, in the middle of the Lake 
of Bienne. During a walking tour, which I had taken the year before 
with Du Peyrou, we had visited this island, and I had been so de- 
lighted with it, that, since then, I had never ceased to think how I 
might contrive to fix my abode there. The chief obstacle was, that the 
island belonged to the Bernese, who, three years before, had disgrace- 
fully driven me from their territory; and, not to mention that my 
pride would have been hurt by going back to live amongst people 
who had received me so ill, I had reason to fear that they would not 
leave me undisturbed on this island any more than at Yverdun. I 
had consulted my Lord Marshal on the matter; he thought, like my- 
self, that the Bernese would be only too pleased to see me banished to 
this island, and to keep me there as a hostage for any further works 
I might be tempted to write, and had sounded them through a cer- 
tain M. Sturler, his former neighbour at Colombier. This gentleman 
made inquiries of several of the chief men of the State, and, in con- 
sequence of the answer he received, assured my Lord Marshal that 
the Bernese, ashamed of their former behaviour, would be delighted 
to see me domiciled in the island of Saint-Pierre, and to leave me in 
peace there. By way of further precaution, before venturing to go and 
reside there, I procured further information through Colonel Chail- 
let, who gave me the same assurances; and, as the receiver of taxes 
of the island had obtained permission from his superiors to receive 
me in his own house, I thought I ran no risk in going there, with the 
tacit consent both of the supreme authority and the owners; for I did 
not venture to hope that the gentlemen of Berne would openly ac- 
knowledge the injustice they had done me, and offend against the 
most inviolable principle of all supreme authorities. 

The island of Saint-Pierre, called the Ile de la Motte at Neufchâtel, 
in the middle of the Lake of Bienne, is only about half a league in 
circumference; but within this small space it produces all the chief 
necessaries of existence. It contains fields, meadows, orchards, woods, 
and vineyards; the whole, thanks to the diversified and mountainous 
nature of the ground, exhibits a variety that is the more agreeable, 


THE ISLAND OF SAINT-PIERRE 663 


since its different aspects, not disclosing themselves all at the same 
time, mutually set each other off, afid cause the island to seem larger 
than it really is. The western portion of it, which faces Gleresse and 
Bonneville, is formed by a very lofty terrace. This terrace has been 
planted with a long row of trees, intersected in the middle by a large 
salon, where, during the e vintage, the inhabitants assemble on Sun- 
days from the neighbouting shores, to dance and enjoy themselves. 
There is only one house in the island, where the receiver of taxes 
lives; but it is large and commodious, and situated in a recess, which 
shelters it from the wind. 

Five or six hundred yards from Saint-Pierre, in a southerly direc- 
tion, is another island, much smaller, uncultivated, and uninhabited, 
which appears to have been at some time separated from the larger 
one by the violence of the storms; its gravelly soil produces nothing 
but willows and persicaria, but it contains some rising ground, cow 
ered with turf and very pleasant. The shape of the lake is almost a 
perfect oval. Its shores, not so fertile as those of the Lakes of Geneva 
and Neufchatel, nevertheless form a most ornamental scene, espe- 
cially on the west side, which is very populous, and, at the foot of a 
chain of hills, has a border of vines which are like those of Côte- 
Rotie,!® but do not produce such good wine. On the way from south 
to north, is the bailiwick of Saint-Jean, Bonneville, Bienne, and 
Nidau, at the end of the lake, the whole being dotted with a number 
of pleasant villages. 

Such was the refuge which I had secured for myself, where I made 
up my mind to settle on leaving Val-de-Travers.*® This choice was 
so entirely suited to my quiet tastes and to my solitary and indolent 
disposition, that I reckon it as one of the delightful dreams for which 
I have conceived a most passionate affection. It seemed to me that, in 


19 A noted vineyard in the département of the Rhône. 

2 Tt is perhaps not irrelevant to observe that I left behind me a personal enemy 
in a certain M. de Terraux, maire of Verrières, who was not held in particular 
esteem in the country, but who has a brother, who is said to be an honourable 
man, in M. de Saint-Florentin’s offices. The matre had paid him a visit some time 
before my adventure. Little remarks of this kind, which in themselves are quite 
insignificant, may subsequently assist in the discovery of many underhand pro- 


ceedings. 


664 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


this island, I should be more removed from the society of men, more 
sheltered from their insults, more completely forgotten by them, 
and, in a word, more at liberty to abandon myself to the delights of 
idleness and-a life of contemplation. I should have liked to be shut 
up in this island so completely as to have no further intercourse with 
any living man; and I undoubtedly took all possible steps to relieve 
myself of the necessity of keeping it up any longer. 

It was necessary to live, and, in consequence of the high price of 
provisions and the difficulty of transport, living was very expensive 
. in this island; in addition to this, one is at the mercy of the receiver. 
This difficulty was removed by an arrangement which Du Peyrou 
was good enough to make with me, by which he took the place of 
the company which had undertaken and abandoned the production 
of a complete edition of my works. I put into his hands all the neces- 
sary materials. I undertook the arrangement and distribution of it. 
I also bound myself to hand over to him the Memoirs of my life, and 
I made him the general trustee of all my papers, expressly stipulating 
that he should make no use of them until after my death, as I had 
set my heart upon ending my career peacefully, without reminding 
the public of my existence. The annuity which he undertook to pay 
me in return was sufficient for my wants. My Lord Marshal, who 
had recovered all his property, had also offered me an annuity of 
1,200 francs, of which I only accepted half. He wanted to send me 
the capital, which I refused, since I should not have known how to 
invest it. He accordingly sent it to Du Peyrou, in whose hands it has 
remained, and he hands me over the interest accruing from it in ac- 
cordance with the terms agreed upon between him and my patron.?+ 
Including my agreement with Du Peyrou, my Lord Marshal’s pen- 
sion, two-thirds of which was to revert to Thérèse after my death, 
and the yearly sum of 300 francs which I received from Duchesne, I 
was able to count upon a respectable income, both for myself and, 
after my death, for Thérèse, to whom I left an income of 700 francs, 
from Rey’s pension as well as my Lord Marshal’s; so that I had no 
longer any fear that she would ever want for bread, any more than 
myself. But it was written, that honour should compel me to reject 


"l Constituant: a term specially applied to one who settles an annuity on an- 
other. 


FAREWELL TO THE WORLD 665 


all the resources which fortune or my own labours placed within my 
reach, and that I should die as poor.as I have lived. The reader will 
be able to judge whether, without degrading myself to the lowest 
- depths of infamy, I could have adhered to arrangements which 
others have always been eareful to make disgraceful for me, by at 
the same time depriving me of all other resources, in order to compel 
me to consent to my dish®nour. How could they have felt any doubt 
as to my course of action in such an alternative? They have always 
judged my heart by their own. 

My mind being easy in regard to my means of livelihood, I had 
~ no other anxiety. Although, in the world, I left the field free for my 
enemies, I was leaving behind me, in the noble enthusiasm which 
had prompted all my writings, and in the consistent uniformity of 
my principles, a testimony on behalf of my soul which corresponded 
to that which my’ whole course of behaviour rendered to my char- 
acter. I needed no other defence against my calumniators. They 
might, under my name, represent a totally different man; but they 
could only deceive those who wanted to be deceived. I could leave 
them my life to criticise, from one end to the other; I felt certain 
that, amidst all my faults and weaknesses, and my unfitness for sub- 
mitting to any yoke, they would always find a man who was just, 
good, free from bitterness, hatred and jealousy, ever ready to ac- 
knowledge his own injustice, and still more ready to forget that of 
others, who sought all his happiness in loving and gentle emotions, 
and displayed in everything sincerity even to the extent of impru- 
dence and the most incredible disinterestedness. e 

Accordingly, I in a measure took leave of my generation and my 
contemporaries, and said farewell to the world, by confining myself 
within this island for the remainder of my days; for such was my 
resolution, and it was there that I hoped at last to be able to carry 
out the grand scheme of a life of idleness, to which I had hitherto 
devoted in vain all the little energy which Heaven had bestowed 
upon me. This island should be my Papimania,”* that happy country 
where one sleeps: 


“Where one does something more, where one does nothing.” 


-2 A name invented by Rabelais for the retreat of the Court of the Pope. 


666 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


This “something more” was everything for me; for I have never 
much regretted the loss of sleep; idleness is enough for me. Provided 
that I have nothing to do, I much prefer to dream awake than asleep. 
As the age for romantic schemes was over, and the incense of vain- 
glory had rather made me giddy than flattered me, there remained 
nothing for me, as a last hope, but a life free from restraint, spent in 
perpetual leisure. This is the life of the blessed in the next world, 
and, from this time forth, I fixed upon it my supreme happiness in 
this. 

Those who reproach me with so many inconsistencies, will not 
fail here to reproach me with another. I have said that the idleness 
of society made it unendurable to me; and yet, here was I seeking 
solitude with the sole object of abandoning myself to idleness. And 
yet such is my disposition; if there is any inconsistency in this, the 
fault is in nature and not in me; but it is so trifling, that it is just that 
which makes me always consistent. The idleness of society is tedious, 
because it is obligatory; that of solitude is delightful, because it is 
free and voluntary. In company it is a cruel task for me to do noth- 
ing, because I am under compulsion. I am obliged to remain there, 
nailed to my chair, or standing bolt upright like a sentinel, without 
moving hand or foot, afraid to run, to jump, to sing, to cry out, or 
gesticulate when I have a mind to, afraid even to dream. I feel at 
once all the weariness of idleness and all the torture of constraint. I 
am obliged to listen attentively to all the silly things that are said 
and the compliments that are interchanged, and to rack my brains in- 
cessantly, that I may not fail in my turn to bring in my pun or my 
lie. And that is called idleness! It is the work of a galley-slave! 

The idleness that I love is not that of an idler who remains with 
folded arms in a state of total inactivity, no more thinking than act- 
ing. That which I love is the combined idleness of a child who is in- 
cessantly in motion without ever doing anything, and that of a 
dotard, who wanders from one thing to another while his arms are 
still. I love to busy myself about trifles, to begin a hundred things 
and finish none, to come and go as the fancy takes me, to change my 
plans every moment, to follow a fly in all its movements, to try and 
pull up a rock to see what is underneath, to undertake with eager- 
ness a work that would last ten years, and to abandon it without re- 


BOTANY 667 


gret at the end of ten minutes—in a word, to spend the day in trifling 
without order or sequence, and, in everything, to follow nothing but 
the caprice of the moment. 

Botany, such as I have already regarded it, and such as it began to 
be a passion for me, was exactly the kind of idle study which was 
calculated to fill up thg void of my leisure time, without leaving 
room for the extravagances of imagination or the weariness of abso- 
lute idleness. To wander carélessly in the woods and in the country, 
to pluck mechanically, here and there, sometimes a flower, some- 
times a branch, to munch my food almost haphazard, to observe the 
same things thousands and thousands of times, and always with the 
same interest, because I always forgot them—that was the way to 
spend eternity without a moment’s weariness. However delicate, 
however admirable, however different the structure of plants.may 
be, it never strikes an ignorant eye sufficiently to interest it. The con. 
sistent analogy and, at the same time, the enormeus variety which 
characterises their organism, only delights those who already have 
some idea of the system of the vegetable world. Others, when they 
behold all these treasures of nature, only feel a stupid and monot- 
onous admiration. They see nothing in detail, because they do not 
even know what they are to look at: they see the whole as little, be- 
cause they have no idea of the chain of relations and combinations 
which overwhelms with its marvels the mind of the observer. I my- 
self was, and my bad memory was always destined to keep me, in 
the happy condition of knowing little enough for everything to ap- 
pear new to me, and yet enough to make everything intelligible to 
me. The different kinds of soil distributed over the island, in spite of 
its small size, afforded me a sufficient variety of plants for study and 
amusement during the rest of my life. I did not intend to leave a 
blade of grass unexamined, and I already began to make arrange- 
ments to write an account of the “Flora Petrinsularis,’” with a huge 
collection of curious observations. 

I sent for Thérése with my books and belongings. We boarded 
with the receiver of the island. His wife’s sisters, who lived at Nidau, 
came to see her in turns, and this was company for Thérése. Here I 
first experienced the pleasures of a life which I could have wished 
might last out my own; but the taste which I acquired for it only 


668 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


served to make me feel more keenly the bitterness of that life which 
was so soon to succeed it. 

I have always been passionately fond of the water, and the sight of 
it throws me into a delightful state of dreaminess, although often 
without any definite object. When it was fine weather, I always has- 
tened to the terrace as soon as I was up, to inhale the fresh and 
healthy morning air, and let my eyes roam over the horizon of this 
beautiful lake, the shores of which, surrounded by mountains, 
formed an enchanting prospect. I can think of no worthier homage 
to the Divinity than the mute admiration which is aroused by the 
contemplation of His works, and does not find expression in out- 
ward acts. I can understand how it is that the inhabitants of cities, 
who see nothing but walls, streets and crimes, have so little religious 
belief; but I cannot understand how those who live in the country, 
especially in solitude, can have none. How is it that their sou] is not 
lifted up in ecstasy a hundred times a day to the Author of the won- 
ders which strike them? As far as I am concerned, it is especially 
after rising, weakened by a night of sleeplessness, that I am led by 
long-standing habit to those upliftings of the heart, which do not im- 
pose upon me the trouble of thinking. But, for this to take place, my 
eyes must be smitten by the enchanting spectacle of nature. In my 
room, my prayers are not so frequent or so fervent; but, at the sight 
of a beautiful landscape, I feel myself moved without knowing why. 
I remember reading of a wise bishop, who, during a visit to his dio- 
cese, came upon an old woman: who, by way of prayer, could say 
nothing but “Oh!” “Good mother,” said the bishop, “continue to 
pray in this manner; your prayer is better than ours.” This better 
prayer is also mine. 

After breakfast I hastily wrote a few miserable letters, with a sulky 
air, longing eagerly for the happy moment when I need write no 
more. I bustled about my books and papers for a few moments, more 
for the sake of unpacking and arranging than of reading them; and 
this, which became for me the task of Penelope, afforded me the 
pleasure of idling away my time for a few moments, after which I 
became tired of the task, and spent the three or four remaining hours 
of the morning in the study of botany, especially the system of Lin- 
naeus, of which I became so passionately fond that I have never been 


HIS LOVE OF THE COUNTRY 669 


able to give it up entirely, even after discovering its deficiencies. This 
great observer is, in my opinion, with the exception of Ludwig, the 
only man who has as yet considered botany from the point of view 
of a naturalist and a philosopher; but he has studied too much from 
gardens and collections of dried plants, and too little from nature 
herself. I, whose garden was the whole island, as soon as I required 
to make or verify some Observation, ran into the woods or meadows 
with a book under my arm: there, I threw myself on the ground by 
the side of the plant in question, to examine it, where it stood, at my 
leisure. This method has greatly assisted me in acquiring a knowl- 
edge of plants in their natural state, before they have been cultivated 
and disfigured by the hand of man. It is said that Fagon, chief physi- 
cian to Louis XIV., who was thoroughly familiar with, and able to 
name all the plants in the Jardin Royal, was so ignorant in the coun- 
try, that he was no longer able to recognise them. It is exactly the 
opposite with me: I know something of the work of nature, nothing 
of that of the gardener. 

In the afternoon I abandoned myself entirely to my idle and care- 
less disposition, and followed, without any system, the impulse of 
the moment. Frequently, when the weather was calm, immediately 
after dinner, I jumped by myself into a little boat, which the receiver 
had taught me how to manage with a single oar, and rowed out into 
the middle of the lake. The moment at which I left the bank, I felt 
ready to leap for joy. It is impossible for me to explain or understand 
the reason of this feeling, unless it was a secret self-congratulation on 
being thus out of the reach of the wicked. I rowed by myself all over 
the lake, sometimes near the bank, but never landing. Frequently, 
leaving my boat at the mercy of the wind and water, I abandoned 
myself to aimless reveries, which, although foolish, were none the 
less delightful. I sometimes exclaimed with emotion, “O Nature! O 
my mother! behold me under thy protection alone! Here there is no 
cunning or knavish mortal to thrust himself between me and thee.” 
In this manner I got out half a league from land. I could have wished 
that this lake had been the ocean. However, in order to please my 
poor dog, who was not so fond of long excursions on the water as I 
was, as a rule I followed a definite plan. I landed on the small island, 
walked about for an hour or two, or stretched myself on the grass at 


670 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


the top of the rising ground, to sate myself with the pleasure of ad- 
miring this lake and its surroundings, to examine and anatomise all 
the plants within my reach, and to build for myself, like a second 
Robinson, an imaginary dwelling on this little island. I became pas- 
sionately attached to this hillock. When I was able to take Thérése, 
the receiver’s wife and her sisters, for a walk there, how proud I felt 
to be their pilot and their guide! We solemnly took some rabbits to 
it, to stock it. Another gala for Jean Jacques! This colony made the 
little island still more interesting to me. I visited it more frequently 
and with greater pleasure from that time, to look for signs of the 
progress of the new inhabitants. 

To these amusements I united another, which reminded me of the 
delightful life at Les Charmettes, and for which the season was par- 
ticularly suitable. This was the occupations of a country life; and we 
gathered in the fruit and vegetables, which Thérése and myself were 
delighted to share with the receiver and his family. I remember that 
a Bernese, named M. Kirchberger, when he came to see me, found 
me perched on the branches of a tall tree, with a bag tied round my 
waist, so full of apples that I could not move. I was not at all sorry 
that he and others should find me thus. I hoped that the Bernese, 
seeing how I employed my leisure time, would no longer think about 
disturbing its tranquillity, and would leave me in peace in my soli- 
tude. I should have preferred to be shut up there by their will than 
by my own; for, in that case, I should have felt more certain of not 
seeing my rest disturbed. 

I am now again coming to one of those confessions, in regard to 
which I feel sure beforehand that those readers will be incredulous, 
who are always determined to judge me by their own standard, al- 
though they have been compelled to see, throughout the whole 
course of my life, a thousand inner emotions which have not the least 
resemblance to their own. The most extraordinary thing is that, 
while denying to me all the good or indifferent feelings which they 
do not themselves possess, they are always ready to attribute to me 
others so utterly bad that they could not even enter into the heart of 
a man. They find it perfectly simple to put me into contradiction 
with nature, and to make me out a monster such as cannot possibly 
exist. No absurdity appears incredible to them, if only it is calculated 


HIS ISLAND LIFE 671 


to blacken me; nothing that is at all out of the common seems te 
them possible, if only it is calculated to bring honour upon me. 
But, whatever they may believe or say, I will none the less con- 
tinue faithfully to set forth what Jean Jacques Rosseau was, did, and 
thought, without either explaining or justifying the singularity of 
his sentiments and ideas, or inquiring whether others have thought 
as he. I took such a fan€y to the island of Saint-Pierre, and was so 
comfortable there, that, from continually concentrating all my de- 
sires upon this island, I formed the design of never leaving it. The 
visits which I had to pay in the neighbourhood, the excursions which 
I should have been obliged to make to Neufchatel, Bienne, Yverdun, 
and Nidau, already wearied me in imagination. A day to be spent 
out of the island seemed to me a curtailment of my happiness; and 
to go beyond the circumference of the lake was, for me, to leave my 
element. Besides, my experience of the past had made me timid. It 
only needed something to make me happy and soothe my heart, to 
make me expect to lose it; and my ardent desire of ending my days in 
this island was inseparably united with the fear of being compelled 
to leave it. I was in the habit of going every evening to sit upon the 
shore, especially when the lake was rough. | felt a singular pleasure 
in seeing the waves break at my feet. They represented to me the 
tumult of the world and the peacefulness of my own abode; and I 
was sometimes so touched by this delightful idea, that I felt the tears 
trickling down from my eyes. This repose, which I passionately en- 
joyed, was only troubled by the apprehension of losing it; but this 
feeling of uneasiness spoilt its charm. I felt my position to be so pre- 
carious that I could not reckon upon its continuance. Ah! said I to 
myself, how gladly would I exchange the permission to leave the 
island, for which I do not care at all, for the assurance of being able 
to remain there always! Instead of being allowed here by sufferance, 
why am I not kept here by force? Those who only leave me here on 
sufferance, can drive me away at any moment; can I venture to hope 
that my persecutors, seeing me happy here, will allow me to continue 
to be so? It is little enough that I am permitted to live here; I could 
wish to be condemned, to be forced to remain in this island, so as 
not to be forced to leave it. I regarded with envy the happy Micheli 
Ducret, who, quietly resting in the fortress at Arberg, in order to be 


672 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


happy, had only needed to wish to be so. At last, from constantly 
abandoning myself to these reflections, and to the disquieting fore- 
bodings of fresh storms always ready to burst upon my head, I at 
last came to wish, with incredible eagerness, that, instead of merely 
tolerating my stay in the island, my persecutors would assign it to 
me as a prison for life; and I can swear that, if it had only rested 
with myself to secure my condemnation to that effect, I would have 
done so with the greatest delight, since I preferred a thousand times 
the necessity of spending the rest of my life there to the danger of be- 
ing driven out of it. 

My apprehensions did not long remain unfulfilled. At the mo- 
ment when I least expected it, I received a letter from the Bailli of 
Nidau, within whose jurisdiction the island of Saint-Pierre was in- 
cluded; in this letter he conveyed to me, on the part of their Excel- 
lencies, the order to leave the island and their States. I thought I 
was dreaming when I read it. Nothing could have been less natural, 
less reasonable, less expected than such an order; for I had rather 
looked upon my forebodings as the uneasiness of a man alarmed by 
his misfortunes, than as a presentiment which rested upon the slight- 
est foundation. The steps which I had taken to assure myself of the 
tacit consent of the Sovereign, the peaceful manner in which I had 
been permitted to establish myself on the island, the visits of several 
Bernese and the Bailli himself, who had overwhelmed me with dem- 
onstrations of friendship and attention, the severity of the weather, 
which made it absolutely barbarous to drive out a man in ill-health 
—all these considerations caused me and many others to believe that 
there was some misunderstanding about the order, and that those 
who were ill-disposed towards me had purposely chosen the time 
when the grapes were being gathered and when several members of 
the Senate were absent, to deal me this blow unexpectedly. 

If I had listened to the first impulse of my indignation, I should 
have set out at once. But where was I to go? what was to become of 
me, at the beginning of winter, when I had made no plans or prep- 
arations, and was without a guide or conveyance. Unless I was pre- 
pared to leave everything in confusion, my papers, belongings, and 
affairs generally, I required time to see to them, and it was not men- 
tioned in the order whether this was to be allowed me or not. My 


EXPELLED FROM THE ISLAND 673 


continued misfortunes began to weaken my courage. For the first 
time in my life, I felt my natural ‘pride bend beneath the yoke of 
necessity; and, in spite of the murmurings of my heart, I was obliged 
to humiliate myself by asking for delay. It was to M. de Graffenried, 
who had sent me the order, that I addressed myself for an explana- 
- tion of it. In his letter, he ¢ expressed strong disapproval of this order, 
which he had only communicated to me with the greatest regret; 
and the evidences of sorrow and esteem, of which it was full, seemed 
to me a kindly invitation to speak to him with perfect frankness, 
which IJ did. I had no doubt that my letter would open the eyes of 
these unjust men to their barbarous conduct, and that, even if they 
did not revoke so cruel an order, they would at least grant me a rea- 
sonable delay, perhaps the whole winter, to make preparations for 
retreat, and to select another place of refuge. 

While awaiting their reply, I began to consider my situation, and 
to reflect upon the course of action which I had to adopt. I saw so 
many difficulties on all sides, my sorrow had so greatly affected me, 
and my health, at this moment, was so bad, that I allowed myself te 
give way altogether, and the effect of my despair was, to deprive me 
of the few expedients, which might possibly remain in my head, for 
getting out of my melancholy situation as successfully as was pos- 
sible. In whatever asylum I might take refuge, it was clear that I 
could not avoid being exposed to the two methods which had been 
employed in order to drive me out; the one, to stir up the people 
against me by underhand intrigues; the other, to expel me by open 
force, without assigning any reason for it. Thus, I could not reckom 
upon any refuge where I should be safe from attack, without going 
further to look for it than my own strength and the weather seemed 
to permit me. All these considerations led me back to the ideas with 
which I had just been busying myself; I ventured to desire and to 
propose that I should rather be imprisoned for life than driven in- 
cessantly as a wanderer over the face of the earth, expelled in succes- 
sion from all the places of refuge which I might choose. Two days 
after my first letter, I wrote a second to M. de Graffenried, asking 
him to lay my proposal before their Excellencies. The reply from 
Berne to both these letters was an order, couched in most harsh and 
formal terms, to leave the island and all the territory belonging 


674 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


directly or indirectly?* to the Republic within the space of twenty- 
four hours, and never to enter it again, under pain of the severest 
penalties. 

It was a terrible moment. Since then I have often been in greater 
distress, never in greater embarrassment. But what afflicted me most 
was, to be obliged to give up the scheme which had made me wish to 
spend the winter in the island. It is now time to relate the fatal cir- 
cumstance which has crowned my disasters, and which has involved 
in my ruin an unfortunate people, whose growing virtues already 
gave promise of some day equalling those of Sparta and Rome. In 
the “Contrat Social” I had spoken of the Corsicans as a new people, 
the only one in Europe which had not yet been ruined by legislation; 
and I had pointed out the great hopes which might be entertained 
of such a people, if it should be fortunate to find a wise instructor. 
My work was read by some Corsicans, who appreciated the terms of 
respect in which I had spoken of them; and, finding themselves 
obliged to devote their energies to the establishment of their repub- 
lic, some of their chiefs bethought themselves of asking my opinion 
upon this important work. A certain M. Buttafuoco, who belonged 
to one of the chief families of the country and was a captain in the 
French Royal Italian regiment, wrote to me on the subject and fur- 
nished me with a number of documents, which I had asked him for, 
to make myself acquaiated with the history of the nation and the 
state of the country. M. Paoli also wrote to me several times; and, al- 
though I felt that such an undertaking was beyond my strength, I 
thought that I could not refuse my assistance in so great and noble 
a task, after I had procured all the information which I required. It 
was to this effect that I replied to both; and this correspondence con- 
tinued until my departure from Saint-Pierre. 

Exactly at the same time, I heard that France was sending 
troops to Corsica, and had concluded a treaty with the Genoese. 
This treaty and this despatch of troops made me uneasy, and, with- 
out imagining that I was in any way connected with it, I considered 
that it would be impossible, and even absurd, to devote my atten- 
tion to a work, which requires such profound tranquillity—the or- 

* Médiats et immédiats: terms used of fiefs held, or persons holding fiefs di- 
rectly or indirectly from. the-King or Emperor. 


CORSICA 675 


ganisation of a people, at the moment when it was perhaps on the 
point of being brought under the yoke. I did not conceal my uneasi- 
ness from M. Buttafuoco, who-calmed me by the assurance that, if 
this treaty had contained anything detrimental to the liberty of his 
country, a good citizen like himself would not remain, as he did, in 
the service of France. In fact, his zeal for the legislative arrangements 
of Corsica, and his intimate connection with M. Paoli, prevented me 
from entertaining any suspicions in regard to him; and, when I 
heard that he made frequent journeys to Versailles and Fontaine- 
bleau, and had interviews with M. de Choiseul, I could only conclude 
that he had assurances in regard to the real intentions of the French 
Court, which he left me to understand, but about which he did not 
desire to express himself openly in a letter. 

All this to some extent reassured me. However, as I could not 
understand the meaning of the despatch of French troops, and could 
not, with any show of reason, think that they were there in order to 
protect the liberty of the Corsicans, which they were very well able 
by themselves to defend against the Genoese, I was unable to feel per- 
fectly easy or to devote my attention seriously to the proposed work 
of legislation, until I had eonvincing proof that it was not all a mere 
joke at my expense. I should have greatly liked an interview with 
M. Buttafuoco, which was the only means of getting from him the 
explanations which I wanted. He held out hopes of one, and I 
awaited it with the utmost impatience. I do not know whether he 
really intended to grant me one; but even if this had been the case, 
my misfortunes would have prevented me from taking advantage of 
it. 

The longer I thought over the proposed undertaking, and the 
more I studied the documents I had in my hands, the more I felt the 
necessity of studying on the spot both the people who were to be leg- 
islated for, and the country which they inhabited, and of examining, 
in all their relations, the circumstances, the aid of which was neces- 
sary for them, in order to adopt such legislation. I understood more 
clearly every day, that it was impossible for me to acquire from a dis- 
tance all the information necessary for my guidance. I wrote to this 
effect to Buttafuoco: he agreed with me, and, if I did not exactly 
make up my mind to go over to Corsica, I thought a good deal about 


676 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


the means of undertaking the journey. I spoke of it to M. Dastier, 
who, having formerly served in the island under M. de Maillebois, 

"was, of course, well acquainted with it. He spared no effort to dis- 
suade me from my intention; and I confess that the frightful picture, 
which he drew of the Corsicans and their country, greatly cooled my 
ardent desire to go and live amongst them. 

But, when the persecutions to which I was subjected at Motiers 
made me think of leaving Switzerland, this desire was revived by the 
hope of at last finding amongst those islanders the tranquillity which ~ 
was denied me everywhere else. One thing only alarmed me in re- 
gard to the journéy—my unfitness for, and the aversion which I had 
always felt to, the active life to which I should be condemned. Fitted 
by nature to meditate at leisure by myself, I was utterly unfitted to 
speak, act, and conduct affairs amongst men. Nature, who had en- 
dowed me with a capacity for the former, had refused it for the lat- 
ter. However, I felt that, without directly taking part in public af- 
fairs, I should be obliged, as soon as I arrived in Corsica, to throw 
myself into the eagerness of the people, and to hold frequent confer- 
ences with the chief personages of the island. The object of my jour- 
ney itself required that, instead of seeking retirement, I should seek, 
in the midst of the nation, the information which I needed. It was 
clear that I should no longer be my own master; that, hurried along, 
in spite of myself, into a whirl of activity, for which I was not 
adapted by nature, I should lead a life utterly opposed to my tastes, 
and should only be seen at a disadvantage. I foresaw that, ill-sustain- 
ing by my presence the opinion of my capabilities which they might 
have formed from my books, I should lose credit with the Corsicans, 
and, in addition, as much to their detriment as my own, the confi- 
dence which they had bestowed upon me, and without which I could 
not successfully carry out the work which they expected from me. I 
felt sure that in thus going beyond my own sphere I should only be- 
come useless to them and make myself unhappy. 

Tormented, buffeted by storms of every kind, worn out by jour- 
neys and persecutions for many years past, I strongly felt the need of 
the repose of which my barbarous enemies, by way of amusing them- 
selves, deprived me. I sighed more than ever for the delightful idle- 
ness, for the sweet repose of body and soul, which I had so longed 


CONTEMPLATES GOING TO CORSICA 677 


for, to which the supreme happiness of my heart, now cured of its 
idle dreams of love and friendship, was limited. I only regarded with 
alarm the task which I was on the point of undertaking, the stormy 
life to which I proposed to abandon myself; and if the greatness, the 
beauty, and the usefulness of the object in view inspired my courage, 
the impossibility of exposing myself to risk with any chance of suc- 
cess completely deprived-me of it. Twenty years of profound and 
solitary meditation would have been less painful to me than six 
months of an active life in the midst of men and public affairs with 
the certainty of failure. 

I thought of an expedient, which seemed to me well adapted to 
settle everything. Pursued, wherever I took shelter, by the under- 
hand intrigues of my secret persecutors, and seeing no other place 
but Corsica where I could look forward, in my old age, to the repose. 
which they refused to allow me anywhere, I decided to go there, in 
accordance with the instructions of Buttafuoco, as soon as it should 
be possible for me to do so; but, in order to live quietly there, I made 
up my mind to abandon, at least to all appearance, the work of legis- 
lation, and in order to repay my hosts in some measure for their hos- 
pitality, to confine myself to writing their history on the spot, with 
the reservation of quietly acquiring the information necessary to 
make me of greater use to them, if I saw any prospect of success. By 
thus binding myself to nothing at first, I hoped to be able to think, 
by myself and at greater leisure, of a suitable plan, without either 
abandoning my cherished hopes of solitude, or adopting the kind of 
life which was unendurable to me, and for which I had no qualifica- 

tions. S 

But in my position, this journey was not easy of accomplishment. 
To judge from what M. Dastier had told me about Corsica, I did not 
expect to find there the simplest comforts of life, unless I took them 
with me: linen, clothes, plates and dishes, kitchen utensils, paper, 
books—all these would have to be taken with me. In order to remove 

- thither with Thérèse, it would be necessary to cross the Alps, and to 
drag after me, for two hundred leagues, a houseful of baggage; it 
would be necessary to pass through the territories of several differ- 
ent princes; and, considering the attitude adopted towards me by the 
whole of Europe, I should naturally have to be prepared, after my 


r 


678 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


misfortunes, to meet with obstacles everywhere, and to find every- 
one proud to overwhelm me with some fresh misfortune, and to vio- 
late, in my person, all the rights of nations and humanity. The enor- 
mous expense, the fatigues, the risks of such a journey compelled me 
to consider in advance and carefully weigh all its difficulties. The 
idea of at last finding myself alone, without rescurces, at my time of 
life, far from all my acquaintances, at the mercy of a barbarous and 
ferocious people, such as M. Dastier represented the Corsicans to be, 
was well calculated to make me ponder such a resolution carefully 
before I carried it out. I was passionately eager for the interview 
which Buttafuoco had led me to hope for, and I awaited the result 
of it, before finally making up my mind. 

While I was thus hesitating, the persecutions at Motiers occurred, 
which forced me to withdraw. I was not prepared for a long journey, 
especially to Corsica. I was waiting to hear from Buttafuoco: I took 
refuge in the island of Saint-Pierre, whence I was driven at the com- 
mencement of winter, as I have already said. The snow, with which 
the Alps were covered, made it impossible for me to leave the coun- 
try by that route, especially at such short notice. It is true that the 
extravagance of such an order made it an impossibility to obey it; for, 
in the midst of this lonely retreat surrounded by water, with only 
twenty-four hours allowed me, from the time of the notification of 
the order, to make preparations for my departure and to procure 
boats and conveyances in which to leave the island and the district— 
even if I had had wings, I should hardly have been able to obey. I 
told the Baill: of Nidau this in my answer to his letter, and then 
made all haste to leave this land of unrighteousness. Thus I was com- 
pelled to abandon ‘my cherished scheme, and having been unable, in 
my discouragement, to prevail upon my enemies to dispose of me as 
they thought fit, I decided, at the invitation of my Lord Marshal, to 
go to Berlin, leaving Thérèse behind to spend the winter in the island 
with my books and belongings, and depositing my papers in the 
hands of Du Peyrou. I made such haste that, on the next morning, I 
left the island and reached Bienne before noon. My journey was 
nearly terminated by an incident which I must not omit to describe. 

As soon as the report spread that I had been ordered to leave my 
refuge, I had a crowd of visitors from the neighbourhood, especially 


PERSUADED TO STAY, AT BIENNE 679 


Bernese, who, with the most detestable falseness, came to flatter and 
soothe me, and to assure me that advantage had been taken of the 
holidays and the absence of several members of the Senate, to draw 
up and send me notice of this order, at which, so they declared, all 
the “Two Hundred” were indignant. Amongst this crowd of con- 
solers were certain persons from the town of Bienne, a little free 
State, included in that “of Berne; amongst others, a young man 
named Wildremet, whose family held the first rank and enjoyed the 
highest reputation in that little town. Wildremet earnestly entreated 
me, in the name of his fellow-citizens, to take shelter amongst them, 
assuring me that they were eager and anxious to receive me; that 
they would consider it an honour and a duty to help me to forget the 
persecutions which I had suffered; that amongst them I had nothing 
to fear from the influence of the Bernese; that Bienne was a free city, 
which was under no one’s jurisdiction; and that all its citizens were 
unanimously resolved to listen to no request which was prejudicial 
to myself. 

When Wildremet saw that he could not shake my resolution, he 
appealed for support to several other persans from Bienne and the 
neighbourhood, and even from Berne itself, amongst others, the 
same Kirchberger of whom J have spoken, who had sought me out 
after my retirement to Switzerland and interested me by his abilities 
and principles. More unexpected and more weighty were the en- 
treaties of M. Barthés, secretary to the French Embassy, who called 
upon me with Wildremet, strongly advised me to accept his invita- 
tion, and surprised me by the lively and tender interest which he 
seemed to take in me. I did not know M. Barthès at all; nevertheless, 
I recognised in his words the warmth and fervour of friendship, and 
I saw that he was really anxious to persuade me to settle at Bienne. 
He praised, in most high-flown language, the town and its inhabit- 
ants, with whom he appeared on such intimate terms, that on several 
occasions, he called them, in my presence, his patrons and fathers. 

This behaviour on the part of Barthès upset all my conjectures. I 
had always suspected M. de Choiseul of being the secret author of all 
the persecutions to which I had been subjected in Switzerland. The 
behaviour of the French Resident at Geneva and of the ambassador 
at Soleure confirmed these suspicions only too strongly. I saw the 


680 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


secret influence of France in all that had happened to me at Berne, 
Geneva and Neufchâtel, and I thought that the only powerful enemy 
l had in France was the Duc de Choiseul. What, then, was I to think 
of the visit of Barthés and of the tender interest which he seemed to 
take in my destiny? My misfortunes had not yet destroyed my natu- 
ral trustfulness, and experience had not yet taught me to see a snare 
in every demonstration of affection. Greatly surprised, I tried to dis- 
cover the cause of this kindness on the part of Barthés. I was not 
foolish enough to believe that he was acting on his own initiative. I 
saw in his behaviour an ostentation and even an air of affectation, 
which was evidence of some hidden purpose, and I was far from 
ever having found in these inferior agents that high-spirited intre- 
pidity, which, when I held a similar position, had often made my 
blood boil. ane 

I had formerly had some slight acquaintance with the Chevalier 
de Beauteville at M. de Luxembourg’s house, where he had shown 
me some kindness. Since his appointment to the embassy, he had 
shown that he had not forgotten me, and had even invited me to go 
and see him at Soleure; although I did not accept the invitation, I 
had felt touched by it, as I was not accustomed to be treated so po- 
litely by those in high places. I accordingly assumed that M. de Beau- 
teville, although he had been obliged to obey instructions in what 
concerned the affairs of Geneva, nevertheless pitied me in my mis- 
fortune, and had procured me, by his private exertions, this refuge 
at Bienne, that I might be able to live there at peace under his aus- 
pices. I was grateful for this mark of attention, although I did not 
intend to take advantage of it; and, having quite made up my mind 
to go to Berlin, I eagerly awaited the moment when I should rejoin 
my Lord Marshal, convinced that only with him should I be able to 
find true repose and lasting happiness. 

When I left the island, Kirchberger accompanied me as far as 
Bienne, where I found Wildremet and some other Biennese waiting 
for me. We all dined together at the inn; and the first thing I did, on 
arriving, was to order a conveyance, as I intended to set out on the 
following morning. During dinner, these gentlemen renewed their 
entreaties to me, to remain amongst them, with such warmth and 
such touching assurances, that, in spite of all my resolutions, my 


PERSECUTED IN BIENNE 68 ¢ 


heart, which has never been able to resist affection, felt moved by 
theirs. As soon as they saw that I began to hesitate, they redoubled 
their efforts, and with such success that I finally allowed myself ta 
be overcome, and consented to remain at Bienne, at any rate until 
the following spring. 

Wildremet immediately made haste to find me a lodging, and 
highly recommended to me, as a great find, a wretched little room, 
on the third floor back, looking upon a yard, where I could feast my 
eyes upon the stinking skins of a leather-dresser’s establishment 
which were displayed there. My landlord was a little, low-looking 
man, a tolerable rascal, of whom I heard the next day, that he was a 
rake and a gambler, and in very bad repute in the district. He had 
neither wife nor children nor servants; and I, shut up in melancholy: 
confinement in my solitary room, and in the most pleasant country 
in the world, was lodged in a manner calculated to make a man die 
of melancholy in a few days. What affected me most, in spite of all 
that I had been told as to the eagerness of the inhabitants to have me 
amongst them, was, that I did not observe, when walking through 
the streets, any politeness in their behaviour, or friendliness in their 
looks. However, I had quite made up my mind to remain there, 
when, even on the next day, I learned, saw, and perceived myself, 
that the town was in a terrible state of excitement on my account. 
Several persons were obliging enough to hasten to inform me that, 
on the next day, I should be told, as harshly as possible, to leave the 
State, that is to say, the town, immediately. I had no one in whom 
I could trust; all those who had urged me to stay had dispersed. 
Wildremet had disappeared; I heard nothing more of Barthès, and it 
did not seem as if his recommendation had done much to ingratiate 
me with the “patrons” and “fathers” of whom he had boasted to me. 
A certain M. de Vau-Travers, however, a Bernese, who had a nice 
house near the town, offered me a refuge in the meantime, in the 
hope, as he said, that I might escape being stoned. This recommen- 
dation did not seem to me sufficiently enticing to tempt me to pro- 
long my stay amongst this hospitable people. 

Having lost three days by this delay, I had already considerably 
exceeded the twenty-four hours which the Bernese had allowed me 
to leave their States, and, as I knew their harshness, I was not free 


682 THE CONFESSIONS OF ROUSSEAU 


from some anxiety as to the manner in which they would allow me 
to pass through them, when the Bailli of Nidau most opportunely 
relieved me of embarrassment. As he had openly expressed his dis- 
approval of the violent measures adopted by their Excellencies, he 
believed, in his generosity, that it was his duty to testify publicly, that 
he had nothing to do with them, and he had the courage to leave his 
bailiwick and pay me a visit at Bienne. He came the day before I left, 
by no means incognito, but even with a certain amount of ceremony; 
he came in state?* in his carriage, accompanied by his secretary, and 
brought me a passport in his name, which would enable me to cross 
the State of Berne without fear of being molested. The visit touched 
me more than the passport. I should have been equally sensible of it, 
if it had been paid to anyone else. I know nothing which exercises a 
more powerful influence upon my heart than an act of courage, per- 
formed at an opportune moment, on behalf of the weak who are un- 
justly oppressed. 

At last, having with difficulty procured a conveyance, I set out on 
the following morning from this murderous land, before the arrival 
of the deputation, with which it was proposed to honour me, even 
before I was able to see Thérèse again, to whom, when I thought that 
I was going to stay in Berne, I had written to join me, and whom I 
had hardly time enough to put off by a few lines, in which I in- 
formed her of my fresh misfortune. It will be seen, in the third part 
of my Confessions, if I ever have strength to write it, how, when I 
thought that I was setting out for Berlin, I was really setting out for 
England, and how the two ladies who were anxious to control my 
movements, after having driven me by their continued intrigues 
from Switzerland, where I was not sufficiently in their power, at 
last succeeded in delivering me into the hands of their friend. 

I added what follows on the occasion of my reading these Confes- 
sions to M. and Madame la Comtesse d’Egmont, M. le Prince Pigna- 
telli, Madame la Marquise de Mesmes, and M. le Marquis de Juigné. 

“T have told the truth; if anyone knows things that contradict 
what I have just related, even though they be proved a thousand 
times over, he knows what is false and an imposture; and, if he de- 
clines to investigate and inquire into them together with me while 


* In fiocchi: lit., the tufts or tassels on a cardinal’s hat. 


FINISHES READING THE CONFESSIONS 683 


T am still in the land of the living, he loves neither justice nor truth. 
As for myself, I declare openly and fearlessly: whosoever, even with- 
out having read my writings, after examining with his own eyes my 
disposition, my character, my manners, my inclinations, my pleas- 
ures, and my habits, can believe me to be a dishonourable man, is, 
himself a man who deserves to be choked.” 

Thus I concluded thegreading of my Confessions, and everyone 
was silent. Madame d’Egmont was the only person who appeared 
to be affected; she trembled visibly, but she quickly recovered herself 
and remained silent, like the rest of the company. Such were the re- 
sults of this reading and my declaration. 

