10

Stepladder to the Presidency

As the War of 1812 faded from national memory, Americans
began to enjoy the greatest peacetime prosperity they had ever
experienced in the more than thirty-two years since Yorktown.
Secretary of State James Monroe had taken advantage of
General William Henry Harrison’s victories in the West to
negotiate purchase of Indian lands east of the Mississippi,
making the western territory between the Appalachian
Mountains and Mississippi River safe for American migration.
Secure from attack by British troops and Indians, tens of
thousands of Americans streamed westward to carve out farms
from virgin plains, harvest furs and pelts from superabundant
wildlife, cull timber from vast forests, and chisel ores from rich
mountainsides. The land rush added six states and scores of
villages and towns to the United States. It generated wealth for
almost every free white man in the nation and engendered the
greatest social and economic revolution in history. Never
before had a sovereign state in the modern world transferred
so much land to ordinary citizens, or “commoners.” The
millions of acres of land they claimed lifted them into the
category of “property owners”—the landed gentry—with rights
to vote, serve in public office, and govern their communities,
states, and nation. To facilitate economic recovery, Congress
reestablished a central bank—the Second Bank of the United
States—to issue federal currency and serve as a depository for
government funds.

As foreign trade resumed with its attendant prosperity,
Americans hailed “Old Hickory”—Andrew Jackson—for his
victory at New Orleans, Secretary of War and of State James
Monroe for his military strategy, and John Quincy Adams for his

successful peace negotiations.

On February 12, 1815, Louisa Catherine Adams left St.
Petersburg with young Charles Francis to rejoin her husband in
Paris, where, he had written, “I shall be impatiently waiting for

you.” Like her husband, she was eager to cast off the pall that
confined her with memories of their dead infant daughter. She
left St. Petersburg “without a sign, except that which was

wafted to the tomb of my lovely babe.”2 In accordance with
John Quincy’s instructions, she set out in a large carriage
temporarily set on runners to negotiate the snows until they
reached roadbeds that permitted normal travel on wheels.
Charles Francis and a French nurse rode with her, while two
manservants followed in a second carriage on runners, and the
two vehicles traveled uneventfully across the Russian snows
into Latvia. After an innkeeper warned that “last night a
dreadful murder had been committed on the very road I was
about to take,” they immediately got lost. She and her son
endured a terrifying evening “jolted over hills, through
swamps, and holes and into valleys into which no carriage had
surely ever passed before, and my whole heart was filled with

unspeakable terrors for the safety of my child.”2 A local farmer
led them back safely to the road toward Konigsberg, Prussia.
Many more frights followed—a broken wheel and a night at
an inn that Louisa described as “little more than a hovel,” with
a “dirty, ugly, and ill-natured” innkeeper and “surly, ill-looking

men” as clients.“ The worst horrors of war confronted them as
they crossed a battlefield covered with “an immense quantity of
bones.” Adding to their terror was the refusal of her two
manservants to continue past Frankfurt. Napoléon had escaped
from Elbe and was leading a growing army to Paris to reclaim
his crown. The two men feared being drafted into his army if
they entered France.

Louisa decided to gamble that the confusion created by
Napoléon’s return would leave government officials uncertain
whether to close any borders, and she ordered her driver to
speed to the French frontier. After crossing safely into France,

her Russian carriage reached the outskirts of Epernay in the
heart of Champagne, where a company of French troops, on
their way from the Russian campaign to join the emperor,
stopped and surrounded them, shouting, “They are Russians!
Tear them out of the carriage! ... Kill them!” Fortunately, a
general rode up and examined Louisa’s papers, then “called out
that I was an American lady going to meet her husband in
Paris. At which the soldiers shouted, ‘Vive les Améri-cains’ and
desired that I should cry ‘Vive Napoléon,’ which I did waving
my handkerchief. They repeated their first cry, adding, ‘Ils sont
nos amis’ [They are our friends] and a number of soldiers were
ordered to march before the horses.”

My poor boy seemed to be absolutely petrified and sat by
my side like a marble statue. ... The general warned that
my situation was a very precarious one; the army was
totally undisciplined; that I must appear perfectly easy
and unconcerned. . . . In this way we journeyed, the
soldiers presenting their bayonets at us with loud and
brutal threats every half hour. The road lined each side
for miles with intoxicated men, ripe for every species of
villainy, shouting and vociferating “A bas Louis dix-huit!
Vive Napoléon! [Down with Louis XVIII! Long live
Napoléon!]” till the whole welkin [firmament] rang with
the screech, worse than the midnight owls’ most dire

alarm to the startled ear.2

After two more days of travel and one night at an inn, where
“soldiers were crowding into the house all night, drinking, and
making the most inappropriate noises,” Louisa and Charles
Francis reached Paris unharmed on the morning of March 20,
forty days after they had left St. Petersburg. At 11 a.m., she
and her seven-year-old and his French nurse entered the Hotel
du Nord on the rue de Richelieu and reunited with John Quincy
Adams for the first time in eleven months. That evening, as
John Quincy held “my best friend” in his arms, huge crowds
surged through the Paris streets cheering the arrival of
Napoléon I and his army of tens of thousands in the capital and

at the gates of the Tuileries Palace near the Adamses’ hotel.

Napoléon had left Elbe on March 1 with seven hundred
armed followers and sailed to the Gulf of Juan, between Cannes
and Antibes. He led his men northward, planning to cross the
Maritime Alps to Grenoble, but a regiment of troops
intercepted them. Instead of attacking, however, they rallied
around him, then led his way northward across the mountains,
with the number of his followers swelling at each village, town,
and city. The people of Grenoble turned out to cheer his return.
Lyon followed suit. Marshal Michel Ney, the commander of the
French army who had promised Louis XVIII to present his
majesty with Napoléon in an iron cage, delivered his sword to
Napoléon, welcomed him back to France, and turned over
command of his regiments. On the night of March 20,
Napoléon, surrounded, it seemed, by the entire French
population, marched into Paris and seized power—and the
palace—from the king, who had fled with his court.

With Paris in a state of riotous flux, John Quincy packed up
his family and prepared to travel to his new assignment in
England. Before leaving they drove out to La Grange, east of
Paris, to say farewell to the Lafayettes, then headed for the
channel port of Le Havre, where thousands of royalists milled
about in panic seeking passage to England. Just after the boat
carrying John Quincy and his family passed out of French
waters, authorities imposed martial law and prevented all other
boats from leaving port.

The Adamses arrived in London on May 25 and went to the
American government’s Harley Street house to find their sons,
fourteen-year-old George Washington Adams and John Adams
Il, nearly twelve, waiting for them. It had been six years since
their parents had seen them, and Louisa burst into
uncontrollable sobs, clasping her two boys in her arms. Eight-
year-old Charles Francis was just turning two when he had last
seen his brothers and, of course, had no recollection of either
of them. Neither parent recognized George. Without a word
about his own feelings, John Quincy confided to his diary that
Louisa had been “so much overcome by .. . the agitation of

meeting so unexpectedly her long absent children that she...

twice fainted. She was relieved by a warm bath.”

Also waiting for John Quincy in London were his old friends
from Ghent, Henry Clay and Albert Gallatin. Both were there to
join him in negotiating a new Anglo-American treaty of
commerce and maritime law—a logical outcome of peace. The
United States had been Britain’s largest source of raw
materials for two centuries, and Britain had been the largest
supplier of finished and manufactured goods to settlers. With
the economies of the two lands so interdependent, both
governments were eager to resume trade relations.

Treaty negotiations had only just gotten under way when the
Duke of Wellington triumphed at Waterloo in mid-June, ending
Napoléon’s one-hundred-day reign and provoking a stiffer
British attitude toward the Americans at the negotiating table
—until news arrived of American Captain Stephen Decatur’s
spectacular naval victories over the Algerines in the
Mediterranean. During the Anglo-American War of 1812, the
dey of Algiers had declared war against the United States,
demanding tribute for the right to sail the Mediterranean,
seizing American’ ships, enslaving their seamen and
passengers, and selling most of the ships to the British. When
American hostilities with Britain ended, Congress authorized
Decatur to lead a ten-vessel fleet to attack the Algerines. In
mid-June, over the course of two days, Decatur’s fleet captured
two Algerine frigates, one with forty-four guns, the other with
twenty-two; he then sailed into Algiers Harbor and forced the
dey to release U.S. prisoners, end his depredations against
American ships, and withdraw his demands for tribute. Decatur
would go on to similar successes against Tunis and Tripoli,
which, together with Algiers, agreed to pay the US.
compensation for the vessels they had seized.

Decatur’s impressive display of American naval power
surprised the British government, which immediately softened
its tone at the talks with John Quincy and his colleagues.
British foreign secretary Viscount Castlereagh even went out of
his way to send a warm personal note to notify John Quincy of

Wellington’s victory. Instead of locking horns over terms of a
formal treaty, Castlereagh and John Quincy worked out a less
formal, but far broader, four-year, renewable commercial
“convention.” It allowed reciprocal establishment of consuls
and free commerce by the ships of both nations between the
United States and Britain and all British territories, with all
products, ships, citizens, and subjects of both nations granted
equal status in all ports of both nations. The convention also
banned discriminatory duties and port fees and allowed
Americans to trade directly in British East Indies ports—
Calcutta, Madras, Bombay, and so forth—as a most favored
nation, thus’ eliminating costly markups. by British
intermediaries in England. The convention, with its
nondiscrimination provision, would serve as a framework for
U.S. trade with all other nations for decades thereafter.

When the time came to approve the finished convention,
however, John Quincy balked suddenly, saying the documents
had not provided for the alternat—a French diplomatic term
defining the order of appearance of participating parties in the
texts of international agreements and of the signatures at the
bottom of such agreements. Under the alternat protocol, the
order of participating nations and their signatories alternates
with each copy of the treaty, with, for example, “Great Britain
and the United States” in the British copy appearing as “the
United States and Great Britain” in the American copy. Until
that moment, the name of U.S. signatories had always appeared
after “His Most Christian Majesty,” in the case of U.S.
agreements with France, or “His Most Britannic Majesty,” in
the case of the peace treaty with Britain in 1783. When time
came to approve the new convention with Britain, however,
John Quincy found that the document “named the British
government and plenipotentiaries first, which was right for
their copy.”

But at the close they had put “done in duplicate,” which
was improper....I... directed that our copy should be
made out, taking the alternative throughout the whole
treaty, always naming the American government and

plenipotentiaries first, but without any change either in
substance or in the words.Z

Fearing John Quincy’s demand might scuttle the entire
agreement, Gallatin called the alternat protocol “a matter of no
importance,” and Clay agreed, but America’s July 4
Independence Day was just days away, and John Quincy refused
to yield. He reiterated his father’s furious demand to the
arrogant French prime minister Talleyrand seventeen years
earlier that the United States be treated with “the respect due

to...a free, independent, and powerful nation.”8
“Tt will throw the business into confusion,” Gallatin insisted.
“Mr. Gallatin,” John Quincy replied angrily, “you and Mr. Clay
may do as you please, but I will not sign the treaty without the
alternative [alternat ] observed throughout.”
“Now don’t fly off in this manner,” Gallatin countered.
“Indeed, sir,” John Quincy continued growling, “I will not sign
the treaty in any other form.”

I am so far from thinking with Mr. Clay that it is of no
importance that I think it by much the most important
thing that we shall obtain by this treaty. The treaty itself I
very much dislike, and it is only out of deference to you
and Mr. Clay that I consent to sign it at all. I should
infinitely prefer to sign no treaty at all, being perfectly
convinced that we obtain nothing by it but what we
should obtain by the regulations of this government

without it.2

On July 3, 1815, the signatories penned their names on the
final documents, and John Quincy Adams savored the joy of
having ensured the appearance of his nation’s name first on
one of the copies of an international document as a full equal
with Great Britain for the first time in history. He then went to
celebrate his nation’s Independence Day with his wife and
children.

As minister plenipotentiary, John Quincy next turned to the
task of improving his nation’s relations with Britain. To

everyone’s surprise in London’s diplomatic circles, John Quincy
established a solid working relationship with Britain’s brilliant,
politically powerful foreign secretary Robert Stewart, Viscount
Castlereagh. Castlereagh had organized the grand alliance of
European nations that defeated Napoléon, then organized the
Congress of Vienna, where he effectively dictated terms of a
common peace settlement. In organizing the so-called Concert
of Europe, he established a precedent that presaged the intra-
European ties of the late twentieth and early twenty-first
centuries. Two years younger than John Quincy, he was too
young to harbor any of the deep antagonisms born of the
Anglo-American disputes of the previous century. Raised in
wealth and educated at Cambridge, he commanded the same
erudition as John Quincy and was an equally skilled diplomat.

Wellington’s army had been the dominant force at Waterloo,
and Castlereagh again dictated terms of peace to ensure
Europe’s return to pre-Napoleonic borders, thus preventing
Russia from swallowing Poland and Prussia from seizing
Saxony. In an expansive mood after his diplomatic triumphs in
Europe, Castlereagh showed great respect for John Quincy—
not only because of the latter’s position in the American
political world and his experience in international diplomacy
but because of John Quincy’s breathtaking erudition. As Czar
Alexander I had learned, few Western diplomats could match
John Quincy’s mastery of classical literature, history, and
modern languages. And unlike most diplomats, John Quincy
never felt the need to equivocate. From the first, he made it
clear that his primary goal was to ensure his nation’s territorial
integrity and the safety of her ships and men at sea. He could
not have arrived in London at a better time to do just that. With
Waterloo and the exile of Napoléon to a volcanic island in the
Atlantic where he could bother no one, Europe settled into an
unearthly peace after centuries of constant war. “The world of
Europe is in a glassy calm,” John Quincy wrote to his father.
“Not a breath of wind or a ripple of water is moving.”12

Like John Quincy, Lord Castlereagh embraced the concept of
Anglo-American reconciliation, and at John Quincy’s

suggestion, he agreed in principle to total disarmament on the
Great Lakes, pledging, “I will propose it to the government for

consideration.”11 While the government considered, both men
agreed to freeze armaments at then-current levels. A year later,
both nations agreed to reduce naval armaments on the Great
Lakes to four ships each, armed only enough to enforce
customs regulations—a landmark voluntary agreement for
reciprocal naval disarmament that would become the longest-
lasting and most successful agreement of its kind in the world.

With the Great Lakes eliminated as a danger zone, John
Quincy addressed other issues that had soured Anglo-American
relations in the years after the Revolutionary War:
impressment, American access to fisheries off the Canadian
Atlantic coast, and the return of slaves who had fled to the
British West Indies with the British after the war. Castlereagh
brushed each of them aside, however, saying they were best
postponed until reconciliation between the two countries had
progressed and each could address emotional issues more
objectively. In the matter of impressment, for example,
Castlereagh pointed out the difficulties of determining the true
citizenship of seamen not born in one country or the other. As
for returning slaves to their owners, he deferred to Prime
Minister Charles Jenkinson, the Earl of Liverpool, who asserted
as diplomatically as he knew how, “I do not think they can be
considered precisely under the general denomination of private
property. A table or a chair, for instance, might be taken and
restored without changing its condition; but a living human
being is entitled to other considerations.”

Although he insisted that the treaty ending the Revolutionary
War had made no such distinction, John Quincy relented,
admitting the validity of Liverpool’s point. “Most certainly a
living, sentient being, and still more a human being, was to be
regarded in a different light from the inanimate matter of

which other private property might consist.”12
Convinced by the arguments of Castlereagh and Liverpool,
John Quincy stopped discussing unresolved issues that had no

evident solutions and turned his attention to reconciliation
between the two governments and the two peoples. “My social
duty at present,” John Quincy explained to his father, “is to
preach peace. And from the bottom of my soul I do preach it as
well to those to whom as to those from whom I am sent. I am
deeply convinced that peace is the state best adapted to the

interest and the happiness of both nations.”13

Becoming the consummate ambassador of goodwill, he and,
when appropriate, Louisa attended every public function and
accepted every invitation they could, including the dinner of
London’s lord mayor in the spring of 1816 to honor the Duke of
Wellington. After presenting Wellington to John Quincy, the lord
mayor toasted “the President of the United States.” John
Quincy responded, “My lord, I pray your lordship to accept my
hearty thanks for the honor you have done my country... . To
promote peace, harmony, and friendship between Great Britain
and the United States is the first duty of my station. It is the

first wish of my heart. It is my first prayer to God.”14

The all-pervasive peace in the Western world left John Quincy
and other diplomats with few, if any, formal negotiations. They
and he spent much of their time creating and improving
personal ties to each other at receptions, dinners, and balls,
and John Quincy established warm—and, as it turned out,
lasting—relationships with both Lord Liverpool and Viscount
Castlereagh and many others of note. “The Duke of Wellington
called in person,” John Quincy enthused in his diary, “and
invited me and Mrs. Adams to the wedding in his house... .

The duchess afterwards called and left her card.”15 John
Quincy sought out and befriended as many academic leaders,
jurists, and thinkers as possible and established a close
friendship with jurist and philosopher Jeremy Bentham, who
pioneered penal reform in England and with whom John Quincy
often walked and talked for hours.

With so little official work to do in London, John Quincy
moved his family into a rented house in rural Ealing, about
eight miles from his London quarters. John Quincy called the

house “one of the most delightful spots upon which I ever

resided.”!6 He enrolled the two older boys in a local private
school, then supplemented George’s daily academic chores
with advanced work in Greek, Latin, and history—essentials for
entrance into Harvard. He and Louisa occasionally went into
town to the opera—they both loved Mozart’s Don Giovanni
—and he took John II to see several debates in Parliament. But
he spent most of his time at Ealing.

At night, he and the boys gazed at the heavens, and he took
time to write long, intimate letters to his father, often
digressing into complex discussions of political philosophy.
Louisa, meanwhile, began writing Abigail, and the two ladies,
often cool to each other during the first years of Louisa’s
marriage, established a deep and warm mother-daughter
relationship. To Abigail’s delight, Louisa described her sorties
to the opera, theater, and formal dinners in London and details
of her activities with the boys in Ealing. She was particularly
generous in describing the progress of the boys—knowing, of
course, how much Abigail and John Adams missed their
grandchildren.

“How delighted I should be to have them all about me,” John
Adams wrote in one of his increasingly emotional letters to
John Quincy. “Yet they would devour all my strawberries,
raspberries, cherries, currants, plums, peaches, pears and
apples. And what is worse, they would get into my bedchamber

and disarrange all the papers on my writing table.”1Z The elder
Adamses also missed their son. “A man should be in his own
country,” the former President admonished John Quincy.
Inspired perhaps by his nightly studies of the stars, John
Quincy started writing poetry again—serious poetry. He had
harbored ambitions of writing poetry since his days in
Newburyport, when he wrote rhymes to ease the boredom of
reading law. “Could I have chosen my own genius and
condition,” he now thought to himself, “I should have made

myself a great poet.”18 John Quincy often read some of his
poems to his family and neighborhood friends, after which they

all gathered about Louisa and her harp to sing. While at Ealing,
Louisa assumed chores as her husband’s private secretary,
writing and answering routine letters—mostly from Americans
in Britain needing or complaining about one thing or another—
or, too often, stranded without money.

While Louisa replied to his letters, John Quincy was writing

“Man wants but little here below,

Nor wants that little long.”2

"Tis not with me exactly so,

But ‘tis so in the song.

My wants are many, and if told
Would muster many a score;

And were each wish a mint of gold,

I still should long for more.19

In 1816, Secretary of State James Monroe rode a wave of
popularity for his wartime successes to an easy election victory
to succeed his friend James Madison as President. Next to the
President himself, the secretary of state held the most
important and powerful post in any administration, with a
portfolio that included far more than simple foreign relations.
In modern terms, the secretary of state in the early 1800s
controlled many functions of today’s Secret Service, Central
Intelligence Agency, Department of Interior, Department of
Commerce, Department of Agriculture, Department of
Transportation, and a number of agencies such as the Bureau
of Indian Affairs. Given the secretary of state’s range of
executive authority, it was no coincidence that the American
electorate had chosen three successive secretaries of state to
succeed the Presidents they had served—Thomas Jefferson,
James Madison, and, in 1816, Monroe. Two days after his
inauguration, President Monroe named John Quincy Adams of
Massachusetts to be secretary of state—the first sign of a break
in the Virginia dynasty that had provided four of the first five
Presidents.

Despite widespread calm in the Western world, the United
States remained surrounded on land and sea by powerful

foreign powers, each greedily eyeing the rich resources of the
American continent and ready to pounce if an opportunity
arose. The secretary of state and his overseas envoys were
therefore central to the nation’s survival, tiptoeing away from
military confrontations while maintaining trade relations
essential to the American economy. John Quincy had been the
most visible and most eloquent American diplomat in Europe
for seven years and, like Monroe himself, had proved himself
the most skillful—parrying and thrusting delicately and
effectively, taking a stand or not, as the situation required, to
extract the best terms he could realistically obtain, given his
nation’s relatively weak military and naval posture.

“The question whether I ought to accept the place .. . is not
without difficulties in my mind,” John Quincy wrote about his
new appointment. “A doubt of my competency for it is very

seriously entertained.”22 Former President John Adams had
sensed his son’s fatigue with public service and his infatuation
with the poet’s quiet life in Ealing. Fearing his son might reject
the appointment—as he had the Supreme Court—he urged John
Quincy to

accept without hesitation and share the fortunes of your
country whatever they may be. You are now fifty years of
age. In my opinion you must return to it or renounce it
forever. I am well aware of the critical situation you will
be in. I know you have not the command of your feelings
or the immutable taciturnity of Franklin and Washington,

but you must risk all. 21

Abigail added her voice to her husband’s appeal, saying that
American political leaders were already pointing to him as

“worthy to preside over the councils of a great nation.”22 Some
of John Adams’s colleagues from the Continental Congress of
1774 had indeed written to congratulate him on his son’s
appointment: “It seems that the office of secretary of state...
is the stepladder to the presidential chair, at least it has been
so in the case of the last three presidents,” wrote one of John

Adams’s friends. “Now, as your son . . . is appointed to that
station, if he makes the best advantage of his situation, it is
more than probable that he may be the next President of the

United States.”23

As he had in the past, John Quincy yielded to his parents’
ambitions and accepted his new assignment. Critics predicted
that as a former Federalist, he and the Republican President
would soon be at odds over foreign policy, but he scoffed at the
allegations, pointing out that he had worked harmoniously
under Secretary of State Monroe for eight years. “I have known
few of his opinions with which I did not cordially concur. .. . My
duty will be to support and not to counteract or oppose the

President’s administration.”24

On June 15, John Quincy Adams abandoned his idyll at Ealing
and, with his wife and three sons, set sail for America, taking
with him two maids, a household manager, thirty-one trunks,
barrels, and boxes, and furniture accumulated in Russia and
England. Without any space to spare left on board, he had to
sell his 560 bottles of red wine and 298 bottles of champagne
before leaving.

After celebrating his fiftieth birthday in mid-ocean, John
Quincy Adams stepped on shore in America for the first time in
eight years, landing in New York City on August 6, 1817. He
immediately sent word to his parents of his and his family’s
safe arrival.

“Yesterday was one of the most uniformly happy days of my
whole life,” the ecstatic former President replied to his son.
“Kiss all the dear creatures for me, Wife, George, John and
Charles. I hope to embrace them all here in a few days. God

Almighty bless you all. So prays John Adams.”22

“God be thanked,” an equally joyful Abigail wrote to her son
in a separate note. “We now wait in pleasing expectation of
welcoming you, one and all, to the old habitation, altered only
by the depredation of time, like its ancient inhabitants. Come
then all of you; we will make you as comfortable as ... love and

affection can render you.”26

After attending several functions in New York in his honor,
John Quincy and his family left by boat for Boston, and at 10
a.m., on August 18, their carriage pulled up to John and Abigail
Adams’s house in Quincy. Abigail stood in the door as John
Adams II flew from the carriage into his grandmother’s arms in
tears, with George Washington Adams just behind him crying,
“Oh! Gran’! Oh! Gran’!”

Poor little Charles, only ten, held back. He had not seen his
grandparents since he was an infant, didn’t know them or what
to do or say, and could not yet share their “affection and

reverence.”2/ He quickly changed his mind, however, as
seventy-three-year-old Abigail resumed her role as family
governor and hectored all three boys to be diligent, punctual,
neat and clean, and so forth. Like his older brothers, he learned
that hectoring was the only way his grandmother knew to

express her “love and warm affection.”28

Over the next three weeks, friends, relatives, and
enthusiastic Republican supporters of President Monroe took
turns entertaining John Quincy and Louisa, and they managed
to settle briefly into the old house that had been John Quincy’s
birthplace. His brother, Thomas Boylston Adams, had
prospered in Boston. A successful lawyer and father of five, he
had won appointment as a judge and, privately, built John
Quincy’s estate to more than $100,000 in cash and securities
and acquired five income-producing residential properties for
his brother But the size of his family was growing
uncontrollably, and the strain, it seems, motivated him to begin
drinking—a fatal error for anyone with Abigail Adams’s genes.

Less than a month after their arrival, John Quincy and Louisa
had to leave Quincy for their new home in Washington. They
enrolled Charles Francis and his older brother John II in the
prestigious Boston Latin School and took George Washington
Adams to Cambridge to enroll in Harvard, but the faculty found
the boy academically unprepared for admission. John Quincy
arranged for him to board with the family of a Harvard faculty
member who agreed to tutor the young Adams and prepare him

for the college curriculum.

Satisfied that he had provided for the education of his sons,
John Quincy set off with Louisa for New London, Connecticut,
where they stepped aboard a steamboat for the first time in
their lives. They “steamed” successively to New Haven, New
York, and Philadelphia, covering in a day and a half, in
comfortable quarters, a distance that would have taken three
times longer by coach—and that produced a collection of
bruises. They arrived in Washington on September 20, 1817,
and went to stay with another of Louisa’s sisters and her
husband until they could find their own property. In accordance
with the President’s instructions, John Quincy went
immediately to confer with Monroe. Because of the thick,
gleaming coats of white paint workers had slathered on its
blackened exterior after the War of 1812, the presidential
mansion had acquired a new name: the White House.

Work on the interior was still progressing when John Quincy
arrived to see the President. Out of deference for the secretary
of state’s first rank in the cabinet, Monroe had awaited John
Quincy’s arrival to announce his other cabinet appointees. The
President had intended to ensure representation of all the
nation’s regions in his cabinet by naming Kentucky’s Henry
Clay as secretary of war, Georgia’s William H. Crawford as
secretary of the Treasury, Maryland’s William Wirt as attorney
general, and Benjamin Crowninshield of Massachusetts as
secretary of the navy. Clay, however, lusted for the presidency—
and had sought appointment to head the State Department as
his own “stepladder” to the White House. When Monroe
appointed John Quincy, Clay decided to remain in his powerful,
high-profile post as Speaker of the House rather than recede
into semi-obscurity as a peacetime secretary of war. The
President named John C. Calhoun of South Carolina instead.

Although John Quincy had expected cabinet members to work
as a team, he realized after its first meeting that far from a
cooperative venture, James Monroe’s cabinet was a hornet’s
nest of ruthless, politically ambitious adversaries, bent on
crushing his chances of becoming President. And beyond the

confines of the cabinet meeting room, Henry Clay sat in
Congress ready for every opportunity to promote his own
candidacy by undermining John Quincy.

My office of secretary of state makes it the interest of all
the partisans of the candidates for the next presidency . .
. to decry me as much as possible in the public opinion.
The most conspicuous of these candidates are Crawford
... Clay... and De Witt Clinton, governor of New York.
Clay expected himself to have been secretary of state,
and he and all his creatures were disappointed by my
appointment. He is therefore coming out as the head of a
new opposition in Congress to Mr. Monroe’s
administration, and he makes no scruples of giving the

tone to all his party of running me down.22

Indeed, Clay, as Speaker of the House, acted immediately to
restrict John Quincy’s activities in the State Department with
so low a budget that he could barely function. His salary, for
example, was a mere $3,500 a year, compared with the more
than $75,000 a year that British foreign secretary Lord
Castlereagh earned in London. With only eight employees, the
State Department had a budget of less than $125,000 a year—
one-tenth the budget of the British Foreign Office. Under
pressure from President Monroe, Congress raised John
Quincy’s salary to $6,000 a year in 1819 but gave him no funds
to cover his annual entertainment expenses, which totaled
about $11,000, or nearly twice his salary.

Monroe himself, of course, had struggled under the same
budgetary restrictions as a U.S. minister overseas for six years
and as secretary of state for five, and because of his experience
in foreign affairs, he involved himself more in State
Department business than that of any other executive
department—with the warm approval of his secretary of state.

“They were made for each other,” Thomas Jefferson declared.
“Adams has a pointed pen; Monroe has judgment enough for

both and firmness enough to have his judgment control.”22 As
Jefferson predicted, the two men worked so closely and

comfortably together and became such intimate friends that
John Quincy could anticipate what the President was thinking
before the President himself even knew. The warmth that
developed between the two men was evident years later, after
the President’s retirement, when he told Adams, “It would
afford me great satisfaction if we resided near each other and
could frequently meet and indulge in that free and confidential
communication which it was, during our residence in

Washington, our practice to do.”31

John Quincy was all too aware, of course, how Secretary of
State Jefferson’s opposition had undermined President George
Washington’s neutrality policy, and he was even more cognizant
of Secretary of State Timothy Pickering’s unconscionable
efforts to undermine the John Adams administration. On taking
his constitutional oath and assuming office, John Quincy vowed
to be a loyal and effective secretary of state—advising the
President but allowing him to make all policy decisions and
putting those decisions in effect to the best of his ability.
“Extend, all-seeing God, thy hand,” he prayed in a poem he
wrote the night before he took his oath,

In mercy still decree,
And make his hand to bless my native land

An instrument of me.32

“From the information given to me,” he added, “the path
before me is beset with thorns. .. . At two distinct periods of
my life heretofore my position has been perilous and full of
anxious forecast, but never so critical and precarious as at this

time.”33

As it turned out, Louisa’s path was as beset with thorns as
her husband’s. She still displayed a “continental accent,” and
Washington’s social elite soon referred to the Adamses as
“aliens”—especially after John Quincy began walking in the
winter weather wearing his exotic Russian fur hat and great
coat. To make matters worse, the Adamses decided to forego
the long-standing practice of cabinet members’ wives paying

the first visit to each member of Congress at the start of each
session. John Quincy scorned the practice as a waste of time,
and Louisa simply saw no point in soiling herself in the
mudflows that separated the buildings and homes of the
capital. Although they had bought a lovely home, most of
Washington City remained a relative wasteland of woods,
swamps, cheap brick buildings, and tumbledown shacks. Seams
of squalid slave quarters wove through every neighborhood.
Streets were still unpaved, and every rain turned them into
vermin-infested marshland that often provoked epidemics. Rats
and snakes were commonplace, as were cows, horses, pigs, and
other livestock, and Louisa hated stepping outside her door.
Washington’s ladies were outraged by the snub, however, and
even complained to the First Lady. Elizabeth Monroe
responded by asking Louisa to the White House—not, as it
turned out, to admonish her but to explain the malignity that
motivated the custom—namely, the ambitions of cabinet
members, who sent their wives to court votes in Congress for
their husbands to succeed to the _ presidency. After
Washington’s retirement, few in the capital expected any
presidential candidate to win a majority of Electoral College
votes, thus leaving the final decision to the House of
Representatives. As a result, candidates’ wives made a show of
visiting every representative’s wife when she and her husband
arrived in town.

Cows graze near the Capitol in what was still the undeveloped
capital city of the United States. At the time, the Supreme
Court met in an area beneath the Senate floor. (LIBRARY OF
CONGRESS)

 

“All ladies arriving here as strangers, it seems, expected to
be visited by the wives of the heads of departments and even
by the President’s wife,” John Quincy learned. “Mrs. Madison
subjected herself to this torture. ... Mrs. Monroe neither pays
nor returns visits. My wife returns all visits but adopts the
principle of not visiting first any stranger who arrives, and this
is what the ladies have taken in dudgeon.” Louisa told the
President’s wife she had no intention of changing her habits
—“not on any question of etiquette,” John Quincy emphasized,
but simply because “she did not exact of any lady that she

should visit her.”34 Surprised by the controversy over Louisa’s
visits, an editor questioned John Quincy whether “I was
determined to do nothing with a view to promote my future
election to the presidency as the successor of Mr. Monroe,” to
which John Quincy replied, “Absolutely nothing!”

He said that as others would not be so scrupulous, I
should not stand upon equal footing with them. I told him
that was not my fault—my business was to serve the

public to the best of my abilities in the station assigned to
me, and not to intrigue for further advancement. I never,
by the most distant hint to anyone, expressed a wish for
any public office, and I should not now begin to ask for
that which of all others ought to be most freely and

spontaneously bestowed.32

John Quincy said he had accepted his appointment “for the
good of my country”—not for the good of his career. Although
willing to accept higher office, he was determined that the
public should decide on his fitness for any office by his record
rather than his words. He would soon learn he had adopted a
naive approach fraught with enormous political danger.

