9

Restoring Peace to the World

John Quincy and Louisa Adams were enjoying life in Russia too
much to leave, and he still hated the thought of devoting his
entire life to the law. As he told his brother Thomas, “I am
conscious of too little law even for practice at the bar, still less
should I feel myself qualified for the bench of the Supreme
Court of the United States.”

I am also and always shall be too much of a political
partisan to be a judge. .. . If the servile drudgery of
caucuses, the savage buffeting of elections, the filth and
venom of newspaper and pulpit calumny, and the
dastardly desertion of... friends... are to be my lot as
it has been in time past, I shall with the blessing of God

live through it again as I have done before.+

After John Quincy turned down the Supreme Court
nomination, two of his law students decided to return home to
America, freeing the Adamses of two responsibilities. On July
11, John Quincy celebrated his forty-fourth birthday; two weeks
later, he and Louisa celebrated their fourteenth wedding
anniversary; and two weeks after that, on August 11, Louisa
gave birth to a baby girl.

“My child!” Louisa cried joyfully “A daughter! The first I was
ever blessed with. ... My sister went and announced her birth

to her father and he soon came in to bless and kiss the babe.”2
The birth of a girl enthralled John Quincy as much as it did
Louisa. “I think this will convince you,” he wrote playfully to his
mother, “that the climate of St. Petersburg is not too cold to
produce an American.”
In an Anglican service on September 11, “my little babe was

christened,” Louisa wrote, “and she was named after me by her
father’s special desire contrary to my wish.” Although the czar
offered to be the little girl’s godfather, John Quincy declined
discreetly for a myriad of religious, political, and logistical
reasons.

In the ecstasy of watching her baby grow, Louisa wrote, “O
she grows lovely. Such a pair of eyes!! I fear I love her too

well.”3

The renewed joys of fatherhood combined with watching the
mysterious mother-daughter bond to make John Quincy long
for his sons. “My dear boys are never out of my thoughts,” he
wrote to his brother Thomas. “Your account of George’s rapid
improvement in learning to read was a banquet to my soul.
There are so many things that I want them to learn that I can
scarcely wait with proper patience for the time when they

ought to be taught them.”4

The birth of his daughter seemed to him “the proper time” to
change the tone of his daily letters to his children. “I want to
write to my son George upon subjects of serious import,” he
said, “but I... find my ideas so undigested and confused.” His
heart wanted to tell his eleven-year-old that he loved him, but
his Puritan mind could only express that love as his father had
—with guidance: “I advise you, my son, in whatever you read
and most of all in reading the Bible to remember that it is for
the purpose of making you wiser and more virtuous.”

I have myself for many years made it a practice to read
through the Bible once every year . . . that it may
contribute to my advancement in wisdom and virtue... .
You must soon come to the age when you must govern
yourself. ... You know some of your duties and .. . it is in
the Bible that you must learn them and from the Bible
how to practice them. Those duties are to God, your

fellow creatures and you yourself.2

Writing to his son made John Quincy regret having rejected
the Supreme Court appointment. His rash decision would mean

remaining in Europe, apart from his boys, indefinitely. He
wrote to his parents declaring, “I can no longer reconcile either
to my feelings or to my sense of duty their absence from me. I

must go to them or they must come to me.”

In the spring of 1811, Secretary of State Robert Smith
resigned. From the first, he had proved himself incompetent
and all too cozy with the British ambassador, who promised an
end to the British blockade of American ports if President
James Madison ended the embargo on British trade. After
Madison responded accordingly, the British government
repudiated their minister and recalled him from the United
States, leaving an embarrassed President puzzling whether to
reimpose the embargo and risk plunging the nation into
another recession.

President Madison dismissed Smith and appointed James
Monroe secretary of state. Experienced in foreign affairs,
Monroe had represented the nation in both Britain and France
and, next to John Quincy, was the nation’s foremost European
affairs expert. The appointment, however, outraged New
England’s Federalists, who accused Madison of perpetuating
the “Virginia dynasty” by giving Monroe an office that had
become the stepladder to the _ presidency. Federalist
newspapers called Madison and Monroe James I and James II.
The British were even less pleased. Monroe was as outspoken a
Francophile as his mentor Jefferson, and the British responded
to his appointment by attacking an American ship within sight
of New York and impressing a seaman. Under orders to protect
American ships, the frigate President countered by attacking
the British ship Little Belt, killing nine and wounding twenty-
three. When the new British minister demanded an
explanation, Monroe replied angrily that American ships had as
much right to recover impressed seamen as British ships had to
impress them in the first place. He then renewed American
demands that Britain cease depredations on American shipping
and respect the rights of neutral ships carrying noncontraband.

When the British refused, Congress declared British
impressment and ship seizures an affront to the nation’s rights

and honor. On April 1, 1812, Madison went to Congress and
requested a sixty-day reinstatement of the embargo on British
trade; ten days later, Congress authorized him to prepare for
war and call up 100,000 militiamen for six months’ service.

War fever was infecting Europe as well. After Russia refused
to cease trading with Britain, Napoléon ordered French troops
to the Russian border. Fearful of an imminent invasion, foreign
diplomats sent their wives and daughters home from St.
Petersburg, leaving Louisa Adams and her sister Kitty as the
only foreign ladies in the diplomatic corps—and Kitty as the
only target for the czar’s amorous glances. In mid-January
1812, however, the Adamses—and the czar—noticed a decided
change in Kitty’s demeanor. She was pregnant—not by the czar,
but by John Quincy’s nephew Billy Smith, Nabby’s son. John
Quincy was irate, and after he had a “very solemn
conversation” with his nephew, Smith married Kitty Johnson in
a private ceremony at the Adams house in early February.

Tragedy marred their marriage from the start, however, and
seemed to envelop the rest of the family. Kitty’s baby was
stillborn. Then the two newlyweds learned that Billy’s mother,
John Quincy’s older sister Nabby, was dying from cancer, and
as Billy and Kitty prepared to leave for America, the Adamses’
one-year-old, Louisa Catherine, came down with dysentery. A
common disease in St. Petersburg, it gripped the baby in
convulsions, fever, and dehydration for two months—then
claimed her life.

“At twenty-five minutes past one this morning,” John Quincy
sobbed over his diary on September 15, “expired my daughter
Louisa Catherine, as lovely an infant as ever breathed the air of

heaven.” Louisa was out of the room when the baby died, but
having nursed her daughter for nearly two months, she had
spent her last emotions and, according to John Quincy,
“received the shock with fortitude and resignation.” Two days
later, he and his nephew accompanied the baby’s diminutive
coffin to the graveyard of the Anglican church, where John
Quincy “saw her deposited in her last earthly mansion.” Louisa
had caught a bad cold and was too sick to accompany her

husband, who returned home in a state of near collapse. He
tried to make sense of his loss, to explain the inexplicable:

Perhaps an affectionate parent praying only for the happy
existence of his child could wish no better for it than that
it might be transported to the abodes of blessedness
before it has lived to endure the pangs and sorrows
inseparable from existence in the body. As life is the gift
of God .. . it is our duty to be grateful for it... . We ought
perhaps be no less grateful for the death of a tenderly
loved child than for its life... . Had it pleased God to
prolong the life of my darling infant, to what miseries,
distress and sufferings might she not have been referred?
... In the bosom of her Father and her God, she has no

more suffering to endure.

By spring of 1812, the American embargo had combined with
Napoléon’s embargo to cripple British foreign trade and
domestic industrial production. Factories and mills shut down,
unemployment rose, and food prices soared. British exports
dropped by one-third, and employers and workers united in
demanding that Parliament restore good relations with the
United States by ending depredations against American ships.
On June 23, Parliament agreed. The Americans had at last won
their long-running conflict with Britain’s parliament.

But the victory came too late.

It took a month or more for messages to cross the Atlantic,
and unaware of Parliament’s decision, President Madison asked
Congress to declare war on Britain, citing impressment, the
blockade of American ports, seizure of American ships, and
incitement of Indians on the frontier as his reasons. On June 4,
after three days of debate, the House agreed; the Senate
followed suit two weeks later. Not knowing that the British had
sued for peace, American troops charged into Canada along
three fronts in northern New York: at the Saint Lawrence River,
at Niagara in western New York, and farther west at the
Detroit River.

Just as American troops were invading Canada, war erupted

in Europe when Napoléon ordered his 450,000-man Grande
Armée into Russia. With Britain’s fleet in control of the Baltic
Sea, Russian forces blocked the paths to St. Petersburg,
funneling French troops westward onto the Russian steppes.
Within weeks, the French had overrun Minsk and reached
Smolensk—almost without firing a shot. After a fierce battle at
Borodino, Russian troops retreated to Moscow, and after the
civilian population had fled, the soldiers set the city afire,
leaving nothing but smoldering ashes for the French army to
plunder when it marched in on September 14.

Only an occasional echo of battlefield explosions reached St.
Petersburg, but the war nonetheless brought diplomatic
activity to a halt and left John Quincy with almost nothing to
do. Even the czar had left—to be with his generals at the front.
John Quincy managed to score a last-minute diplomatic
triumph, however, by coaxing the czar to give America’s Robert
Fulton “the privilege for the term of fifteen years” to build and
sail steamboats between St. Petersburg and Kronstadt and

along navigable Russian rivers whenever the war permitted.2

Without food or other resources in Moscow for the
approaching winter, the French had to retreat. On October 19,
however, swarms of mounted Cossacks thwarted the French
about-face with fierce hit-and-run attacks. Darting in and out of
snow gusts like ghosts, the Cossacks slaughtered French
troops at will and left every farm and village along the way in
ashes, without a grain of wheat, stick of wood, or shred of
canvas to nourish, warm, or shelter a Frenchman. The
“scorched earth” strategy left the French nothing to harvest
but cold, hunger, and death. With surviving French troops in
full flight, Napoléon abandoned them on December 3 and fled
to Paris. Only about 20,000 of his half million troops survived
their long retreat. John Quincy described the disaster to his
mother:

Of the immense host with which he [Napoléon] invaded
Russia, nine-tenths at least are prisoners or food for
worms. They have been surrendering by ten thousands at

a time, and at this moment there are at least one hundred
and fifty thousand of them in the power of Emperor
Alexander. From Moscow to Prussia, eight hundred miles
of road have been strewed with French artillery, baggage
wagons, ammunition chests, dead and dying men ...
pursued by three large regular armies of a most
embittered and exasperated enemy and by an almost
numberless militia of peasants, stung by the destruction
of their harvests and cottages... . It has become a sort of
by-word among the common people here that the two
Russian generals who have conquered Napoléon and all

his marshals are General Famine and General Frost.12

The slaughter of the French army convinced John Quincy
more than ever of the wisdom of America’s policy “not to
involve ourselves in the inextricable labyrinth of European
politics and revolutions. The final issue . .. is not yet
completely ascertained, but there is no longer a doubt that it

must be disastrous in the highest degree to France.”11

Although they lacked the magnitude of the French invasion of
Russia, American incursions into Canada in 1812 proved just as
futile. In the West, the British forced 2,200 American troops to
surrender without firing a shot in Detroit, ceding control of
Lake Erie and the entire Michigan Territory to the British. To
the east, some six hundred American troops in western New
York crossed into Canada and seized the heights above the
Niagara River, only to face a devastating counterattack by
1,000 crack British troops, who forced the American
commander to send for help. New York militiamen, however,
refused to cross into Canada, saying their terms of service
required them to defend only New York State and no other
states or foreign territories. As the British savaged the little
American legion, survivors fled back into New York.

Farther to the east, just north of Lake Champlain, the largest
of the three American forces faced similar humiliation when
another group of New York militiamen refused to cross into
foreign territory to the north.

Out at sea, America’s little navy—twelve fast and highly
maneuverable ships—had better results. The forty-four-gun
frigate Constitution demolished Britain’s  thirty-eight-gun
Guerriére off the coast of Nova Scotia in only thirty minutes,
killing seventy-nine British sailors and losing only fourteen of
her own. Other American ships humiliated Britain’s navy off the
coasts of Virginia and Brazil. Captain Stephen Decatur’s United
States captured a thirty-eight-gun British frigate near the
Madeira Islands off the African coast and brought her all the
way back across the Atlantic Ocean to New _ London,
Connecticut, as a prize of war. Complementing the tiny
American navy were five hundred privateers, which captured
about 1,300 British cargo ships valued at $39 million and
forced the British navy to plug America’s outlets to the sea with
an impenetrable blockade of gunboats along the Atlantic coast
and the mouth of the Mississippi River.

Although the navy’s exploits lifted American morale, they did
little to turn the tide of war, and less than three months after
the American army had fired its first shots, Secretary of State
Monroe instructed the American minister in London to
approach the British foreign office with an offer of peace. The
proposal simply repeated America’s prewar demands, however,
and Britain rejected it.

As word of American defeats reached St. Petersburg, John
Quincy Adams’s friend the czar offered to mediate the Anglo-
American dispute. John Quincy’s influence had left the czar an
admirer of all things American, although he remained allied to
Britain in the war against France. With the U.S. Navy bottled
up and British forces in Canada poised to invade, President
Madison jumped at the czar’s offer, hailing John Quincy as a
master diplomat. The President’s peace envoys had no sooner
sailed off to St. Petersburg, however, when a British frigate
renewed the fighting with another attack on the ill-fated USS
Chesapeake, killing 146 American seamen before capturing the
ship and sailing it to Nova Scotia as a prize. With the British
sensing victory in the war near at hand, London abruptly
rejected the czar’s offer to mediate, leaving America’s peace

envoys bobbing across the Atlantic on a useless voyage.

The humiliation of the Chesapeake set Americans aroar with
anger at what they now called “Madison’s War.” New
Englanders demanded Madison’s resignation, and settlers in
the West took matters into their own hands, pouring into army
camps to avenge defeats by the British. General Henry
Dearborn, who had failed in his first invasion of Canada at
Niagara, now had a corps of ardent patriots to replace the
recalcitrant New York militiamen who had refused to fight
outside state borders. They sailed across Lake Ontario and
swept into York (now Toronto), the capital of Upper Canada
(now Ontario), burning the city’s public buildings, including the
Assembly houses and governor’s mansion.

After the raid, the Americans trekked westward around Lake
Ontario to Niagara and joined 2,500 troops under Colonel
Winfield Scott in capturing Fort Niagara, Fort Erie, and
Buffalo’s Black Rock Navy Yard, where they freed five
American warships. To these ships, Secretary of the Navy
William Jones added six new warships, giving Captain Oliver
Hazard Perry a lake fleet of ten ships—four more than the
British squadron. On September 10, 1813, Perry engaged the
British at Put-in-Bay for three hours. The battle left Perry’s ship
in splinters and killed or wounded 80 percent of his men, but
inflicted even more damage on the enemy. The British
retreated, ceding control of Lake Erie to the Americans. Perry
emerged from the wreckage and sent his famous message: “We

have met the enemy, and they are ours.” 12

Perry’s victory allowed General William Henry Harrison’s
troops in the west to rout a combined force of British and
Indian warriors on the banks of the Thames River, killing
Shawnee chief Tecumseh and giving Harrison control of the
Illinois, Indiana, and other northwestern territories. When
news of the American victories reached London, the British
prime minister reversed his previous stance and sent Secretary
of State Monroe an offer to begin direct negotiations for peace
at a neutral site in Ghent, Belgium. President Madison named
John Quincy to lead the negotiations, promising, as a reward

for success, promotion to the highest post in the foreign service
as minister plenipotentiary to Great Britain. Rather than risk
having Louisa and seven-year-old Charles Francis travel
through areas where fighting might still be taking place, John
Quincy left St. Petersburg alone on April 28, 1814, relieved at
distancing himself from the scene of his daughter’s death.

By the time John Quincy had crossed out of Russia, the
Russian, Prussian, and other armies allied against Napoléon
had captured Paris and forced the French army to surrender.
Napoléon abdicated and accepted exile on the tiny isle of Elbe,
in the Mediterranean Sea off the Italian west coast. Louis
XVIII, the dead Louis XVI’s younger brother, acceded to the
French throne, freeing 14,000 British troops to sail for North
America for a massive land and sea attack against the United
States. Even as British and American peace negotiators were
preparing to meet in Europe, British ships began shelling U.S.
coastal cities, allowing British troops to seize Fort Niagara and
take control of Lake Champlain. Coastal raids devastated the
entrance to the Connecticut River, Buzzard’s Bay in
Massachusetts, and Alexandria, Virginia, just across the
Potomac River from Washington City. The United States
seemed helpless to respond. The government was bankrupt and
the President impotent, with no command of his armed forces,
no credit with Congress, and little influence over or respect
from the American people. Everything he said or did only
alienated more of his countrymen. He coaxed Congress into
reimposing the Embargo Act—and almost starved the people of
Nantucket Island. The embargo so devastated the New York
and New England economies that state leaders again
threatened secession to negotiate a separate peace with
England. Northern merchants openly defied the President and
federal law by trading at will with the enemy across the
Canadian border—and with British vessels that sailed
unimpeded in and out of New England ports.

Recognizing the Embargo Act as a failure and a personal
humiliation, Madison asked Congress to end the charade and
repeal it. Congress erupted into cheers and overwhelmingly

agreed. Congressmen stopped cheering in early August,
however, and fled for their lives when a British fleet sailed into
Chesapeake Bay. Some 4,000 British troops landed and set up
camps along the Patuxent River near Benedict, Maryland,
about forty miles southeast of Washington and sixty miles south
of Baltimore. Within days they were on the banks of Indian
Creek outside Washington at Bladensburg. As the British
forded the stream, the shrill scream of rockets pierced
American skies for the first time in history, sending bolts of fire
into the midst of defending militiamen. To the terror-stricken

Americans, the heavens had unleashed the stars.? Their front
line broke and fled in panic. With bugler retreats piercing the
air, 2,000 Americans sprinted away, tripping over and
trampling each other to escape the advancing British, never
firing a shot at the enemy.

A few hours later, British troops entered Washington and
began an all-night spree of destruction, burning all public
buildings to punish the American government for having
burned the public buildings in York. The British spared most
private property in the city, although they set fire to four homes
whose owners repeatedly shot at passing redcoats. They also
spared the Patent Office, as it contained models of inventions
and records, which the British commander deemed private
property that might well belong to British as well as American
patent holders.

A storm the following morning brought bursts of heavy winds
that sent flames flying erratically in all directions and forced
the British to withdraw to their boats on the Patuxent River.

As British troops burned Washington, British government
negotiators sat down with their American counterparts in
Ghent to negotiate an end to the war—unaware, of course, of
the flames consuming Washington. Joining John Quincy was
Kentucky congressman and Speaker of the House Henry Clay,
who, like John Quincy, was a fierce champion of manifest
destiny. Virginia-born and self-educated, Clay believed in what
he called the “American System,” with Americans settling the
entire continent and the federal government underwriting a

network of roads, canals, and bridges for a comprehensive
transportation system. He also favored erecting a tariff wall to
protect American manufacturers from foreign competition in
domestic markets. He arrived in Ghent unprepared to yield to
British pretensions to governance over the seas.

Also a champion of westward expansion was former
Pennsylvania senator Albert Gallatin. Born and educated in
Geneva, Switzerland, he and John Quincy had become good
friends in the Senate, and Gallatin went on to become U.S.
secretary of the Treasury under Jefferson for eight years.
Delaware senator James Bayard, a Federalist, and career
diplomat Jonathan Russell, the new American minister to
Sweden, made up the rest of the delegation.

Although President Madison had purposely appointed
members from all sections of the nation, they presented a
united front at the negotiating table behind John Quincy, who
was the most experienced diplomat in the group and America’s
reigning authority on European affairs. And despite their
cultural and regional differences, they meshed together
magnificently, sharing a rented house, whose servants provided
for their needs as efficiently as the staff of a hotel. Although
John Quincy took umbrage at Clay’s all-night card parties, they
found so much in common politically that they became good
friends.

“There is on all sides a _ perfect good humor and
understanding,” John Quincy wrote to Louisa in one of his
weekly letters to her. “We dine all together at four and sit
usually at table until six. We then disperse to our several
amusements and avocations. Mine is a solitary walk of two or
three hours—solitary because I find none of the other
gentlemen disposed to join me at that hour. They frequent the
coffee houses, reading rooms and the billiard tables. We are

not troublesome to each other.”13

Both sides began negotiations from positions of strength and
weakness. In North America, British coastal raids had pushed
the Americans behind their borders, and the superior British
army threatened to invade at a time when the American

government was bankrupt, unable to pay or rearm its troops.
Clearly, the Americans wanted—and needed—peace. Britain,
however, was just as eager for peace. Her forces had just
fought a brutal war in Europe, but with Napoléon alive in Elbe,
the British government realized he might return to France and
fire up his troops again. Britain also faced possible conflict with
Russia, which, like the United States, was demanding freedom
of the seas but, unlike the United States, had the oceangoing
fire power to attack British ships. In short, Britain did not want
to drain its resources in another long war in the American
wilderness where it knew from experience it could never score
a decisive victory.

The Americans sat down with demands for an end to
impressment, which John Quincy termed nothing less than
slavery, but before the talks even got under way, the end of the
war in Europe left Britain with no need to expand its navy, and
it voluntarily ended the practice. John Quincy’s other demands
included an end to British blockades as well as British
depredations on the high seas and recognition of freedom of
the seas for neutral ships. John Quincy also demanded
compensation for British depredations on American ships
during the long Anglo-French war. British negotiators not only
rejected his demands but countered with demands of their
own, including a southward revision of the Canadian boundary
with the United States by about 150 miles. The British also
demanded that the United States cede most of Maine to
Canada and agree to demilitarization of the Great Lakes and
establishment of a huge Indian-controlled buffer zone across
present-day Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan, Indiana, and Ohio.
The British also wanted to end American fishing rights off the
Canadian Atlantic coast unless Americans granted Britain an
equivalent privilege, such as navigation rights on _ the
Mississippi River. John Quincy rejected all the British demands,
and as negotiations dragged on, each side backed away or
increased its demands, according to news from American
battlefields, with British negotiators stiffening after the
burning of Washington.

In America itself, the press and public had unleashed a
torrent of abuse on President Madison after the British burned
the federal capital, but Secretary of State Monroe emerged as
a hero, and the President appointed him acting secretary of
war. Monroe mobilized the nation, calling in militia from other
states, ordering and distributing supplies, and setting up an
intelligence system and teams of riders to transmit intelligence
to his headquarters. He acted to protect other parts of the
country as well, sending a message to General Andrew Jackson
in Mobile, Alabama, to take 1,000 troops to defend New
Orleans against attack. He promised Jackson 10,000 additional
men, then sent express messages to the governors of
Tennessee and Kentucky to send militiamen and volunteers to
New Orleans. Ignoring the Constitution, Monroe essentially
seized the reins of government from the President and
Congress, intimidating private banks and _ municipal
corporations into lending him more than $5 million on his own
signature to pay and arm more troops.

Secretary of State James Monroe named John Quincy Adams
American minister to Russia, then lead peace commissioner at
talks in Ghent, Belgium, to end the War of 1812 with Britain.
(LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

By September 12, the troops that had burned Washington
sailed out of the Patuxent River and up the Chesapeake Bay
toward Baltimore, landing about fourteen miles from the city.
As British warships came within firing distance of Fort
McHenry, troops on shore fought their way to the foot of the
fort. The ships opened fire on the fort the next day, September
13, and continued the bombardment through the night. On a
nearby ship, attorney Francis Scott Key watched “the rockets’
red glare, the bombs bursting in air,” and, to his amazement,
“by dawn’s early light . . . our flag was still there,” fluttering in
tatters over the fort and inspiring his poem “Defense of Fort
McHenry.” A newspaper published it a few days later and
renamed it “The Star-Spangled Banner.”

On September 14, the British abandoned their fruitless
assault on Fort McHenry, withdrew their troops, and sailed out
of Chesapeake Bay for Jamaica in the British West Indies. Their
flight weakened the British negotiating position in Ghent,
where John Quincy rejected the British demand for an Indian
buffer zone. The United States, he argued, would not cede
territorial rights to “savages, whose known rule of warfare is
the indiscriminate torture and butchery of women, children,

and prisoners.” 14

After a month of talks with no progress, John Quincy grew
frustrated. “It appears to me to be the policy of the British
government,” he wrote to Louisa in St. Petersburg, “to keep the
American war as an object to continue or close, according to
the events which may occur in Europe or America. If so they
will neither make peace, nor break off the negotiation, and the
circumstances may be such as to detain us here the whole

winter.” 15 The British, he said in a subsequent letter, “have
withdrawn just so much of their inadmissible demands as
would avoid the immediate rupture of the negotiation. They
have varied their terms .. . abandoned the claims which they
had declared indispensable preliminaries, only to bring them
forward again whenever the circumstances of the war might
encourage them to insolence and... are now delaying their
reply to our last note . . . only to receive accounts of success

from America . . . to dictate new terms to us.”16

As both sides realized they had reached an impasse,
negotiators fixed on a solution that would relieve them of
having to solve any problems. They would simply end the war
and relegate all demands of both sides to an arbitration
commission to be set up at a later date.

In the end, the Treaty of Ghent represented a stinging defeat
for both sides, each of which accepted nothing more than a
return to the status quo ante bellum after a costly two-year
war. Nevertheless, John Quincy was jubilant at having ended
the bloodletting.

“My DEAR AND HONORED MOTHER,” John Quincy exulted

on Christmas Eve of 1814.

A treaty of peace between the United States and Great
Britain has this day been signed by the British and
American plenipotentiaries at this place. .. . You know
doubtless that heretofore the President intended in case
of peace to send me to England.

If the treaty should be ratified, I am uncertain whether
he will still retain the same intention or not. I have
requested to be recalled from the mission to Russia. I
shall proceed from this place in a few days to Paris, to be
there in readiness to receive the President’s orders, and I
shall write immediately to my wife requesting her to
come and join me there. If we go to England, I beg you to
send my sons George and John there to me... . If any
other person should be sent to England, I intend to
return as soon as possible to America and shall hope
before midsummer to see once more my _ beloved

parents.1Z

The Treaty of Ghent called for release of all prisoners and
restoration of all conquered territories except for West Florida,
which now fell under American sovereignty. Negotiators did not
include a word about the Great Lakes or disputed boundaries
along the northern frontier with Canada—or about the issues
that President Madison had deemed vital enough for the United
States to declare war: ship seizures and impressment. On
paper at least, the war had been a waste, leaving 1,877
Americans dead and 4,000 wounded and costing millions of
dollars in war matériel. It had cost tens of millions of dollars in
lost domestic and foreign trade and provoked the collapse of
the economy—and the United States had failed to achieve any
of the goals for which it went to war. The only triumph at Ghent
—for either side—was an end to war and establishment of
peace between the two nations—or so they hoped.

Agreement at Ghent. Admiral Lord Gambier, Britain’s chief
negotiator, holds the treaty ending the Anglo-American War of

1812 and shakes hands with John Quincy Adams, America’s
chief negotiator. Albert Gallatin stands to Adams’s immediate
left, while Henry Clay is seated on the right at the rear. (FROM
THE SIGNING OF THE TREATY OF GHENT, CHRISTMAS EVE,
1814, A PAINTING BY SIR AMEDEE FORESTIER, 1914;
SMITHSONIAN AMERICAN ART MUSEUM, GIFT OF THE
SULGRAVE INSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES AND
GREAT BRITAIN)

 

At the signing, John Quincy declared to the delegates of both
countries, “I hope it will be the last treaty of peace between

Great Britain and the United States.”+2 At a farewell banquet,
Adams stood to toast “His majesty the king of England,” after
which an orchestra played “God Save the King”; then Lord
Gambier, the chief British delegate, rose to toast “the United
States of North America,” and the orchestra played “Hail,

Columbia,” which was then the American national anthem.

“T consider the day on which I signed it [the Treaty of Ghent]
as the happiest of my life,” John Quincy wrote to Louisa,
“because it was the day on which I had my share in restoring

peace to the world.”19

On December 24, 1814, as John Quincy and the other
negotiators signed the Treaty of Ghent, a fleet of fifty British
ships with 7,500 battle-hardened veterans approached the
Louisiana shore and glided into Lake Borgne—a large bay on
the southeastern coast of Louisiana near New Orleans. Landing
forty miles east of the city, a British advance guard marched to
within seven miles of the city where, to their shock, General
Andrew Jackson awaited in ambush with more than 2,000
frontiersmen. The Americans opened fire and sent the British
reeling back to their main force. Jackson then pulled back to a
point five miles from the city and deployed 5,000 men in a dry
canal that blocked the only route into the city. Compared with
the trim-cut uniforms of advancing British troops, the
Americans were a largely unwashed, unshaven mixture of
militiamen, frontiersmen, woodsmen, hunters, and farmers—to
a man, fiercely independent, loyal Jacksonians. Wild, willful,
reckless, and often drunk, they were like Jackson himself:
fighting cocks who gave no ground in battle.

After a spectacular but indecisive artillery battle on January
1, the British pulled back and waited a week to attack again. As
the redcoats advanced in traditional linear style of European
warfare, the Americans pressed against the forward wall of the
canal and poised their long hunting rifles on the rim. A sudden
explosion of high-pitched music startled soldiers on both sides
as the British line moved forward. Jackson had ordered a band
to sound out “Yankee Doodle,” then thundered a command to

his troops: “Give it to ’em, boys. .. . Let’s finish it up today!”29
Tennessee and Kentucky woodsmen—all of them crack
marksmen in the center of the big ditch—opened fire. The
British troops stepped forward mechanically, suicidally
pressing onward into the sprays of rifle fire, toppling one by

one, each atop the other, then by the dozens. The bodies piled
higher and higher until the “horror before them was too great
to be withstood: and they turned away, dropping their weapons

and running to the rear.”21 After only thirty minutes, the battle
was over; the British commanding general and two other
generals lay dead, along with more than 2,000 British troops.
Jackson’s men suffered thirteen dead, thirty-nine wounded, and
nineteen missing in action. British survivors limped back to
their ships and, on January 27, sailed away from what proved
to be the last battle of the war and the last hostile incursion by
British troops on American soil.

A few days later, Secretary of State Monroe called members
of Congress into the Patent Office building in Washington, the
only public building the British had spared from flames. They
unleashed a chorus of sustained cheers when he delivered the
news of Jackson’s victory. Federalists, Republicans, hawks, and
doves alike slapped each other on the back, exchanged
handshakes, and adjourned to soak in the news with
appropriate drinks. What they did not know, however, was the
utter uselessness of Jackson’s victory. It had not changed the
course of the war at all. Two weeks earlier, John Quincy Adams
and his American negotiators had signed a treaty ending the
war, but like the negotiations when the war began, news of the
settlement did not arrive until weeks later, when a British sloop
sailed into New York Harbor flying a flag of truce. The war the
United States could have won without firing the first shot had
ended before they had fired the last.

Nonetheless, Americans—almost unanimously—deluded
themselves into calling the war a glorious triumph over the
world’s most powerful nation—a “second war _. of
independence.” The national delusion resulted from a series of
coincidences—the United States had scored the victory at New
Orleans just before news of peace arrived, and in the public
mind, the chronology of the victory made it seem decisive in
forcing the British to sue for peace and end depredations on
American shipping. In fact, it was the defeat of Napoléon that
allowed Britain to harbor her warships and ended her need to

impress seamen and seize ships carrying contraband.

On January 7, 1815, John Quincy’s colleagues on the
American peace commission left Ghent, with John Quincy,
Henry Clay, and Albert Gallatin having grown especially close—
socially as well as politically. One evening, when the three
returned to their hotel after negotiations, the often hot-
tempered Clay remarked that one of the British negotiators
was “a man of much irritation.”

John Quincy corrected his colleague’s grammar:

“Trritability is the word, Mr. Clay,” said John Quincy.
“Trritability.” And then fixing him with an earnest look and a
tone of voice midway between seriousness and jest, he added,
“Like somebody else I know.”

Clay laughed and said, “Aye we do all know him—and
none better than yourself.”

And Mr. Gallatin, fixing me exactly as I had done Mr.
Clay, said emphatically, “That is your best friend.”
“Agreed,” said I, “but one.”

And there was... truth in the joking on all sides... . I
can scarcely express to you how much both he [Clay] and
Mr. Gallatin have risen in my esteem since we have been

here, living together. 22

Two weeks later, having put his papers in order and received
word of his promotion to the London embassy, John Quincy set
out for Paris to await Louisa and his seven-year-old son Charles
Francis. His wife had left St. Petersburg on January 26, but as
each day passed with no word of their whereabouts, John
Quincy regretted not having gone to St. Petersburg to
accompany them. Reports soon reached Paris of pillaging by
renegade soldiers and savage attacks on travelers along
Louisa’s route from Russia.

