1

A First Son for a Founding Father

“Mr. Adams!” the old lady shrieked. “You’re embarking under
very threatening signs. The heavens frown, the clouds roll, the

winds howl, the waves of the sea roar upon the beach.”
Ten-year-old John Quincy Adams looked up at his father, who
nodded to the lady, smiled and excused himself, then whispered
reassurances in his son’s ear: the woman, was “a good lady...
an Adams with very delicate health . . . much afflicted with
hysterical complaints ... often a little disarranged in her

imagination.”2 With that, father, son, and their servant boarded
the barge and bounded over the angry waters toward the
twenty-four-gun frigate Boston that waited in the bay to take
them across the Atlantic to France. All but echoing the lady’s
warning, the waves lapped the sides of the barge—slapping
passenger faces, stinging John Quincy’s eyes with salty spray,
and filling him with fear of impending disaster at sea.

Several days later, the captain of the Boston confirmed the
boy’s fear—shouting to crewmen and pointing to the horizon:
three British navy frigates had climbed into view. Heeling over
with sails full, the Boston fled and lost sight of two ships, but
the third stayed in sight, pursuing the entire day, night, and all
next day, intent on capturing the American ship and its famous
passenger.

“Our powder, cartridges and balls were placed by the guns,”
John Adams recalled, “and everything made ready to begin the

action.”3 As night fell, the enemy “was gaining on us very fast,”
and John Quincy knew that if the British captured them, his
father faced summary hanging from the yardarm, while the boy
himself faced impressment and a life of servitude in the British

navy.

Nightfall only added to their danger as winds picked up and
swelled into a hurricane. The Adamses went below to their
cabin, where “it was with the utmost difficulty that my little son
and I could hold ourselves in bed with both our hands...
bracing ourselves with our feet.”

Then, “a sudden, tremendous report” rocked the ship. Adams
and his boy had no way of knowing “whether the British frigate
had overtaken us and fired on us or whether our guns had been

discharged.”4

As they waited for the sea to smash through the door and
rush into their cabin, John Adams held his frightened little son
in his arms, but said nothing, as the last-minute thoughts and
regrets of every man facing death raced through his head. Of
all his regrets, he rued his decision to take his boy on the
Atlantic crossing—a foolhardy decision for an adult, let alone a
child, in midwinter. But Adams and his son had been apart for
nearly two years; John Quincy needed paternal attention, and
John Adams missed the joys of nurturing his oldest son. On
learning he would have to go to France, he thought the trip a
perfect opportunity for the two to grow close again—and to
expose “Johnny” to the glories of French and European culture,
with their history, art, music, architecture, and languages. The
American Revolution had deprived the boy of most educational
and cultural advantages, not to mention his father’s attention.
Now the boy and his father faced death together at sea in each
other’s arms.

John Quincy Adams had been born a decade earlier, when the
first seeds of the Revolution were sprouting; periodic riots
erupted in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and other American
towns. Britain’s Parliament had raised taxes on goods shipped
to the colonies, then it shredded the Magna Carta and ordered
admiralty courts in Canada to try American smugglers—
without juries of their peers.

“And this sequence of events,” John Quincy explained, “was
to affect the fortunes of no single individual more than those of

the infant then lying in his cradle in the little village of

Braintree, in the Massachusetts Bay.”2

That infant was the second child and first son of John and
Abigail Adams, of Braintree, Massachusetts, a farming
community about six miles south of Boston, later renamed
Quincy. At birth, John Quincy was the most recent in a long line
of illustrious forebears who helped shaped the destiny of the
English-speaking world. The first recorded Quincy sailed with
William the Conqueror across the English Channel from
Normandy in 1066 to crush English forces at Hastings. A
century and a half later, in 1215, Saer de Quincy, Earl of
Winchester, rode to Runnymede and helped force King John to
sign the Magna Carta, which guaranteed English freemen the
right to trial by a jury of their peers.

Subsequently, the Quincy and Adams clans® produced a host
of distinguished noblemen, churchmen, physicians, and
scientists—among the last, Thomas Boylston, a renowned
English surgeon who emigrated to Massachusetts with his son,
Zabdiel Boylston, who pioneered smallpox inoculation in the
New World. The Adams family also included ordinary
craftsmen, of course—among them, John Alden, who may have
been the least significant until Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
rhymed him into poetic immortality in The Courtship of Miles
Standish. A cooper on the Mayflower , Alden caught
Longfellow’s odic fancy by wedding Priscilla Mullins. John and
Priscilla Alden’s granddaughter would marry Joseph Adams Jr.,
great-grandfather of John Quincy Adams. His son, Joseph
Adams III, tied his family’s academic future to Harvard College,
becoming the first of a long line of Adamses to study there. The
second was John Adams, John Quincy’s father, who graduated
in 1755 at the age of twenty.

Harvard was the first college established in the New World,
and within a decade of its founding in 1636, it had evolved into
more than a mere college: it was a “school of prophets”—a

divinity school engaged in “a noble and necessary work”® to
create and lead a new sort of nation conceived in liberty. From

the first, its students and graduates were extraordinaries—and

Americans recognized them as such.2 Their motto was
“Veritas” —a “truth,” enhanced by the divine, that gave Harvard
men the wisdom of both God and man to transform America’s
wilderness into a Paradise.

Although John Adams’s parents hoped he would enter the
ministry after Harvard, the school broadened its curriculum to
include secular studies, and he opted for teaching at first, then
law. After winning admission to the bar, he settled in Braintree
to practice law, fell in love, and, on October 25, 1764, married
Abigail Quincy Smith. Abigail was the second of three
daughters of the Reverend William Smith of nearby Weymouth
and granddaughter of Colonel John Quincy, longtime Speaker
of the Massachusetts colonial legislature. Unlike the illustrious
Quincys, many of the Smiths lived in the shadows of humanity
—victims of genetically transmitted mental illnesses, including
alcohol abuse, that usually led to premature death. Abigail
Smith’s brother, William Smith Jr, suddenly and inexplicably
abandoned his wife and children to poverty and plunged into
humanity’s gutter—whoring, drinking, and finally dying at an
early age. In raising her own children, Abigail Adams resolved
to instill in them principles of self-discipline and prayer to
protect them from alcohol and other sins. “Nothing,” she

believed, “bound the human mind but religion.” 2

Abigail Adams, wife of John Adams, America’s second
President, and mother of John Quincy Adams, America’s sixth
President. Her family’s roots stretched back to the Battle of
Hastings in 1066 and the signing of the Magna Carta in 1215.
(NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE, ADAMS NATIONAL
HISTORICAL PARK)

 

Deprived of formal education as a woman, she more than
compensated by devouring the books in her father’s huge
library of religious and literary works, including Shakespeare’s
plays, the English poets, and a wide range of classical tales
that gave her a broader education than that of most men.
Indeed, Harvard’s young John Adams found Abigail more than
an intellectual equal as well as a romantic match. Nine months
after she married John Adams, she gave birth to their first
child, a daughter they named Abigail but called “Nabby” to
distinguish her from the senior Abigail. Two years later, on July
11, 1767, Abigail’s second child was born—a son they named
John Quincy Adams, after the infant’s father and maternal
grandfather.

The ninety-five-acre Adams family farm, in Braintree (now
Quincy), Massachusetts, with the birthplace of John Quincy
Adams on the left, the birthplace of his father, John Adams, to
its immediate right, and John and Abigail Adams’s retirement
“mansion” on the far right. In the rear is Penn’s Hill, where
Abigail Adams took seven-year-old John Quincy to witness the
Battle of Bunker’s Hill. (NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE, ADAMS
NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK)

 

At John Quincy’s birth, his father’s reputation had spread far
beyond Braintree. “The disputes [with Britain] grew,” John
Quincy explained, and “agitated no household more than that
in which this boy was growing up. My father, from pursuing a
professional life, began to feel himself impelled more and more
into the vortex of controversy. .. . My mother’s temperament
readily caught the rising spirit of popular enthusiasm and

communicated it to me.”8

A move from Braintree to Boston put John Quincy’s father
close to the state’s most influential clients—and at the center of
popular anger over British rule. “America is on the point of

bursting into flames,” Boston’s Sons of Liberty warned,2 and
on March 5, 1770, two years after John Quincy’s family had
settled in town, an angry mob transformed the Sons of
Liberty’s warning into the Boston Massacre, with British troops
killing two men and wounding eight, two of whom quickly died
from their injuries.

To prevent disorder from spreading, the royal governor
ordered the soldiers and commanding officer arrested and
charged with murder. He thwarted accusations of favoritism by
naming John Quincy’s father and his mother’s cousin Josiah
Quincy—two outspokenly anti-British lawyers—to defend the
soldiers in an out-of-town trial before a jury of farmers, none of
them Tories. Motivated in part by political ambition, Adams
gambled that, win or lose, the case would show him as a man of
stature who eschewed hatred in favor of the law and the right
of every free Englishman to a trial by a jury of his peers.
Fearing reprisals against his family, he sent his wife, who had
just given birth to their second son, Charles, to the safety of
their Braintree farm with their children. He need not have
worried. After his brilliant summation, the jury unanimously
acquitted the soldiers, saying they had legitimately defended
themselves against unprovoked mob assault.

His courtroom triumph gained John Quincy’s father national
and international fame—and _ election as _ Boston’s
representative in the Massachusetts House of Representatives.
The trial also ended mob protests; the troops retired, and with
Boston at peace, the Adams family moved back to town, where
Abigail gave birth to their third son, Thomas Boylston Adams.

Although street disorders ended for a while, new import
duties provoked more smuggling, and by the end of 1773,
protests against a British tea tax climaxed with a mob boarding
three ships in Boston Harbor and dumping more than three
hundred chests of tea, worth about $1 million, overboard.
British troops returned to Boston, declared martial law, and

closed the city to commerce, threatening to keep it closed until
Bostonians either repaid the East India Company for the
vandalized tea—or starved.

“Boston became a walled and beleaguered town,” John
Quincy recounted. “Among the first fruits of war, was the
expulsion of my father’s family from their peaceful abode in
Boston to take refuge in his and my native town of

Braintree.” 10

Outraged by the British threat to starve the innocent with the
guilty, colonial leaders elsewhere convened a Continental
Congress in the fall of 1774 to respond, and after ensuring his
family’s safety in Braintree, John Quincy’s father rode off to
Philadelphia with four other Massachusetts delegates.
Although the First Continental Congress ended indecisively in
late October, orders arrived in the spring for British troops to
crush the rebellion and “arrest the principle actors and

abettors in the Congress,”11 including John Adams. John
Quincy never forgot the terror he felt when he heard of the
threat to arrest his father: “My mother with her infant children,
dwelt every hour of the day and of the night liable to be
butchered in cold blood, or taken and carried into Boston as

hostages by any foraging or marauding detachment of men.”12

In May 1775, John Quincy’s father again left for Philadelphia
and a Second Continental Congress, where forty-three-year-old
George Washington arrived in uniform dressed for war. At six
foot three, he towered over other delegates—especially forty-
year-old John Adams, who, even his wife Abigail conceded, was

“short, thick and fat.”13 Nonetheless, their mutual interest in
farming gave Adams and Washington common ground to form a
firm friendship that often included dining and attending church
services together.

On June 2, a letter from Dr. Joseph Warren, a close family
friend of the Adamses and president of the Massachusetts
Provincial Congress, urged the Continental Congress to take
control of disorganized New England militiamen laying siege to
Boston by appointing a commander in chief. “The sword

should, in all free states, be subservient to the civil powers,”
Warren argued. “We tremble at having an army (although
consisting of our own countrymen) established here without a

civil power to provide for and control them.”14

In a more dire letter, Abigail Adams wrote to her husband of
the chaos engulfing Braintree, with their home a “scene of
confusion—soldiers coming in for lodging, for breakfast, for
supper, for drink, &c. &c.”

Sometimes refugees from Boston tired and frightened
seek an asylum for a day or night, a week—you can
hardly imagine how we live... . I wish you were nearer to
us. We know not what a day will bring forth nor what

distress one hour may throw us into.15

John Adams, second President of the United States and father
of John Quincy Adams, the nation’s sixth President. He had
been a prominent lawyer before attending the first two
Continental Congresses, and his Thoughts on Government
served as the basis for constitutions in nine of the thirteen
states after independence. (AFTER A PORTRAIT BY JOHN
SINGLETON COPLEY; NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE, ADAMS
NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK)

 

Visibly upset by Abigail’s letter, John Adams replied by
return, “Oh that I was a soldier! I will be. I am reading military
books. Everybody must and will and shall be a soldier... . My
dear Nabby and Johnny and Charley and Tommy are never out

of my thoughts. God Bless, preserve and prosper them.”

A few days later, John Adams reacted to Dr. Warren’s warning
and asked Congress to draft patriot forces besieging Boston
into a Continental Army and appoint a supreme commander.
Congress agreed, and again Adams rose to speak. He had
mingled discreetly with delegates from middle and southern
colonies and discovered “a jealousy against a New England
Army under the command of a New England General,” who, if

he defeated the British, might give law to the other states.

“T had no hesitation to declare,” he responded, “that I had
but one gentleman in mind for that important command, and
that was a gentleman from Virginia . . . whose skill and
experience as an officer, whose independent fortune, great
talents, and excellent universal character, would command the
approbation of all the colonies better than any other person in

the Union.”!2 Two days later, Boston’s John Hancock, the
president of Congress, wrote to Dr. Joseph Warren, “The
Congress here have appointed George Washington, Esq.,

General and Commander-in-Chief, of the Continental Army.”18
As Hancock penned his inimitable signature, however, Warren
already lay dead on the field of battle at Breed’s Hill, on the
Charlestown peninsula opposite Boston.

Like Boston, Charlestown sat in Boston Bay on what was
nearly an island, connected to the mainland by a narrow neck.
Two hills dominated the neck, Bunker’s Hill, as it was then
called, near the mainland, and the smaller Breed’s Hill, nearer
the water. Warren had gone to Bunker’s Hill to warn the
commander of ammunition shortages and joined the troops
behind a makeshift fortification on Breed’s Hill.

When she heard the first cannon blasts, Abigail Adams
shuddered, then suppressed her fears of running into British
soldiers and took seven-year-old John Quincy to a hilltop behind
their home in Braintree, where they watched a battle unfold
across the bay. By day’s end, the battle had turned into a
slaughter. The first British troops to land had set Charlestown
aflame, while 2,400 of their comrades swarmed up the hillside
like ants—only to topple by the hundreds under a rain of
American fire from above.

“The town all in flames around them,” Abigail wrote to her
husband, “and the heat from the flames so intense as scarcely
to be borne .. . and the wind blowing the smoke in their faces .

.. the reinforcements not able to get to them.”12

An 1830 map of Boston Harbor shows Quincy Bay at the

bottom, with the site of President John Quincy Adams’s home
indicated in small print.

wAPY Hate

8

Seam
_Gudeon
( Coanty ob SED

 

Seven-year-old John Quincy and his mother watched a second
wave of British troops surge upward over their fallen comrades
—only to fall back again, regroup, and charge a third time,
tripping over lifeless bodies, sprawling to the ground into pools
of blood and torn flesh, then crawling upwards on their hands
and knees until enough reached the summit to silence the few
patriot arms not out of ammunition. One thousand dead British
soldiers covered the hillside; 100 dead patriots and 267
wounded lay on the hilltop. John Quincy said the battle and the
carnage it left made “an impression in my mind” that haunted
him the rest of his life.

Seven-year-old John Quincy Adams witnessed the Battle of

Bunker’s Hill with his mother from a distant hilltop. Nearly 270
patriots perished, including Dr. Joseph Warren, the
Revolutionary War leader and the Adams family’s physician,
seen in the throes of death in an engraving by Gotthard von
Muller, after the painting by John Trumbull. (NATIONAL
PORTRAIT GALLERY, SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION)

 

“I saw with my own eyes the fires of Charlestown,” he
exclaimed, “and heard Britannia’s thunders in the battle...
and witnessed the tears of my mother and mingled them with
my own at the fall of Dr. Joseph Warren, a dear friend of my

father, and a beloved physician to me.”209 Only days before his
death, Warren had devised an ingenious array of splints to save
John Quincy’s forefinger from amputation after the boy had
suffered a bad fracture.

John Quincy watched his mother sob as she described
Warren’s death to her husband: “Our dear friend .. . fell

gloriously fighting for his country—saying better to die
honorably in the field than ignominiously hang upon the

gallows.”21

When the last patriot lay still on Bunker’s Hill and the British
had ceased firing, Abigail led her frightened seven-year-old
home, and together they recited the Lord’s Prayer. “My mother
was the daughter of a Christian clergyman,” John Quincy
explained, “and therefore bred in the faith of deliberate

detestation of war.”22 Abigail made John Quincy promise to
repeat the Lord’s Prayer each morning before rising from his
bed—a promise he kept for the rest of his life. The memory of
Bunker’s Hill, he said, “riveted my abhorrence of war to my
soul... with abhorrence of tyrants and oppressors. . . [who]
wage war against the rights of human nature and the liberties

and rightful interests of my country.”23

A few days later, Abigail and John Quincy were still shaken by
the slaughter at Bunker’s Hill. “We live in continual expectation
of hostilities,” she wrote to her husband. “Scarcely a day that
does not produce some, but like good Nehemiah . . . we will say
unto them, ‘Be not afraid. Remember the Lord who is great and
terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your

wm

daughters, your wives, and your houses. 24 Her sorrow over
Warren’s death soon turned into fury, however, and Abigail
declared a personal war against the British. With John Quincy
at her side, unwrapping each piece and handing it to her, she
melted all her prized pewter spoons in molds to make musket
balls for patriot soldiers.

In the days that followed, John Quincy lived “in unintermitted
danger of being consumed with my family in a conflagration
kindled by a torch in the same hands which .. . lighted the fires

of Charlestown.”22 As dangerous as the threat of fire was that
of disease. Eight neighbors died of dysentery, distemper, and
other maladies that raged through Braintree and nearby
hamlets. Hunger spared no one; soldiers and refugees alike
plundered kitchen gardens and root cellars of whatever food
they could find, often stealing into the Adams house and

terrifying Abigail and the children as they searched.
“Does every member feel for us?” Abigail pleaded to her
husband about his colleagues in Congress. “Can they realize

what we suffer?”26

Despite the disorder, Abigail and John maintained their
regular correspondence, each addressing the other as “My
Dearest Friend,” with Abigail always conveying their children’s
love and “duty” to their father. Whenever his letters arrived,
she told him, “You would laugh to see them run upon the sight

of a letter—like chickens for a crumb when the hen clucks.”22
With schools closed and her husband absent, Abigail Adams
took command of John Quincy’s education, encouraging him to
read ever more books from his father’s library and calling in
John Thaxter, a cousin who was studying law in John Adams’s
office, to tutor the boy in mathematics and science. When she
discovered her son turning pages of some prose or poetry
without reading, the resourceful mother complained aloud
about her eyes and asked John Quincy to read to her. After
writing to her husband about her ruse, John Adams replied that
he was “charmed with your amusement with our little Johnny.
Tell him I am glad to hear he is so good a boy as to read to his
Mamma for her entertainment and to keep out of the company

of rude children.”28
John Adams went on to provide a complete curriculum for
“our little Johnny.”

I am under no apprehension about his proficiency in
learning. With his capacities and opportunities he can not
fail to acquire knowledge. But let him know that the
sentiments of his heart are more important than the
furniture of his head. Let him be sure that he possesses
the great virtue of temperance, justice, magnanimity,
honor, and generosity, and with these added to his parts,
he cannot fail to become a wise and great man.

Does he read the newspapers? The events of this war
should not pass unobserved by him at his years.

As he reads history, you should ask him what events

strike him most. What characters he esteems and
admires? Which he hates and abhors? Which he
despises?

Treachery, perfidy, cruelty, hypocrisy, avarice, &c &c
should be pointed out to him for his contempt as well as

detestation.22

Adams insisted that his son master Greek, “the most perfect
of all languages,” and that he read the original text of
Thucydides’s History of the Peloponnesian War. Besides
pressing him to meet his father’s academic demands, Abigail
constantly reminded John Quincy of his family heritage and his
father’s achievements as a scholar, lawyer, and legislator, as
well as his courage in defying British rule and risking death by
serving in the Continental Congress. John Quincy responded
with bold displays of his own courage that added to his
mother’s pride.

“Master John,” Abigail reported to her husband, “cheerfully
consented to become ‘post-rider,'” venturing alone on
horseback past British troop encampments to carry family
news between Braintree and Boston.

“As the distance was not less than eleven miles each way,”
John Quincy boasted, “the undertaking was not an easy one for

a boy barely nine years old.”30

Abigail’s demands, discipline, expectations, and hectoring—
along with fears generated by war—took a toll on the boy,
however, often leaving him depressed and convinced he would
never match the achievements of his “Pappa.” Abigail read and
reread her husband’s letters from Philadelphia exhorting his
son to achieve “great and glorious deeds.” The letters insisted
that scholarship be central to the boy’s life to ensure his
achieving his father’s ambition to “become a wise and great

man.”31

“At ten years of age,” John Quincy recalled later, “I read
Shakespeare’s Tempest, As You Like It, Merry Wives of
Windsor, Much Ado About Nothing, and King Lear.”

There was also a small edition of Milton’s Paradise Lost,
which I believe I attempted ten times to read and never
could get through half the book. . .. I was mortified, even
to the shedding of tears, that I could not even conceive
what it was that my father and mother admired so much
in that book, and yet I was ashamed to ask them an
explanation. I smoked tobacco and read Milton at the
same time, from the same motive—to find out what was
the recondite charm in them which gave my father so
much pleasure. After making myself four or five times
sick with smoking, I mastered that accomplishment .. .
but I did not master Milton. I was thirty when I first read

Paradise Lost with delight and astonishment.22

Following his success placing George Washington in
command of the military, John Adams’s erudition and quick
legal mind raised him to leadership in Congress—perhaps
higher than he wanted. By summer’s end in 1775, he was
sitting on ninety committees, serving as chairman of twenty-
five, and by his own admission, he was “worn out”—and longed
for his wife and children.

“My dearest friend,” he wrote to Abigail. “I have some
thoughts of petitioning for leave to bring my family here. lama
lonely, forlorn creature... .”

I want to walk with you in the garden—the Common—the
Plain—the Meadow. I want to take Charles in one hand
and Tom in the other and walk with you, Nabby on your
right and John upon my left, to view the corn fields, the
orchards, &c. Alas, poor imagination. How faintly and
imperfectly do you supply the want of originality and

reality.23

Abigail longed for John as much as he longed for her. She too
began her letters “My Dearest Friend.”

My anxiety for your welfare will never leave me but with
my parting breath. Tis of more importance to me than all
this world contains. The cruel separation to which I am

necessitated cuts in half the enjoyments of life; the other
half are comprised in the hope that what I do and what I
suffer may be serviceable to you and the little ones and

our country.34

In August, John Adams learned that his thirty-four-year-old
brother, Elihu, had died of dysentery at his army camp, and
reports from Boston about troop outrages left him worried
about his family’s safety. He pleaded with Abigail to “fly to the
woods with our children” in the face of danger. John Quincy
tried assuaging his father’s fears with a pledge to defend the
family and the family home.

“John writes like a hero,” Adams wrote back to Abigail,
“glowing with ardor for his country and burning with

indignation against her enemies.”32

Adams surprised his wife in December by appearing at the
farm unexpectedly—only to surprise her even more, four days
later, by leaving for Watertown, Massachusetts, to report to the
Provincial Congress. He returned home three weeks after that
—then left for Philadelphia almost immediately, with hardly a
moment for John Quincy and the other children.

By then, Abigail was so lonely for her husband that she grew
angry, asking bluntly, “Shall I expect you or do you determine
to stay out the year?” After he left, she decided to cease writing
him after one last message. “I miss my partner,” she admitted.
“T have not felt in a humor to entertain you with letters. If I had
taken up my pen perhaps some unbecoming invective might
have fallen from it. . . . Our little ones whom you so often
recommend to my care and instruction shall not be deficient in
virtue or probity if the precepts of a mother have their desired
effect, but they would be doubly enforced could they be
indulged with the example of a father constantly before
them.”36

“T cannot leave Congress, without causing injury to the

public,” her husband snapped,2Z but then reiterated his
loneliness for her and his family. “I never will come again

without you if I can persuade you to come with me,” he
promised. “Whom God has joined together ought not to be put
asunder so long with their own consent. We will bring master

Johnny with us.”38

In the spring of 1776, Adams and the Continental Congress
learned that George Washington’s Continental Army had forced
the British to evacuate Boston on March 17. Adams and the
others cheered as Virginia’s Richard Henry Lee then resolved
that the United Colonies “are, and of right ought to be, free and
independent states.” Congress postponed voting on the
resolution until July 1 to permit Adams, Benjamin Franklin,
Thomas Jefferson, Robert Livingston, and Roger Sherman to
prepare a formal Declaration of Independence. Congress
approved it without dissent on July 4.

Adams subsequently achieved still greater prominence by
writing a document he called Thoughts on Government, which,
by the end of the year, had served as the basis for constitutions
in nine states. Adams’s Thoughts on Government called for
establishment of republican governments, each with an
executive and a bicameral legislature with separate, clearly
defined powers.

In June 1777, a month before his tenth birthday, John Quincy
wrote to his father, whose long absence and exalted position
had transformed him into a distant, godlike fantasy in the boy’s
imagination. Although he was ahead of most students twice his
age, his mother’s hectoring convinced him he was falling short
of his father’s expectations.

Dear Sir: I love to receive letters very well; much better
than I love to write them. I make a poor figure at
composition, my head is much too fickle, my thoughts are
running after birds eggs, play and trifles, till I get vexed
with myself. Mamma has a troublesome task to keep me
steady, and I own I am ashamed of myself. I have but just
entered the 3d volume of Smollett, tho’ I had designed to
have got it half through by this time.

John Quincy pledged to devote more time to reading and

promised to write again in a week “and give a better account of
myself.”

I wish, Sir, you would give me some instructions with
regard to my time & advise me how to proportion my
studies & my play .. . and I will keep them by me &
endeavor to follow them. I am, dear Sir, with a present

determination of growing better, Yours.22

Early in winter 1778, the French government became the
first foreign nation to recognize the United States’
independence. By then, John Adams was chairman of
Congress’s Board of War and Ordnance—in effect, the nation’s
secretary of war. Shortly thereafter, he wrote to Abigail of his
intention to retire from government and return home “to my
practice at the bar.” After four years in Congress, he realized,
he had left too many debts unpaid, and, with money
depreciating, “I was daily losing the fruits of seventeen years’
industry.”

My family was living on my past acquisitions which were
very moderate. ... My children were growing up without
my care in their education, and all my emoluments as a
member of Congress for four years have not been
sufficient to pay a laboring man upon my farm. Some of

my friends . . . suggested to me what I knew very well
before, that I was losing a fortune every year by my
absence.42

With her husband gone for all but four of the previous
twenty-four months, Abigail had taken a dominant role in the
Adams household. When a smallpox epidemic swept into
Boston, she confronted the dreaded disease by taking her
children and sixteen relatives to Boston to submit to
inoculation with live infected serum. Although she and John
Quincy emerged unscathed, the vaccine left eleven-year-old
Nabby ill for several days and six-year-old Charles so sick he
needed weeks to recover. She also oversaw the farm,
farmhands, and household servants, as well as the buying and

selling of lands.

“T have supported the family!” she complained to her
husband.

Late in 1777, John Adams arrived home before Christmas to
what he called “a blissful fireside, surrounded by a wife and a
parcel of chattering boys and girls”—and a stack of letters from
potential clients promising lucrative fees to take their cases.
After he had left for Portsmouth, New Hampshire, to take one
such case, a letter from Congress staggered Abigail: Congress
had appointed her husband a commissioner to France to
replace Connecticut’s Silas Deane and to join Benjamin
Franklin and Virginia’s Arthur Lee in soliciting financial aid
from the French government.

“Dr. Franklin’s age alarms us,” explained Massachusetts
congressman James Lovell, and because they suspected Arthur
Lee of spying for England, “We want one man of inflexible

integrity on that embassy.” 4 As for Deane, Congress had

recalled him after receiving an accusation that he had
embezzled congressional funds intended for arms purchases.

Abigail was furious and tried to reverse the appointment with
an irate letter to Lovell: “How could you contrive to rob me of
all my happiness?” she demanded.

You who so lately experienced what it was to be restored
to your family after a painful absence from it... .I have
often experienced the want of his aid and assistance in
the last three years of his absence, and that demand
increases as our little ones grow up, three of whom are
sons and at this time of life stand most in need of the
joint force of his example and precepts. And can I, Sir,
consent to be separated from him whom my heart
esteems above all earthly things and for an unlimited
time? My life will be one continued scene of anxiety and
apprehension, and must I cheerfully comply with the

demand of my country?42

The prospect of another long separation from her husband
terrified her. Even if he survived the dangerous transatlantic

winter voyage, he faced summary hanging for treason, without
trial, if a British ship captured his vessel. Who would support
their family if he failed to return, she demanded to know. With
their family’s finances already in a “very loose condition,” John
Quincy and her other children, she wailed, faced “growing up

in poverty without ever knowing their father. 43

Knowing her husband would never refuse his country’s call,
Abigail decided to ask him to take the entire family with him to
France. And when he returned from Portsmouth, he surprised
her by agreeing enthusiastically—only to learn a few weeks
later that Congress lacked funds for the family’s passage and
living expenses overseas.

John Adams was no more eager to leave his family than
Abigail was to see him go, and to John Quincy’s dismay, his
parents decided he should accompany his father on the voyage.
His presence would not only ease some of his father’s
loneliness for his family but allow John Adams and his firstborn
to reforge father-son bonds and give John Adams greater
influence over his son’s development. Foreign travel would also
enhance John Quincy’s education and accelerate his evolution
into the “wise and great man” his parents expected him to
become. John Quincy hated the idea at first. Instead of romping
with friends at school, he faced possible drowning at sea or
capture and impressment in the British navy—or worse, by
pirates. Just as dismal were the prospects of endless days of
incessant study under constant watch and criticism by his
scholar-father, whom he hardly knew and whose impossible
success his parents expected him to emulate or surpass.

“My dear son,” Abigail tried to console him, “It is a very
difficult task for a tender parent to bring her mind to part with
a child of your years going to a distant land nor could I have
acquiesced in such a separation under any other care than that
of the most excellent parent and guardian who accompanied

”

you.

Let me enjoin it upon you to attend constantly and
steadfastly to the precepts and instructions of your father

as you value the happiness of your mother and your own
welfare. You are in possession of a natural good
understanding and of spirits unbroken by adversity and
untamed. Improve your understanding by acquiring
useful knowledge and virtue such as will render you an
ornament to society, an honor to your country, and a

blessing to your parents.44

Preparations for an eighteenth-century transatlantic voyage
were not simple and, indeed, needed all the efforts of John and
Abigail Adams and their children. In the absence of passenger
ships, travelers usually had to bribe captains of cargo or naval
vessels to take them aboard, then pay more bribes to obtain
sheltered sleeping quarters. Congress, however, had ordered—
and agreed to pay—the captain of the frigate Boston to
transport John Adams to Europe. Like passengers on other
ships, however, Adams still had to bring his own provisions for
a voyage of unpredictable length and hardships. Transatlantic
crossings could last thirty to sixty days, depending on
prevailing winds and possible detention by enemy naval vessels
or privateers. Apart from the clothes they would need at sea
and in France, John and John Quincy Adams bought and carried
aboard

a bushel of corn meal, thirty pounds of brown sugar, two
bottles of mustard, two pounds of tea, two pounds of
chocolate, six live chickens, a half-barrel of “fresh meat,”
five bushels of corn, a barrel of apples [a precaution
against scurvy], six small barrels of cider, “a fat sheep,” a
ten-gallon keg of rum; three dozen bottles of Madeira
wine, thirty bottles of port wine [water and milk were
unsafe to drink], fourteen dozen eggs, seven loaves of
sugar, a box of wafers, and a pound of pepper...and...
three reams of paper, two account books, twenty-five
quills; a dozen clay pipes; two pounds of tobacco, two
mattresses, two bolsters [as pillows], and £100 in silver

currency of various denominations stuffed in shoes.42

Not making preparations easier or more pleasant were
warnings from well-meaning relatives, friends, and neighbors
about everything from seasickness to pirates, privateers, and
English gunboats. All knew that if the British captured John
Adams, they would hang him and impress young John Quincy.

On the day of departure, family members and friends
escorted Adams and his son from their door to water’s edge on
Quincy Bay, where a barge bobbed about under thickening
clouds, waiting to take them to their ship.

On February 13, 1778, John Adams and his son John Quincy
ignored the ominous warnings of a hysterical relative who
shrieked of “threatening signs” in the sky and sea; with their
servant, they climbed aboard the Boston and set sail for
France. Six days out, John Quincy and his father saw the three
British frigates materialize on the horizon, speeding under full
sails to capture the Boston and its famous passenger. The
captain told John Adams that “his orders were to carry me to

France ... to avoid fighting if he could, but if he could not
avoid an engagement he would give them something that
should make them remember him... . Our powder, cartridges

and balls were placed by the guns and everything made ready

to begin the action.”46

John Quincy watched his father “encourage the officers and
men to fight to the last.” He knew his father intended “to be
killed on board the Boston or sunk to the bottom in her rather

than be taken prisoner. 41

By nightfall on the second day of the chase, the British
frigate chasing the Boston was no closer, and as the winds
picked up and reached hurricane force, John Quincy and his
father went to bed. Suddenly, they heard a thunderous crash
above as the hurricane’s wind rocked the ship. John Adams
clasped his boy in his arms and prayed: he was ready to die for
his country, but asked God to spare his little son.

