8

Diplomatic Exile

Although Republicans urged John Quincy to run as their 1808
senatorial and even gubernatorial candidate, he was too
disgusted with public service and chose to return to private
life. At their request, however, he continued feeding his views
on foreign relations to Republican leaders in Congress. Though
a private citizen, he remained, after all, one of the nation’s
leading foreign affairs analysts, and his first advice went to his
friend President Jefferson. With New England secessionists
threatening armed insurrection, he advised the President to
narrow the scope of the embargo to France and England; the
President heeded John Quincy’s advice, and the renewal of
trade with noncombatant nations immediately improved the
nation’s economy.

Although Boston Federalists shunned him professionally and
socially, enough Republicans found their way to John Quincy’s
law office to set him on the path to prosperity. Indeed, his legal
and oratorical skills even earned him several cases before the
U.S. Supreme Court—some of historic importance.

Early in March 1809, Boston land speculator John Peck
retained John Quincy for what grew into a landmark case in
contract law and, indeed, one of the most important cases in
Supreme Court history. For $3,000, Peck had sold Robert
Fletcher 15,000 acres that Peck had obtained in a state grant
from the 30-million-acre Yazoo land tract in Georgia. As it
turned out, land speculators like Peck had bribed Georgia
legislators—en masse—to make the grants. After the press
exposed the scandal, a new legislature cancelled all Yazoo land
sales, including Peck’s sale to Fletcher. Fletcher sued to get his
money back, but John Quincy argued that the legislature’s

cancellation of Fletcher’s agreement to buy Peck’s land
violated Article I of the Constitution, which prohibits states
from “impairing the obligation of contracts.” The Supreme
Court stunned the nation by sustaining John Quincy’s
argument, ignoring the justice of Fletcher’s claim in favor of
the letter of the Constitution declaring the inviolability of
contracts and reasserting the constitutional prohibition against
state interference in the rights of Americans to acquire
property. John Quincy’s father had put it bluntly in an earlier
pronouncement on the French Revolution: “Property must be

secured or liberty cannot exist.” Now John Quincy had elicited
a Supreme Court decision banning state interference in the
rights of Americans to life, liberty, and property. Hailed by
Americans across the nation, the decision raised John Quincy to
the top of his profession.

On March 8, 1804, three days after James Madison had taken
his oath as fourth President of the United States, Madison
asked John Quincy to be American minister plenipotentiary to
Russia and asked for an immediate reply. John Quincy accepted
—without consulting his wife and engendering a furious
response from her when he returned to Boston. He tried to
explain his rash decision—as much to himself as to her:

My personal motives for staying at home are of the
strongest kind: the age of my parents and the infancy of
my children both urge to the same result. My connection
with the college is another strong tie which I break with
great reluctance. ... To oppose all this I have the duty of
a citizen to obey the call of his country .. . by the regular
constitutional authority ... the vague hope of rendering
to my country some important service; finally, the desire
to justify the confidence reposed by Mr. Madison in me..
. by devoting all my powers to . . . the welfare of the
union. These are my motives—and I implore the blessing

of Almighty God upon this my undertaking.2

John Quincy’s explanation was an elaborate rationalization.
As he himself admitted later, Federalists despised him so much

they had pledged to prevent his ever again entering public
service. It was James Madison’s friendship and generosity that
reopened the door just enough for Adams to slip back into
government. “I was proscribed in my native state for voting for
the embargo and resenting British impressment and
commercial depredations,” he wrote to a friend years later.
“Mr. Madison sent me for eight years to honorable diplomatic

exile in Europe.”

In his last lecture at Harvard, he issued a stirring encomium
for his implacable embrace of neutrality: “Let us rejoice,” he
cried out against Federalist Anglophiles, “that the maintenance
of our national rights against Great Britain has been committed
to men of firmer minds.”

If our nominal independence of France rested upon no
other foundation of power than the navy of England, the
consequence would be that we should again be under the
domination of England. Her argument would be that in all
reason we ought to contribute our share to support the
expense of protecting us and we should soon be called

upon for our contribution of men as well as money.

Federalist attacks on John Quincy did not influence his
students, who crowded about him after his lecture, many with
tears in their eyes, inventing questions to keep him in their
midst. “I called the students my unfailing friends,” he wrote to
his brother a few days after his ship had put to sea on the way
to Russia. He had asked his brother to have his two dozen
Harvard lectures bound and published, and they later appeared

in two volumes, Lectures on Rhetoric and Oratory.2 He said his
compliment to the students “was justly their due. For they had
withstood a most ingenious and laborious attempt to ruin me in
their estimation.”

Youth is generous, and although the majority of the
students were made to believe that I was a sort of devil
incarnate in politics . . . yet they never could be
persuaded to believe .. . and they have all confirmed me

in the belief that the safest guide for human conduct is
integrity. I have inflexibly followed my own sense of duty.

. I have lost many friends and have made many
enemies ... but the students at college are... the only
steady friends that I have had. They have been willing
still to be considered as my friends at a time when
neither my name nor my character was in fashionable

repute.&

John Quincy’s decision to go to Russia without a word of
warning, let alone discussion, devastated Louisa—left her
angry, distraught, heartbroken. The boys were hysterical. The
meager State Department budget—and the lack of an English-
language school in St. Petersburg—would mean leaving nine-
year-old George and six-year-old John II behind in Quincy. With
John Adams too old and Abigail ill too often to cope with two
growing boys, John Quincy boarded them with John Quincy’s
aunt and uncle. He put brother Thomas in charge of their
education.

Fearful they would die before ever again seeing their son,
John and Abigail Adams were too distraught even to come to
shipside to say good-bye. “This separation from a dear son,”
sixty-four-year-old Abigail wrote to one of her grandchildren,
“at the advanced age both of your grandfather and me was like
taking a last leave of him and was felt by us both with the

heaviest anguish.”Z

Although former Federalist friends stayed away, a crowd of
Republicans cheered at dockside as the champion of union and
independence boarded his ship with his wife and baby on
August 5, 1809. Church bells rang out in Boston and
Charlestown as the ship left the quay and sailed into the bay,
and all the ships in the harbor sounded a salute—including the
legendary Chesapeake. As darkness fell and he lost sight of his
native land, John Quincy Adams retreated to a quiet corner of
the ship with his God and penned,

Oh, grant that while this feeble hand portrays
The fleeting image of my earthly days,

Still the firm purpose of this heart may be
Good to mankind and gratitude to Thee! 8

John Quincy and Louisa were not without friends aboard ship.
Louisa’s younger sister Catherine had come as a companion to
help mind Charles Francis, and William “Billy” Smith, Nabby’s
son, had come as John Quincy’s secretary. Four young Harvard
graduates each paid their own way to sit at the feet of and
assist John Quincy—much as he had assisted Francis Dana
when he was a youngster. Two were studying law with him in
his Boston office and planned studying international law with
him in Russia. A third was the son of Maryland senator Samuel
Smith, brother of the new secretary of state, Robert Smith,
while the fourth, Alexander H. Everett, planned making a
career in the diplomatic service.

Despite the presence of friends and companions, John Quincy
and Louisa missed their boys dreadfully, and John Quincy took
to writing all but daily “Letters to My Children,” describing his
and their mother’s adventures. He also tried to impart—as his
father had imparted to him—his deep sense of obligation to his
country for the liberties he enjoyed and his passion for public
service. “Take it, then, as a general principle to be observed as
one of the directing impulses of life,” he wrote to his boys,
“that you must have some one great purpose of existence... to
make your talents and your knowledge most beneficial to your

country and most useful to mankind.”2

John Quincy lightened the tone of some letters, noting in one
that he had passed a night on the Grand Bank of Newfoundland
“catching cod, of which in the interval of a six-hour calm, we
have caught upwards of sixty.” He then posed a conundrum
that he left unanswered, asking for the “links ... in the
association of ideas” between “cod fishing on the Grand Bank

and the history of the United States,” 10

After a pleasant Atlantic crossing, they approached a line of
storms as they neared the Danish coast and put into port,
where John Quincy “had the mortification to find there upwards
of four hundred of my countrymen, the masters and crews of

the greater part of thirty-six American vessels, belonging with
their cargoes to citizens of the United States captured and
detained by privateers under Danish colors, and arrested for

many months.”11 Without diplomatic credentials to show the
Danish government, John Quincy had no authority to lodge a
formal protest, but he displayed “a memorial” that he drew up,
addressed “to the President of the United States,” hoping to
intimidate Danish officials into releasing the Americans. He
thrust it under the nose of every official he could find, before
admitting in his report to the secretary of state, “My good

offices may probably be of no avail to them.”12

On October 13, 1809, eighty days after they had left Boston,
John Quincy’s ship reached Kronstadt, on Kotlin Island in the
Gulf of Finland opposite St. Petersburg. A Russian admiral
greeted them and sailed John Quincy and his entourage across
to the Russian capital—only days before the Arctic winds
surged in from the North Pole and wrapped the gulf—and all
Russia—in an impenetrable deep freeze for the winter.

The map and political fortunes of Europe had changed
radically in the eight years since John Quincy Adams had last
set foot in the Old World. Napoléon had seemed on the run in
1801, having suffered humiliating defeats by a powerful
English fleet in Egypt and raging mobs of hungry slaves in
Haiti. After selling Louisiana and abandoning his territorial
ambitions in the New World, he turned to consolidating his
power at home—first, by restoring troop morale, then by
ensuring the superiority of their arms and artillery, and finally,
by setting them loose to assault the fragile defenses of
Europe’s tiny, divided nations. By the time John Quincy
returned to Europe, Napoléon’s armies ruled—directly or by
proxy—the lands stretching from the North Sea to the
Mediterranean and from the Straits of Gibraltar to Russia’s
western borders. Napoléon’s boot had trampled over Portugal,
Spain, Italy, Naples, the Vatican, Switzerland, western Austria,
the Netherlands, Belgium, the German states, Prussia, and
Poland. Although French troops had stopped short of Vienna,

they encamped so near that Austrian officials feared shifting a
leaf of official paper without a nod of approval by a French
officer.

Emperor Napoléon I brought the Pope from Rome to crown him
and his wife, Josephine, emperor and empress. (REUNION DES
MUSEES NATIONAUX)

 

Determined to outdo even Charlemagne, Napoléon ordered a
religiously based coronation that would exceed in grandeur the

coronation ceremonies of all previous French _ kings.
Charlemagne at least had traveled to Rome to force the Pope to
crown him; Napoléon abducted Pope Pius VII and brought him
to Paris for the coronation. Like Charlemagne, Napoléon took a
crown from the Pope, placed it on his own head, and anointed
himself “Emperor for Life.” He then took a second crown and

put it on the head of his wife, Josephine. 13

By the time John Quincy arrived in St. Petersburg, Britain
stood alone with her powerful navy as the only western
deterrent to French territorial ambitions. With French troops
massed along the channel coast for an invasion of Britain,
British warships attacked and sank any and all ships bound to
or from continental Europe in an effort to starve Napoléon’s
Grande Empire. British attacks had destroyed almost as many
neutral Russian ships on the Baltic and North Seas as they had
American ships on the Atlantic. Both Russia and the United
States saw establishment of diplomatic relations as a possible
way of solving their common problems with England. President
Madison, therefore, purposely flattered the Russians by
appointing the son of a former American President as U.S.
minister plenipotentiary. His gesture did not go unnoticed.

Besides the United States, only Napoléon’s France and the
Kingdom of Sweden had ministers plenipotentiary at the czar’s
court, while ten other nations maintained diplomatic ties
through ordinary ministers. The Russian chancellor, or prime
minister, therefore invited John Quincy to a private audience
the day after his arrival and to be guest of honor at an
elaborate banquet for the diplomatic corps. A week later, the
czar summoned John Quincy to the breathtakingly beautiful
Imperial Palace where, to John Quincy’s enormous surprise and
relief, the Russian ruler awaited him in his private office—
alone. When John Quincy entered, Czar Alexander I—about ten
years younger than the American—stepped forward, hand
outstretched to greet Adams, saying, “Je suis trés content de

vous recevoir’—“I’m very happy to see you here.”14 John
Quincy reported that the czar took him by the arm—an

astonishing gesture of familiarity in a world where divinely
appointed royals never touched commoners.

Alexander I had acceded to the throne after a band of
noblemen assassinated his father, the harsh despot Paul I.
Unlike his father, Alexander had studied under a liberal Swiss
educator, and after becoming czar, he granted amnesty to
political prisoners and repealed many of his father’s harshest
laws and edicts. Foreign wars, however, erupted along Russia’s
borders, and Alexander found himself in a vise, first joining
Britain in the war against Napoléon and, when the French
army defeated Russian forces at the Battle of Friedland in
1806, agreeing to join the French coalition against Britain.
Russia was still a nominal French ally when John Quincy
arrived in St. Petersburg in 1810, although Alexander refused
to restrict overseas trade to the French sphere of influence as
Napoléon had demanded. Like the United States, Russia
championed freedom of the seas as a basic tenet of
international law.

John Quincy, of course, spoke French as well as or better
than the czar. He also understood enough Russian to allow the
czar to digress into occasional anecdotes in his native tongue.
At their first meeting, the czar walked John Quincy to a window
overlooking the Neva River, then confided that he considered
the American foreign policy of neutrality to be “wise and just”
and that “they may rely on me not to do anything to withdraw

them from it.”15 John Quincy was ready with a reply:

The political duty of the United States towards the
powers of Europe is to forbear interference in their
dissensions. . . . The United States, by all the means in
their power, consistent with their peace and _ their
separation from the political system of Europe, will
contribute to the support of the liberal principles to
which your majesty has expressed so strong and so just

an attachment. 16

John Quincy’s first meeting with the czar quickly grew into an
unprecedented relationship between a monarch and a

commoner, with the czar inviting John Quincy to join him in
morning walks on the quay along the Neva. The two men
discussed international news, and the czar continually
peppered John Quincy with questions about life in America.
Nor was the friendship limited to the two men, although
Louisa’s friendship with the czarina had started somewhat
differently.

“T went with a fluttered pulse,” Louisa recalled, “dressed in a
hoop with a silver tissue skirt with a train, a heavy crimson
velvet robe with a very long train . .. white satin shoes, gloves,
fan, etc. and over all this luggage my fur cloak. . . and thus
accoutered I appeared before the gentlemen of our party who
could not refrain from laughter at my appearance.” A countess
greeted her, escorted her to the reception room where the
empress was to enter, and instructed her “that I must stand
unmoved until her Imperial Majesty walked up to me; that
when she came up I must affect to kiss her hand which her
Majesty would not permit and that I must take my glove off so
as to be ready and take care in raising my head not to touch

her majesty. “AZ

It was two-year-old Charles Francis Adams, however, who
inadvertently shattered imperial protocol, catching the Russian
royal couple by surprise and winning their hearts. When John
Quincy and Louisa brought him to the palace for his first visit,
the childless czar and czarina fell to their hands and knees with
joy, laughing at the antics of the little American boy, whom they
subsequently invited regularly to attend balls and banquets for
children at the Imperial Palace.

Clearly favorites of the czar and his court, the Adamses
became the centerpieces of social events in the Russian capital.
Invited to every diplomatic function, large and small, John
Quincy sent more intelligence about European affairs to the
State Department than any other U.S. minister in Europe. With
easy access to the czar, John Quincy persuaded the Russian
leader to intervene with the Danish government to free
American ships and their seamen. The czar then ordered the
release of American ships held for ransom by local satraps in

Russian ports and opened Russian waters to free trade with the
United States. Within weeks, American ships were sailing in
and out of Russian ports, developing profitable new trade
routes for both the United States and Russia.

As in Berlin, most of John Quincy’s work in Russia was to
listen to other diplomats and gather intelligence for the State
Department. Trapped by Russia’s bitterly cold winter, the
diplomatic community warmed itself with free-flowing vodka
and champagne at lavish banquets and balls that routinely
lasted until 3 or 4 a.m. and left most participants drunk,
talkative, and exhausted.

“T went in a chariot and four,” John Quincy wrote to his
brother Thomas to describe the Russian  chancellor’s
hospitality, “attended by two footmen and driven by a
coachman on the carriage box and a postilion . . . on the right-
side horse of the leading pair.” Upon his entering the
chancellor’s palace, a row of twenty footmen stood “like so
many statues” on either side of a broad marble staircase. A
dinner of innumerable courses of fish, poultry, and meats
climaxed with multiple desserts of fruits and ice creams,
accompanied by a choice of liquors and frozen champagne.
“The attention of the servants to the guests at the table is so
vigilant,” John Quincy told Thomas, “that you scarcely have
occasion to ask for anything. The instant you have emptied
your plate or that you lay down your knife and fork or spoon,
your plate is taken away and a clean one is given you in its
stead.” He said the footmen “see your need for fresh bread as
soon as you do yourself. .. . Everything moves like a piece of

clockwork.”18

Louisa was equally astonished, calling the chancellor’s
banquet “like a fairy tale,” with the emperor’s table “served on
solid gold. That of the corps diplomatique with silver. The
chancellor was said to have 300 servants of different grades,
150 at least wearing magnificent liveries according to their

grades.”19
The evenings of luxury, however, contrasted sharply with the

Adamses’ own living conditions. With a salary of only $9,000 a
year and another $9,000 in annual living expenses, John Quincy
could hardly compete with the French ambassador’s expense
allowance of $350,000 a year or even the Dutch minister’s

modest $17,500-a-year allowance.2 It took months, but John
Quincy finally found an affordable house to rent for about
$2,100 a year, but he had to spend nearly $6,000 on
furnishings. “The firewood,” he explained, “is, luckily, included
as a part of the rent,” as were salaries for more than a dozen
servants—a steward, a cook and two assistant cooks, a servant
to tend the fires, a coachman and postilion, two footmen, a
porter, valet, lady’s maid, housemaid, and laundry maid. “The
porter, the cook, and one of the footmen are married,” John
Quincy complained in a letter to his mother,

and their wives live in the house. The steward has two
children, and the washerwoman a daughter, all of whom
are kept in the house. I have baker’s, milkman’s,
butcher’s, greengrocer’s, poulterer’s, fishmonger’s and
grocer’s bills to pay monthly, besides tea, coffee, sugar,
wax and tallow candles. On all these articles of
consumption, the cook and steward first make their
profits on the purchase and next make free pillage of the
articles themselves. The steward takes the same liberty

with my wines.22

One evening, John Quincy stepped into his cellar and found
373 bottles missing—272 of them “the choicest and most costly

wines I had.”21

Their expenses left the Adamses unable to reciprocate the
many invitations they received from the czar and members of
the diplomatic corps, but no one seemed to care. The Adamses
—John Quincy, Louisa, and her attractive younger sister
Catherine—all spoke French beautifully and made up in social
skills what they lacked in their ability to entertain. John Quincy
did such a good job explaining the Puritan American ethos to
the czar that the Russian ruler gave his staff instructions to

exempt the Adamses from the many dress requirements,
including the costly and elaborate wigs worn by men and
women and the exorbitantly expensive, bejeweled gowns of
noble ladies—a different one each night through the season.

After the Adamses arrived at an Imperial Palace ball with
Louisa’s sister Catherine—“Kitty,” as her family called her—the
thirty-two-year-old czar made the twenty-four-year-old the
target of amorous advances. Day after day, he appeared
magically at one turning or another as the two American ladies
took their daily walks. Louisa recalled that, at a ball at the
French embassy, “he sought [Kitty] out himself to dance, and
she, not knowing the etiquette, began laughing and talking to
him as she would have done to an American partner... and
produced a buzz of astonishment’—especially as he danced
into the dinner hour and forced hungry guests to delay their
meal until he took a seat.

Her dance floor tryst with Czar Alexander provoked a spate
of invitations for Kitty and her family to attend theater
presentations, receptions, and other events that the czar
attended. Each invitation included instructions for the Adamses
to use the czar’s private entrance. Soon, his attentions
broadened, with the czar appearing wherever Kitty and her
sister happened to be—in the park, at the museum, at the
concert hall or theater ... anywhere and everywhere. Although
unnerved by the frequency of their encounters, Louisa dared
not interfere with the czar’s attentions. Although he acted like
a smitten schoolboy, he was nonetheless a schoolboy with
absolute power over the life and death of every living being in
the land.

As the Adamses continued dining and dancing in St.
Petersburg, Abigail Adams had taken her son’s complaints
about his low wage and high living costs straight to the
President. Even the President hesitated tangling with Abigail
Adams, and in September 1810, when Supreme Court
Associate Justice William Cushing died, Madison submitted
John Quincy’s name to the Senate, which immediately approved
the appointment. Born and raised in Massachusetts and

educated at Harvard, Cushing had been the first justice
appointed to the Supreme Court by President George
Washington twenty-one years earlier.

To the astonishment of all, John Quincy turned down the
appointment, using as his excuse the pregnancy of his wife and
the impossibility, given her history of miscarriages, of her
traveling without endangering her own life and that of her
unborn child. His refusal devastated his parents, with his
mother saying the Supreme Court appointment would have
ensured “the preservation of your family from ruin.” John
Adams feared his son’s refusal would provoke “national disgust

and resentment.”22 As he had when his son had resigned from
the Senate, John Adams again predicted an end to John
Quincy’s career in public service and to his hopes for assuming
national leadership.

