13

A New Beginning

After his 1828 defeat, President John Quincy Adams prepared
to return to his father’s house in Quincy, Massachusetts,
resigned to a life of semiretirement, puttering about the farm a
bit, but focused on writing a biography of his father and
practicing law part time. John Quincy and Louisa were waiting
for George Washington Adams to arrive from Boston to help
them move back to Quincy, when a messenger delivered a
thunderbolt:

Their firstborn son was dead at twenty-eight.

George Washington Adams had been en route to Washington
on a steamboat from Providence to New York. On April 30, at 3
a.m., after a night of heavy drinking, he turned irrational,
demanding that the captain stop the ship to let him off. When
the captain refused, he went topside by himself and either
jumped or fell overboard, leaving only his cloak and hat on
board—and no note. In the weeks before his death, his drinking
and gambling had not abated, and his work had suffered. Still
worse, a maid working for the family where he was living had

given birth to his child and was blackmailing him.“

After learning of her son’s death, Louisa decided to remain in
Washington apart from her husband. She was too despondent
to cope with her husband’s moodiness and his brother’s
drunkenness. John Quincy bought a home two miles from the
Capitol and left her there.

“The parting from my wife was distressing to her and to me,”
he confided to his diary. “The afflictions with which we have
been visited—especially the last—has so weakened us in body
and mind that our dejection of spirit seems irrecoverable. We

parted with anguish that I cannot describe.”1

Early in September, John Quincy’s youngest son, Charles
Francis—by then his and Louisa’s brightest hope—married
Abigail Brooks, whose sister had married Massachusetts

congressman Edward Everett.* Everett’s brother Alexander
had trained in the law with John Quincy and served in his St.
Petersburg legation for a year. Although John Quincy attended
his son’s wedding, Louisa was still too distraught from the
death of her oldest son to travel to Boston.

Later that fall, John Quincy rejoined Louisa in Washington,
spending his time on walks, swimming in the Potomac, and
writing articles on international affairs that found their way
into scholarly journals. In the spring of 1830, he returned to
Quincy, this time with Louisa, leaving John II in Washington to
try to extract profits from the Columbian Mills flour business.

As the summer progressed, however, John Quincy fell deeper
into depression, finding his only pleasures in walking and
swimming, reading the Bible and Cicero’s Orations, planting
fruit trees, and tending a garden of peas, beans, corn, and
other vegetables. He made halfhearted attempts at organizing
his father’s papers, rummaging through boxes and finding
some mementos of his youth—largely books, such as a fondly
remembered edition of Arabian Nights. “The more there was in
them of invention, the more pleasing they were,” he recalled.
“My imagination pictured them all as realities, and I dreamed
of enchantments as if there was a world in which they

existed.”2 Charles Francis and his wife visited regularly for
family clambakes, John II came up from Washington for two
short visits, and the summer slipped away.

As ill disposed as he was to public functions, he agreed to
attend the bicentennial celebration of the founding of Boston
on September 17, and to his surprise, two honorary marshals
escorted him from the State House to the Old South Church.
Well-wishers hailed him as he passed, and even former
Federalist adversaries approached with warm salutations. At
the end of the day, he attended a reception at the lieutenant
governor’s residence, where his friends, the Everett brothers

and the editor of the Boston Patriot, were huddling with Quincy
congressman Reverend Joseph Richardson. After greeting the
former President, they asked if they could visit him the
following day. He agreed, and at the appointed time, they
informed him that Richardson’s parishioners had pleaded with
him to retire from Congress to devote himself full time to his
church, and he had agreed. The Everetts then asked John
Quincy to run for Richardson’s seat, assuring him that he
would win without opposition and flattering him with the
notion of “ennobling” the House of Representatives with the
presence of a former President.

Always in character, John Quincy feigned disinterest, saying
he would do nothing to support his own candidacy. Explaining
his familiar position on political campaigns, he asserted that if
the people called on him of their own volition, he “might deem
it my duty to serve. . .. I want the people to act

spontaneously.”2 He made it clear, however, that he would
remain independent of party affiliations and represent the
whole nation, with his only political loyalty tied to national
independence from all foreign entanglements and preservation
of the Union.

Both Louisa and Charles Francis were appalled that John
Quincy would even consider returning to politics after the
humiliation he had suffered. Louisa threatened not to
accompany him if he returned to Washington—to no avail.
Quincy voted overwhelmingly to return their former President
to Washington, giving him 1,817 votes, while the two other
candidates garnered a combined total of only 552 votes.

“T am a member-elect of the Twenty-Second Congress,” he
wrote in joyful disbelief that night, and nothing Louisa could
say could detract from his satisfaction. “My return to public life

. is disagreeable to my family,” he admitted, “yet I can not
withhold my grateful acknowledgment to the Disposer of
human events and to the people of my native region for this
unexpected testimonial of their continued confidence.”

It seemed as if I was deserted by all mankind... . In the

French opera of Richard Coeur-de-Lion, the minstrel
Blondel sings under the walls of his prison a song,
beginning:

O, Richard! O, mon Roi!

Lunivers t’abandonne.¥

When I first heard this song, forty-five years ago... it
made an indelible impression upon my memory, without
imagining that I should ever feel its force so much closer
to home. But this call upon me by the people of the
district in which I reside, to represent them in Congress,
has been spontaneous. .. . My election as President of
the United States was not half so gratifying to my inmost
soul. No election or appointment conferred upon me ever

gave me so much pleasure.

As his spirits revived, he finally coaxed Louisa into returning
to Washington, and the two left in December. Along the way, he
showed himself still a champion of public improvements by
being among the first to ride on the new steam-driven train
between Baltimore and Washington. And to his delight and
Louisa’s amazement, a crowd awaited to greet them on their
return. Although he would not take his seat until 1832, three
hundred callers came to their house on New Year’s Day 1831,
buoying his spirits still more and spurring him to seek out and
meet members of Congress to determine their political views.
He attended the House of Representatives to learn the rules
and study member quirks and tics, and as he soaked up the
thinking of his future colleagues, the joy of his return to politics
spurred a renewed interest in scholarly pursuits, including
poetry. By spring, when the time came to return to Quincy, he
had reread Childe Harold, Don Juan, and other works of Lord
Byron—and written his own epic, 2,000-line poem titled Dermot
MacMorrogh, on Henry II’s conquest of Ireland. He considered
it his finest work and at least one publisher agreed, producing
three successive editions.4 On the way north, he stopped to see
former President James Monroe, who was gravely ill in New
York and destitute, living off the charity of his daughter and

son-in-law at their New York City home.

After his return to Quincy, town officials invited him to give
the July 4 oration, and he set to work drafting a fierce attack on
the doctrine of “nullification,” which had regained currency in
the South in response to high federal tariffs on cotton goods.
Thomas Jefferson had fathered the concept in 1798, when he
was vice president and opposed the Alien and Sedition Acts of
President John Adams. Declaring the Constitution only “a
compact” among sovereign states, Jefferson insisted that the
states retained authority to restrain actions by the federal
government that exceeded its constitutional mandate. Jefferson
persuaded the Kentucky legislature to approve a resolution
allowing it to declare unconstitutional any federal government
exercise of powers not specifically delegated by the
Constitution. His protégé, James Madison, marched in lockstep
and convinced the Virginia legislature “to interpose” its
authority to prevent federal “exercise of . . . powers” not

granted by the Constitution.2 Federalist legislatures in other
states, however, declared the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions
“mad and rebellious” and rejected them by declaring U.S.
courts to be the sole judges of constitutionality.

Vice President John C. Calhoun subsequently revived
southern interest in the concept with an essay he called “South
Carolina Exposition and Protest.” In it, he insisted that the
Tenth Amendment gave every state the right to nullify a federal
act that it deemed a violation of the Constitution. In his July 4
oration in Quincy, John Quincy countered by labeling the
concept of state sovereignty a “hallucination” and nothing “less
than treason”—a fierce charge that resounded across the
country after an enterprising printer distributed more than
4,000 copies of his speech nationwide.

As John Quincy delivered his oration, the President he had
served for eight years died in New York—joining John Adams
and Thomas Jefferson as the third of the first five Presidents to
die on July 4. Asked to deliver a eulogy for Monroe at Boston’s
Old South Church, John Quincy produced a stirring reminder of
Monroe’s courage as an officer during the Revolution,

“weltering in his blood on the field of Trenton for the cause of
his country.” Then John Quincy turned to his own—and
Monroe’s—favorite subject: public improvements. He urged
mourners to “look at the map of United North America, as it
was... in 1783. Compare it with the map of that same Empire
as itis now. ... The change, more than of any other man, living
or dead, was the work of James Monroe.” John Quincy recalled
how Monroe had scoffed at Congress for denying it had “the
power of appropriating money for the construction of a canal to

connect the waters of Chesapeake Bay with the Ohio.”© He
portrayed the “unspeakable blessings” of Monroe’s vision of a
transnational network of roads and canals. “Sink down, ye
mountains!” John Quincy called out. “And ye valleys—rise!”

Exult and shout for joy! Rejoice! that ... there are
neither Rocky Mountains nor oases of the desert, from
the rivers of the Southern [Pacific] Ocean to the shores of
the Atlantic Sea; Rejoice! that . . . the waters of the
Columbia mingle in union with the streams of the
Delaware, the Lakes of the St. Lawrence with the floods
of the Mississippi; Rejoice! that... the distant have been
drawn near ... that the North American continent
swarms with hearts beating as if from one bosom, of
voices speaking with but one tongue, of freemen
constituting one confederated and united republic of

brethren, never to rise... in hostile arms... to fulfill the
blessed prophecy of ancient times, that war shall be no
more.

Charles Francis Adams was the youngest child of John Quincy
and Louisa Catherine Adams. Like his father, he was a Harvard
graduate and lawyer. (NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE, ADAMS
NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK)

 

After he had delivered his eulogy, John Quincy and Louisa
learned to their delight that Charles Francis’s wife, Abby, had
given birth to their first child, a girl they named Louisa
Catherine Adams. With John II’s two daughters, John Quincy
and Louisa now had three granddaughters, but they still
awaited the birth of a grandson to carry the family name into
the future.

By the time John Quincy and Louisa began their return to
Washington for the opening of Congress in December 1831, his
eloquence had resounded across the nation, with both his July
4 oration and eulogy to Monroe having been published in most
American newspapers. Old political friends greeted him in New
York. In Philadelphia, Albert Gallatin, his associate in Ghent,
asked him to preside at the Literary Convention then in session

and won his appointment to a committee drawing up plans for
a National Library and Scientific Institution. By the time he
reached Washington, his political enemies in Congress feared
he was mounting a surreptitious campaign to recapture the
presidency, and to prevent that possibility, they shunted him
onto the least important committees. Instead of the Committee
on Foreign Affairs—“the line of occupation in which all my life
has been passed”—he found himself chairman of the
Committee on Manufactures, “for which I feel myself not to be
well qualified. I know not even enough of it to form an estimate

of its difficulties.”8

Although any member of the House could introduce a bill
relating to anything he chose, by tradition, members limited
the bills they proposed to matters within the purview of their
own committees. To escape what he considered a procedural
straitjacket, John Quincy decided to flaunt House tradition and
use the right of every committee chairman to read citizen
petitions on the House floor—regardless of their content.

On his first day in Congress, therefore, he hurled his first
thunderbolt on the floor of the House, shocking both sides of
the aisle with not one but fifteen petitions from Pennsylvania
Quakers “praying for the abolition of slavery and the slave
trade in the District of Columbia.” Under rules adopted by the
First Congress in 1790, the House had agreed to remain silent
on the question of abolition—largely because of South
Carolina’s threat to walk out at the mention of abolition or
slavery. The Capitol all but imploded under the tension of his
words. “I was not more than five minutes on my feet but I was
listened to with great attention, and when I sat down, it

seemed to myself as if I had performed an achievement.”

He had indeed performed an achievement. Although most of
the House rose as one to roar its disapproval, former President
John Quincy Adams had burst open the doors of Congress to
abolitionist voices for the first time in decades—voices that
other congressmen had routinely ignored for years and would
never be able to ignore again. Although Pennsylvania Quakers

were not his constituents, he had proclaimed himself a
representative of the whole nation, and the whole nation now
took him at his word, inundating him with petitions they knew
their own representatives would never accept.

It was not a good time to be a proponent of abolition in
America, however. Only months before, a black preacher, Nat
Turner, had led an insurrection in Virginia, killing fifty-seven
white people, including eighteen women and _ twenty-four
children. Only swift retaliation by U.S. marines prevented the
insurrection from spreading into North Carolina. Although one
hundred blacks had been killed and twenty were later
executed, the specter of future black uprisings terrified
southerners—and many northerners—and southern states were
tightening their slave codes to curb black mobility. Some
required blacks to carry special passes for travel; others
banned all travel by blacks except to church meetings. Ten
states were considering or had proposed changes in their state
constitutions to ban voluntary emancipation of slaves by
slaveholders.

Most House members responded to John Quincy’s petitions
for abolition with such hostility that he feared for the very
future of the nation. He had entered Congress convinced “that
this federative Union was to last for ages,” but after his
presentation, “I now disbelieve its duration for twenty years

and doubt its continuance for five.”

In his self-appointed role as representative of the entire
nation, John Quincy was determined to fulfill his obligation to
his huge constituency by attending every session of Congress—
from its first day on December 5, 1831, to its last, in March
1833—regardless of the weather or his own health. He threw
his mind and soul into his new work, studying rules and
proceedings of previous Congresses and reviewing his law
texts and the language of laws. His work brought new joy into
his life—and misery into Louisa’s. Unlike his presidency, John
Quincy’s role as a congressman did not generate the need to
entertain at home, thus leaving Louisa with so little to do that
she took up fishing—and poetry writing. Even when John

Quincy returned home, his mind, his heart, his soul remained in
Congress. The only joy in her life came from caring for her two
granddaughters.

As much as, and even more than, anything he had ever done
in his life, John Quincy’s work in Congress seemed to him the
ultimate patriotic service he could perform for his country.
“The forms and proceedings of the House,” he exulted, were “a
very striking exemplification of the magnificent grandeur of
this nation and the sublime principles upon which our
government is founded.”

The colossal emblem of the Union over the Speaker’s
chair, the historic muse at the clock, the echoing pillars
of the hall .. . the resolutions and amendments between
the members and the chair, the calls of ayes and noes,
with the different intonations . . . from the different
voices, the gobbling manner of the clerk in reading over
the names, the tone of the Speaker in announcing the
vote, and the varied shades of pleasure and pain in the
countenances of the members on hearing it, would form a

fine subject for a descriptive poem.11

As it had throughout his life, tragedy forced its way into his
sublime existence when he returned to his home on F Street
one evening to find John II in a drunken stupor, still another
inheritor of the disease that had plagued his maternal forbears
for generations. And then, on March 12, John Quincy’s beloved
younger brother, Thomas Boylston, died of the family affliction,
leaving John Quincy the only surviving son of an American
Founding Father. Thomas’s death left John Quincy the sole
support for his brother’s spendthrift wife and_ their

dysfunctional children.2@

Before long, John Quincy realized that Congress had not
transduced his petitions for abolition into legislative proposals;
although he kept presenting them, he knew he would need his
committee’s support to produce actual bills for enactment into
laws. He soon mastered all the intricacies of American
economics and manufacturing—especially cotton and woolen

goods manufacturing—and discovered the intricate ties
between manufacturing and a broad range of other issues,
including foreign affairs, tariffs, and slavery. He now knew the
way to broaden the scope of his committee proceedings, using
the most obvious issue first: tariffs.

For a while, high tariffs on imported English cotton goods
had protected small New England manufacturers against
competition from British imports, but the tariffs that protected
New England mills against British competition hurt southern
cotton growers, who shipped more of their crop to the big
British cotton mills than they did to New England. As high U.S.
tariffs cut British textile sales to America, British mills bought
less cotton from the American South and left planters with too
many slaves to support for the amount of cotton they picked.

John Quincy proposed—and Congress approved—a
compromise tariff bill that reduced duties on British goods with
a high content of southern cotton, but the British mills resented
the selective tariffs, saying they would not submit to a foreign
government’s dictating their sales policies. Responding to their
British clients, southern planters demanded an end to the
tariffs, and South Carolina’s governor called a_ special
Nullification Convention in November 1832, which declared
federal tariff laws null and void in South Carolina, prohibited
collection of federal tariffs in the state, and threatened South
Carolina’s secession from the Union if federal officials tried
using force to collect tariffs. A week later, the South Carolina
legislature authorized raising a military force and appropriated
funds for arms. Civil war seemed imminent.

The state’s declaration and mobilization shocked the nation
and left even President Andrew Jackson, a champion of states’
rights, aghast. “The nation will be preserved,” he declared
angrily. “Perpetuity is stamped upon the Constitution by the
blood of our fathers. Nullification therefore means insurrection

and war, and the other states have a right to put it down.”12
South Carolinians responded with huge demonstrations in

Charleston. South Carolina senator Robert Hayne resigned

from the Senate to run for governor of his state and lead the

fight for nullification. Vice President Calhoun resigned his post
and won election as Hayne’s replacement in the Senate,
although rumors swept through Charleston that he intended
returning to become first president of a Southern Confederacy.

On December 5, 1832, Jackson overwhelmed John Quincy’s
former secretary of state, Henry Clay, in the presidential
election, with New York’s Martin Van Buren winning the vice
presidency. Former vice president Calhoun from South Carolina
won reelection to the Senate. Five days after his reelection,
Jackson issued a presidential proclamation declaring “the
power to annul a law of the United States, assumed by one
state, incompatible with the existence of the Union” and
warning of “dreadful consequence” for the “instigators” of the
South Carolina Nullification Act. “Disunion . . . is treason,” he
told the people of South Carolina. “On your unhappy heads will
inevitably fall all raw evils of the conflict you force upon the

government of your country. 13

The summer recess postponed further congressional debate
over nullification until fall, and during that time, Harvard
University voted to grant President Jackson an honorary
degree. Although firmly on Jackson’s side in the battle against
nullification, John Quincy refused to attend the ceremonies
honoring the President. “As myself an affectionate child of our
Alma Mater,” he explained, “I would not be present to witness
her disgrace in presenting her highest literary honors upon a
barbarian who could not write a sentence of grammar and

hardly could spell his own name.”14

Although the summer began disagreeably, it ended in joy,
when Charles Francis and his wife realized what had become
one of John Quincy’s cherished dreams—the birth of his first
grandson. They named him John Quincy Adams II and ensured
the preservation of the legendary Adams name in the United
States for at least another generation. “There is no passion
more deeply seated in my bosom,” John Quincy exulted, “than
the longing for posterity worthily to support my own and my
father’s name. . .. There is now one son of the next

generation.”15

John Quincy returned to Congress refreshed and ready to
battle nullification, even if it meant strengthening ties to
President Jackson. On January 16, 1833, with civil war
threatening, Jackson asked Congress to grant him authority to
use military force if necessary to crush the nullifiers and
enforce revenue- and tariff-collection laws. Congress complied,
with John Quincy voting in favor. Jackson signed the Force Bill
into law on March 2 and frightened South Carolina’s
legislature into rescinding its Nullification Act.

After John Quincy had supported the President by voting for
the Force Bill, he leaped back across the political fence to
oppose efforts by Jacksonian Democrats to mollify the South by
eliminating tariffs.

“Our slaves,” explained Georgia’s Democratic congressman
Augustus Smith Clayton in arguing for tariff cuts, “are our
machinery, and we have as good a right to profit by them as do

the northern men to profit by the machinery they employ. 716
John Quincy listened to Clayton’s appeal in disbelief, the
phrase “our machinery” resounding in his head until he
exploded in outrage.
“That machinery,” John Quincy roared in_ response,

“sometimes exerts self-moving power! vl

With Nat Turner’s insurrection still fresh in the minds of
many northern as well as southern congressmen, the House all
but shouted John Quincy down, while another South Carolina
member, William Drayton, cried out, “The member from
Massachusetts has thrown a firebrand into the hall.”

“Tt is not I who have thrown the firebrand,” John Quincy
shouted back. “The Nullification Ordinance is the firebrand.”
18

In the end, northerners capitulated by voting for further tariff
cuts, as did Henry Clay, who had originally based his American
System on high tariffs but was now licking his wounds from the
presidential race and seeking to court southern votes for the
next election.

Before the presidential election of 1834, tragedy struck the
Adams family again. In the autumn of that year, John II suffered
a series of seizures—a consequence of alcoholism—and lapsed
into a coma. By the time his father reached his bedside, he was
close to death, and indeed, he died the next day, October 22,
without recognizing his father. Besides his wife and two
daughters, he left debts of $15,000 (which John Quincy paid).
John Quincy and Louisa turned to each other for comfort, with
John Quincy calling his wife “the dearest partner of my life.”
Both doted on their granddaughters, with John Quincy stopping
at his dead son’s house each day on the way to the Capitol to
help the older girl learn her arithmetic. John Quincy would
support his granddaughters and their mother as long as he
lived.

In December 1835, President Jackson sent Congress a
curious and unexpected message: an Englishman, James
Smithson, had left a bequest of about $500,000 to the United
States “to found at Washington, under the name of the
Smithsonian Institution, an Establishment for the increase and

diffusion of knowledge among men.”9 Son of the first Duke of
Northumberland, Smithson had, ironically, been the _half-
brother of General Hugh Lord Percy, the British commander at
the Battle of Lexington in 1775. Although both houses of
Congress licked their collective chops at the possibilities for
personal profits, the House acceded to John Quincy’s fierce
interest in science and named him chairman of the committee
to determine how to disburse the money.

Besieged by schools and colleges for shares of the money,
John Quincy ruled out disbursement of any of the principal,
reserving it entirely to the government and limiting spending to
interest generated. He intended combining George
Washington’s vision of creating “institutions for the general
diffusion of knowledge” with his own vision of national
astronomical observatories—the “lighthouses in the sky” that
his political opponents had ridiculed when he was President.
He called “the link between earth and heaven .. . the means of
acquiring knowledge... therefore the greatest benefit that can

be conferred upon mankind.”22 He was now prepared to fight
his opponents in ways that had eluded him when he was
President.

South Carolina senator John Calhoun, the former vice
president, assailed John Quincy’s proposal as federal intrusion
in an area the Tenth Amendment reserved for the states. He
pointed out correctly that the Constitutional Convention had
twice rejected efforts to give the government powers to
establish a national university. John Quincy countered,
however, that there were no constitutional restrictions on
establishing research institutions—nor did the framers restrict
the national government from establishing any kind of
institution in the District of Columbia. John Quincy won the day,
with both houses deferring to his constitutional scholarship and
approving his bill to establish the Smithsonian Institution as a
public institution that remains in the hands of the American
people to this day.

Despite President Jackson’s proclamation that nullification
was tantamount to treason, nullification fervor continued
spreading in the South, and northerners responded with
stepped-up demands for abolition. Peering into the future, John
Quincy warned that “a dissolution of the Union for the cause of
slavery would be followed by . . . a war between the two
severed portions of the Union. It seems to me that its result
must be the extirpation of slavery from this whole continent
and desolating as this course of events ... must be, so glorious
would be its final issue, that, as God shall judge me, I dare not

say that it is not to be desired.”21

As petitions demanding an end to slavery increased, he found
abolitionists as prepared as slavery proponents to dissolve the
Union to further their cause. For several years, therefore,
beginning with the debate over the Missouri Compromise, he
had argued that the Constitution failed to give Congress any
powers to interfere with slavery in any state or territory in
which it already existed. It could prevent its establishment in
states and territories where it did not exist but could not

abolish it where it already did exist. Abolitionists argued,
however, that Congress could at least eliminate slavery in the
District of Columbia, where it had powers to legislate and
govern, unrestricted by the Constitution.

In the wake of three House resolutions in 1836, however,
John Quincy completely changed his stance on abolition. The
first two resolutions declared Congress without constitutional
powers to interfere in any way with slavery in any of the states
and that it “ought not” do so in the District of Columbia. John
Quincy voted for both, conceding that the Constitution offered
no clear guidance on abolition in the District of Columbia. The
third resolution, however, stepped beyond the abolition issue
by clearly abridging free speech, and John Quincy all but
exploded with rage as he listened:

All petitions, memorials, propositions, or papers, relating
in any way, or to any extent whatsoever, to the subject of
slavery or the abolition of slavery shall, without being
either printed or referred, be laid on the table, and that

no further action whatever shall be had thereon .22

Although John Quincy shot to his feet for recognition,
Speaker James K. Polk, a Tennessee slaveholder, ignored him
and recognized only southern congressmen. John Quincy
howled for recognition, but Polk looked the other way, and after
southerners had finished their presentations, he put the third
resolution to a vote. The House approved it 95-82, and the
Speaker shut off all further debate, preventing John Quincy
from saying a word.

“Am I gagged or am I not,” John Quincy shouted in disbelief,
inadvertently giving the new rule its historic name—the Gag
Rule. Southerners tried shouting him down with cries of
“Order! ... Order!!” The Speaker called out over the din, “The
motion is not debatable,” and when John Quincy appealed to
the House to overrule the Speaker, it sustained the Speaker
109-89. When the clerk called the Adams name, he stood: “If
the House will allow me five minutes in time—”

“Order!” shouted southerners. “Order!”

“T hold the resolution—” John Quincy shouted above the roar,
“I hold the resolution to be in direct violation of the
Constitution of the United States, of the rules of this House,

and of the rights of my constituents.”23

The enmity he encountered in the House grew vicious—
spiteful at times. When he asked the House to recognize the
death of William Wirt, who had served the nation as attorney
general for twelve years in the Monroe and Adams
administrations, the House refused. John Quincy called the
refusal mean-spirited. “I place in perpetual opposition to me
and to everything that I propose or support,” he growled,
“twenty-nine members of the House and six of the Senate; and
for all this and its consequences I have no compensation .. .

but the bare consciousness of having done my duty. 24

As Speaker of the House, James K. Polk of Tennessee tried to
silence John Quincy Adams with the Gag Rule, which banned
mention of the word “slavery” and presentation of citizen
petitions to abolish the institution. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

When he opposed Ohio’s forcible takeover of disputed
territory in Michigan, John Quincy reported that “the people in
the territory of Michigan were grateful to me,” but he
predicted that “the people of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois will
hate me with perfect hatred for crossing their interests.” Of his
efforts in the House, he concluded, “Never in my life have I
taken in public controversies a part more suicidal to my own
popularity.”25

The Gag Rule infuriated Americans across the North and
parts of the West as much as it did John Quincy, however, and
hundreds of thousands of petitioners rallied to his side, arguing
that if the House could gag the reading of petitions against
slavery, it could gag petitions against or for anything. Women’s
rights groups joined the protests and added their own petitions
to the flood already inundating Congress. When Maryland’s
Benjamin Chew Howard objected to the “unseemliness” of

women presenting a petition, John Quincy sharpened his
tongue and leaped for the rhetorical kill:

“Why, does it follow,” he boomed, “that women are fitted for
nothing but the cares of domestic life, for bearing children and
cooking the food of a family, devoting all their time to the
domestic circle—to promoting the immediate personal comfort
of their husbands, brothers, and sons?” Louisa had apparently
taught her husband to alter his thinking if not his ways. “The
mere departure of woman from the duties of the domestic
circle, far from being a reproach to her, is a virtue of the
highest order, when it is done from purity of motive, by
appropriate means, and the purpose of good.” He went on to
read a_ petition opposing slavery from women in_ his
constituency of Plymouth, Massachusetts. “Is this
discreditable?” he asked, before thundering his oft-repeated
conviction: “I do believe slavery to be a sin before the sight of

God.”26

Recognized by then as an authority on parliamentary rules,
John Quincy kept finding ways around the Gag Rule, at one
point asking for recognition to read the prayers of a group of
Massachusetts women. When a House member objected, John
Quincy responded by explaining that the women were not
petitioning but simply praying for “the greatest improvement
that can possibly be effected in the condition of the human race

—the abolition of slavery. “27 The House exploded in collective
anger at his flagrant violation of the ban on reading petitions
against slavery and even uttering the word “slavery” in
congressional debates. John Quincy smiled wryly, reiterating
that he had not read a petition containing the word “slavery”
(once more uttering the word) but a prayer of women who, like
the members’ own mothers, were offended by “the sinfulness of
slavery [again, the forbidden word!] and keenly aggrieved by
its existence in a part of our country over which—”

Choking with anger by then, South Carolina’s Thomas
Pinckney interrupted to charge John Quincy with reading a
petition. “Point of order!” Pinckney bellowed.

“—keenly aggrieved by its existence in a part of the country
over which Congress possesses exclusive jurisdiction in all
cases whatever—”

“Order! Order!”

“—do most earnestly petition your honorable body—”

“Mr. Speaker! I rise on a point order!”

“—immediately to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia

”

“Mr. Speaker! A call to order!”

“Order! Order!”

“Take your seat!” the Speaker ordered John Quincy.

“—and,” John Quincy began to sit, accelerating his words as
he did, “to-declare-every-human-being-free-who-sets-foot-upon-
its-soil.”28

Increasingly stifled by the Gag Rule and its proponents, John
Quincy finally ran out of parliamentary maneuvers and resorted
to rhetorical trickery to confuse, embarrass, and essentially
emasculate his political enemies. Early in February, he
presented two petitions, one from nine unnamed women and
the other from actual slaves. As he knew they would, the
southerners erupted in collective fury, with one of them
resolving that “infamous women .. . [and] slaves do not possess
the right of petition secured to the people of the United States
by the Constitution.” The same congressman resolved, as well,
that any member who presents a petition from slaves should be
considered “unfriendly to the Union,” and his third resolution—
its content almost comical—cited “the Hon. John Q. Adams” as
having “disclaimed all design of doing anything disrespectful to
this House.” In effect, it accepted an apology from John Quincy
that he had never offered. To prolong the charade, John Quincy
asked “for an opportunity for a full hearing in my defense.” He
insisted he had never apologized and resented the accusation
of having done so. After the laughter subsided, even Gag Rule
sponsors relented, recognizing that refusal to hear one of their
own colleagues might prevent each of them from defending
themselves in the future.

Focusing on the constitutional right of petition rather than

abolition, John Quincy asked, “Will you put the right of
petitioning, of craving for help and mercy and protection on the
footing of political privileges? ... No despot of any age or clime
has ever denied this humble privilege to the poorest or
meanest of human creatures... . That would be a sad day, Sir .
. . when a vote should pass this House that would not receive a
petition from slaves. . . . When the principle is once begun of
limiting the right of petition, where would it stop?”

John Quincy then accused the sponsor of the resolutions of
having accused the nine unnamed women of prostitution.

“T did not say they were prostitutes,” the congressman
protested in his southern drawl. “I have not said I know those
women!”

“T am glad to hear the honorable gentleman disclaim any
knowledge of them,” John Quincy smirked, “for I had been
going to ask, if they were infamous women, who it was that had
made them infamous. Not their color, I believe, but their
masters! I have heard it said in proof of that fact... that in the
South there existed great resemblances between the progeny
of the colored people and the white men who claim possession
of them. Thus, perhaps the charge of infamous might be
retorted on those who made it, as reflecting on themselves.”

As southerners exploded with rage, “Old Man Eloquent,” as
the press now called John Quincy, could shout touché. It was a
rhetorical triumph like no other in congressional history at the
time. Even the Register of Debates saw fit to note the response

to John Quincy’s words: “Great agitation in the House.”22

Although the House voted down resolutions to censure John
Quincy, it nonetheless voted to deprive slaves of the right to
petition, thus eroding the sanctity of the Constitution and
depriving most African Americans of the privileges and
protections of the Bill of Rights.

“Vengeance is mine, say the South!” warned a printed sheet
someone slipped under John Quincy’s door. Beneath a drawing
of a whip were the words, “Flog and Spare Not!” Another letter
addressed him as “Sir” but warned that “your conduct... is
such as to draw upon you the indignation of the South... . The

rod is cut that will make your old hide smart for your insidious
attempt on southern rights. .. . If ever you dare to vindicate
abolition again you will be lynched . . . drawing you from your

seat in the House by force. So be on your guard.”39
Thousands of northerners, however, wrote to support him,
calling him the “Sage of Quincy” and urging him to “fear not

southern insolence. . .. We will defend and sustain you.”31

The death threats terrified Louisa, and she, Charles Francis,
and Charles Francis’s wife, Abby, pleaded with John Quincy to
retreat from his war with what he called the “slaveocracy.”
They could do nothing to dissuade him. At sixty-nine, he was on
fire, breathing the flames of freedom his father had lit and that
he believed he had to maintain. As they approached their
fortieth wedding anniversary, it was Louisa, not John Quincy,
who turned to poetry and prayer for solace:

Grant, grant! O God a helping hand
And save us when we call;
Protect us ’gainst the murderer’s hand;

Support us lest we fall 32

“T walk on the edge of a precipice in every step I take,” John
Quincy admitted, but defying age, aching joints, and the
deterioration of his body, he found renewed strength in battle.
He had never been to war and had always personified the
perfect diplomat, but he now seemed fearless, felt fearless—
like a knight charging into battle.

He pursued his daily routine of walking vigorously—defiantly
—to and from his house and the Capitol—and swimming the
Potomac nude. Occasionally, he misjudged his physical strength
and agility and tripped and fell, suffering cuts and bruises and
even dislocating his shoulder once—but he never missed a
session of Congress. He believed the future of the nation was at
stake, and he returned day after day to fight his war against
the “slaveocracy.” And Quincy voters sent him back to
Congress again and again. Louisa fretted about his health and
safety, but she had lost all influence over him and could do

nothing to restrain him. He was unstoppable—a meteor
spiraling out of control in the political firmament. By 1836,
Charles Francis and Abigail had given John Quincy and Louisa
a second grandson, Charles Francis Jr., whose presence only
added to his grandfather’s determination to defeat injustice in
the nation his grandchildren would inherit.

With each session, his opponents renewed the Gag Rule to
try to silence his assault on slavery, but he sidestepped their
obstructions and found another target: the admission of slave
states into the Union. A fierce advocate of westward expansion
when he was President—indeed, he had offered to buy Texas
from Mexico—he now led the fight to block Texan appeals to
join the Union. With a population of 30,000 American
frontiersmen and 5,000 slaves, Texas had always stood apart
from the rest of Mexico, and when the Mexican government
abolished slavery in all Mexican territory including Texas,
Texans declared independence and recruited an army that
defeated Mexican forces. They then formed a government that
restored slavery and applied for U.S. recognition as a first step
toward joining the United States. With Mexico still claiming
sovereignty over the territory, U.S. recognition of Texan
independence would have meant war—not only with Mexico
but with England and France, which had both outlawed slavery
and the slave trade and pledged to stand by Mexico in
enforcing the ban on slavery.

John Quincy shot out of his seat to oppose recognition of
Texan independence, knowing it was a prelude to annexation
and, therefore, an end to the slave-state/free-state balance
worked out in the Missouri Compromise. Annexation of Texas,
he knew, would give slave states a majority in both houses of
Congress and end all hopes for emancipation in the United
States.

In leading the fight against recognition of Texan
independence, he also found a perfect weapon against the Gag
Rule: “Mr. Chairman,” he thundered. “Are you ready for all
these wars? A Mexican war? A war with Britain, if not with
France? A general Indian war? A servile war? And, as an

inevitable consequence of them all, a civil war?” The South and
South-west, he warned, would be “the battlefield upon which
the last great conflict must be fought between slavery and
emancipation.”

I avow it as my solemn belief that the annexation of an
independent foreign power to this government would be
ipso facto a dissolution of this Union. .. . The question is
whether a foreign nation [Texas] .. . a nation damned to
everlasting fame by the reinstitution of that detested
system of slavery, after it had been abolished within its
borders, should be admitted into union with a nation of

freemen. For, Sir, that name, thank God, is still ours!33

“Take your seat!” the Speaker ordered, trying to apply the
Gag Rule, but John Quincy shouted back, “Am I gagged? Am I
gagged?” He then appealed to the House membership, and it
overruled the Speaker to ensure open debate on the Texas
question—and once they opened the debate on Texas, they
automatically reopened the debate on slavery. “The annexation
of Texas,” John Quincy thundered in response, “and the

proposed war with Mexico are all one and the same thing.”34

Humiliated by John Quincy’s rhetorical tactics, southerners
began to shout, “Expel him!” whenever he spoke. “Expel him!”
they repeated, as he continued—sometimes prolonging his
diatribes against slavery for hours and, in one instance, for
parts of fifteen days.

John Quincy went beyond the halls of Congress to the
American people and became a national presence, a force for
justice and progress that he had never been before—even as
President of the United States. Invited to speak throughout the
Northeast and parts of the West, he used traditional July 4
orations, along with eulogies on the deaths of the Marquis de
Lafayette and James Madison, to echo the words of George
Washington and other Founding Fathers. Although silent on
slavery, all had inveighed against involvement in foreign wars,
and John Quincy now connected the two issues. John Quincy
appealed to church leaders, calling slavery “a sin before the

sight of God,” and they, in turn, formed peace societies that
inundated Congress and the White House with petitions signed
by tens of thousands of Americans opposed to war with Mexico.
State legislatures in Vermont, Michigan, Ohio, and
Massachusetts passed resolutions supporting John Quincy’s
war against war—and against recognition of ‘Texas.
Southerners in Congress, however, proved too strong, and after
both houses voted in favor of recognizing Texan independence,
President Jackson agreed and appointed a chargé d’affaires. As
John Quincy had predicted, a petition for U.S. annexation of
Texas followed recognition, but, in the face of the growing
antiwar movement, Jackson, nearing the end of his presidency,
rejected it, refusing to risk certain war with Mexico.

By then, Andrew Jackson had decided to follow the precedent
of earlier Presidents and cede his office after two terms, and
the Democratic Party nominated Vice President Van Buren of
New York as their candidate to succeed Jackson. Van Buren had
used his presidency of the Senate to court antiabolition
sentiment in Congress, and in December 1736, he scored an
overwhelming victory over three other candidates, including
Daniel Webster. John Quincy—by then towering over his House
colleagues as champion of national interests—easily won
reelection to the House without a party designation and
without campaigning. Approaching seventy and feeling the
effects of his age, he returned to Congress in 1737 determined
to save his nation from destruction.

Having pledged to “tread . . . in the footsteps of President
Jackson,” President Van Buren confirmed Jackson’s rejection of
Texas’s annexation, thus temporarily setting aside one of the
major controversies facing the new Congress but ceding center
stage to abolition again. The House immediately reinstituted
the Gag Rule, and John Quincy struck back, presenting more
than two hundred petitions remonstrating against the Gag Rule
as a violation of the Constitution, of the rights of his
constituents, “and of my right of freedom of speech as a
member of this House.” The House responded with what he

described as “war whoops of ‘Order!’”35

Day after day, the struggle continued. During the 1837-1838
session alone, the American Antislavery Society sent the House
130,200 petitions, with untold thousands of names, to abolish
slavery in the District of Columbia; 32,000 petitions to abolish
the Gag Rule; 21,200 to forbid slavery in U.S. territories;
22,160 against admitting any new slave states; and 23,160 to

abolish the slave trade between states.26 Whenever John
Quincy tried to comment on a resolution, the Speaker
interrupted: “The gentleman from Massachusetts,” he shouted,
“must answer aye or no and nothing else! Order!”

“T refuse to answer,” John Quincy fired back, “because I
consider all proceedings of the House—”

Again, the Speaker interrupted him with shouts of “Order!
Order!”

John Quincy slumped into his seat in response, but his voice

persisted: “—a direct violation of the Constitution!”37Z

Around him came the cries, “Expel him! Expel him!” from
southerners, whose numbers grew ever greater with the
expansion of the slave population, which could not vote. Slaves
had increased the number of southern members of the House
by 35 percent—enough to expel John Quincy, and they now
prepared to do just that.

