6

A Free, Independent, and Powerful Nation

When John Quincy and his bride crossed London Bridge to the
Johnson family mansion after their honeymoon, they expected
relatives, friends, and other well-wishers to greet them.
Instead, they found a mob of angry, twisted faces, screaming
for “money! my money!” During John Quincy and his new wife’s
absence, Louisa’s father’s business had collapsed. A cargo-
filled ship had sunk in mid-ocean, and one of his partners
absconded with company funds. Bankrupt and facing debtors’
prison if he remained in England, he fled to America with his
wife and children, leaving behind the angry creditors who now
blocked John Quincy and Louisa’s access to her parents’ home.

With no other recourse, Joshua Johnson’s creditors demanded
that John Quincy cover his father-in-law’s debts. The press
accused Louisa and her father of having lured the unsuspecting
American into marrying a penniless woman to bilk him of his
money. “It is forty-three years since I became a wife,” Louisa
would recall years later, “and yet the rankling sore is not

healed which then broke upon my heart of hearts.”

Her father’s bankruptcy erased the £500 dowry he had
pledged to John Quincy and, indeed, gave John Quincy the legal
right to recant his marriage vows, but he stood by his bride
even as she sank into despondency under the weight of
humiliation. As he tried to comfort her, John Quincy faced
serious difficulties of his own. Having arranged to transfer his
belongings from Lisbon to Berlin, he now learned that the
Senate had postponed voting on his appointment to the
Prussian court. Although it had unanimously approved his
appointment to Lisbon by President Washington, it balked at
approving his appointment by President Adams _ after

newspapers assailed the President for nepotism.

Noting that Washington had refused to select even the most
distant relatives for office, Boston’s Independent Chronicle
called John Quincy “the American Prince of Wales”—sent
abroad “to prosecute his studies.” The newspaper charged
that, as the first appointment of his father’s administration,
“this young man, from an obscure practitioner of the law, has
been mounted on the political ladder with an uncommon
celerity. Young John Adams’s negotiations have terminated in a
marriage with an English lady. .. . It is a happy circumstance

that he has made no other treaty.”2 And Aurora editor
Benjamin Franklin Bache, Benjamin Franklin’s grandson and
John Quincy’s former schoolmate, demanded that President
John Adams resign “before it is too late to retrieve our

deranged affairs.”3

Abigail was furious at what she called “misrepresentations”
and “billingsgate” (vulgar abuse). John Quincy reacted with
equal rage. “My old schoolfellow Bache,” he snapped, “has
become too thoroughbred a democrat to suffer any regard for
ancient friendship or any sense of generosity for an absent

enemy to suspend his scurrility.”4

Despite Abigail’s protests, Bache’s “billingsgate” had its
desired effect on the Senate, which postponed consideration of
John Quincy’s Berlin appointment three times before acceding
to the President’s wishes. John Quincy Adams, his wife Louisa,
and his brother Thomas set sail for Hamburg, on October 18,
1797, elated by the prospects of a new adventure. As they put
to sea, Louisa added to their collective joy by announcing that
she was pregnant.

On November 7, the Adamses reached Berlin’s gates, only to
be “questioned by a dapper young lieutenant who did not know
—until one of his private soldiers explained to him—who the

United States of America were.”2

By the time they reached Berlin, King Frederick William II
had died, and John Quincy had to send to Philadelphia for new
papers designating him minister plenipotentiary to the new

court of King Frederick William III]. The papers arrived just
before Christmas—as did all the furniture, baggage, and books
from Lisbon. With all their personal possessions in hand, John
Quincy, Louisa, and Thomas were, at last, able to move from
their hotel into a house of their own. A few days later, John
Quincy presented his papers at court, where the new king, his
three highest ministers, and other dignitaries received him
warmly after he demonstrated his fluency in both French and
German. Royal society embraced John Quincy and Louisa as an
American prince and princess. The pair attended royal
banquets and balls, and John Quincy spent three days as a
guest of honor at “the grand annual reviews of the troops”—a
spectacle of color, parades, and precision marching by tens of
thousands of soldiers over hundreds of acres. Always gathering
intelligence to relay to the secretary of state, he noted, “There
were five regiments of cavalry of twelve hundred men each and
ten regiments of infantry of two thousand men each. The troops
are in admirable condition and exhibit a very fine

appearance.”©

With an elegant house—and expense account—John Quincy
and Louisa opened their doors to European society and looked
forward to a festive Christmas, when tragedy struck. Louisa
miscarried—not once, but twice in succession over the next six
months. “For ten days,” he wrote to his father, “I could scarcely

leave her bedside for a moment.”Z

Her miscarriages left her so pale that the queen urged her to
use rouge on her cheeks and gave her a box, which John
Quincy insisted she must return. Only actresses and “fallen
women” wore makeup in New England, and when John Quincy
saw his wife wearing rouge as they were to leave for the ball
one evening, he told her that “unless I allowed him to wash my
face, he would not go.” Louisa said, “He took a towel, drew me

on his knee, and all my beauty was washed away. “8

Although John Quincy kissed her later and put the incident
behind him, Louisa never forgot it. Decades later, the wound
still festered, as she recalled her husband’s response. Louisa’s

pallor, however, continued to provoke “teasing about my pale
face” at court. Months after the first incident, she again
applied a touch of rouge and “walked boldly forward to meet
Mr. Adams. As soon as he saw me, he requested me to wash it
off, while I with some temper refused,” and John Quincy left
without her. Louisa went on her own to dine with friends, and
when John Quincy met her at the end of the evening, “we

returned home as good friends as ever.”2 John Quincy never
explained his uncharacteristically hurtful behavior.

Between Louisa’s illnesses, John Quincy attempted to
negotiate extending a treaty of amity and commerce with
Prussia for another ten years. Benjamin Franklin had
negotiated the original treaty, but by the time John Quincy
Adams appeared in Berlin, the status of the United States had
changed. Now a trading nation of consequence and all but out
of debt, the United States had become a valuable trading
partner, and the Prussians eagerly renewed their ties—on John
Quincy’s birthday, July 11, 1799.

The treaty renewal, however, came at just the wrong time for
both countries. The French Directory’s foreign minister,
Talleyrand, had just proclaimed what he called France’s
“natural right” to give law to the world and recover the colonial
empire of the 1750s that France had lost to Britain in the
Seven Years War. French troops swept across the Rhineland,
Switzerland, Italy, Venice, Dalmatia, and the Ionian Islands, and
French warships wreaked havoc on Anglo-American trade in
the Caribbean and on the Atlantic. By the time John Adams
assumed the presidency, the French had seized 340 American
ships—more than half the American merchant fleet, with
cargoes valued at more than $55 million. Hundreds of
American seamen languished in prison chains in Brest,
Bordeaux, and the French West Indies. Insurance rates on
American cargoes soared and threatened to price American
exports out of world markets. After France rejected Charles
Pinckney as America’s new ambassador, President Adams and
the Federalist-controlled Senate threatened war.

“France has already gone to war with us,” the President

bellowed. “She is at war with us, but we are not at war with

her.” 10

The Republican majority in the House of Representatives,
however, demanded that Adams send a mission to France to try
to heal the rupture—much as Washington had sent John Jay to
Britain three years earlier, in 1794, to heal relations with that
nation. In the fall of 1797, Adams sent Republican Elbridge
Gerry of Massachusetts and Federalists John Marshall of
Virginia and Charles Cotesworth Pinckney of South Carolina, a
cousin of Charles Pinckney. When they arrived in France, three
intermediaries told the Americans that the Directory expected
the same fealty and remunerations as “the ancient kings of
France” and that to begin negotiations they would have to pay
a tribute of $250,000 in cash to Talleyrand and arrange a loan

to the French government of $12.8 million. 1

“No!” Pinckney shouted. “Not even six pence! We are unable
to defend our commerce on the seas, but we will defend our

shores.”12 In April 1798, Marshall and Pinckney abandoned
their mission. “There is not the least hope of an

accommodation with this government,” Pinckney declared.13
Talleyrand insisted the three American envoys had “twisted the

meaning of honest conversations.”14

By then, John Quincy had been sending a stream of vital
intelligence reports to both his father and the secretary of
state, gleaned in part through clever banter with the French
minister to the Prussian court—“the citizen Caillard, whom I
had formerly known as secretary of the French legation in St.

Petersburg.” 15

“The fleet from Toulon,” he wrote in one report to the
secretary of state, “is said to have arrived in Corsica... . Its
destination is Alexandria in Egypt. . . . The Danish chargé
d’affaires told me that .. . by his last accounts from
Copenhagen, they were expecting the arrival of the Russian
fleet... . He said that... they were substantially in a state of

war with France.”!© And in another report, he warned the

secretary of state that a group of French agents masquerading
as the “friends of liberty .. . threatens the United States with a

speedy revolution.”1Z When William Vans Murray, who
replaced John Quincy in The Hague, complained that foreign
agents had deciphered his coded letters to the secretary of
state, John Quincy warned that “your private letters to the
secretary of state cannot escape the inspection of persons not
entitled to them. . . . Everything leaks out, either through
treachery or ungovernable’ curiosity or misplaced

confidence.”18

Outraged by French government conduct toward his envoys,
President Adams asked Congress for funds to strengthen
American defenses, arm merchant ships, build a navy, and
prepare for war. When Republicans insisted on proof of French
government demands for bribes, the President sent them the
dispatches he had received from Pinckney, Marshall, and Gerry,
describing their encounters with the men who had solicited
bribes but identifying them as only “X,” “Y,” and “Z.” When
Republicans scoffed at the allegations, John Quincy’s
intelligence work exposed the three mystery men as the shady
Swiss financier Jean Conrad Hottinger; another Swiss-born
banker from Hamburg, Monsieur Bellamy; and Lucien
Hauteval.

“Z, or Hauteval,” John Quincy wrote, “I knew very well when
long before the establishment of the French Republic he called
himself Monsieur le Comte d’Hauteval.”

I was present at the performance of mass after the head
of Louis XVI was cut off, at which the said Hauteval
thundered out the ‘Domine salvum fac regem’ with as
much devotion and enthusiasm as if he had been ready to
suffer martyrdom for the cause. I know not how many
millions of livres he assured us he had lost by the revolt
of the blacks in St. Domingo. He had been a member of
the colonial assembly . . . been obliged to flee the island. .
.. The next I heard of him was in Paris in 1796 when and
where he .. . had been trying to get appointed Minister

of France to the United States.12

As Federalists had hoped, the XYZ dispatches—and John
Quincy’s revelations of their identities—muffled Francophile
voices in Congress and across America. Even Abigail Adams
put aside her Anglophobia and recognized that “the olive
branch tendered to our Gallic allies ... has been rejected with
scorn. . . . Public opinion is changing here very fast, and the
people begin to see who have been their firm unshaken friends,
steady to their interests, and defenders of their rights and

liberties.”29

Abigail was prescient. The XYZ dispatches provoked a frenzy
of war fever and violent anti-French demonstrations. Mobs
attacked the home of John Quincy’s schoolmate, the fanatically
pro-French Aurora editor Benjamin Franklin Bache, and across
the nation, town after town formed militia companies to serve
the nation. More than 1,000 young men in Philadelphia
marched to the President’s house and volunteered to fight the
French. President Adams came out to address them, dressed
incongruously in full-dress military uniform complete with
sword—and a scabbard that was too long for his stature and
scraped the ground. Abigail greeted another group wearing a
flowerlike device radiating bows of black ribbon that
Federalists immediately converted into a black cockade to
symbolize their opposition to the tricolor cockade of the French
Revolution.

“Every black cockade will be another Declaration of
Independence,” wrote the editor of Boston’s Columbian
Centinel. Within days, Abigail’s black cockade had sprouted on
the hats of the President, his cabinet members, and every
“good American” man, woman, and child across the land.

“T will never send another minister to France,” President
Adams proclaimed to Congress at the end of June 1798,
“without assurances that he will be received, respected and
honored as the representative of a great, free, powerful, and

independent nation.”21
Federalists and Republicans alike held their collective breath

as they awaited the President’s request for a declaration of war
against America’s former ally. Instead, he asked Congress to
create a Department of the Navy and authorize acquisition of
twelve ships with up to twenty guns each. He asked for an
embargo on all trade with France, and once Congress
supported his requests, he ordered the navy to seize French
privateers and other raiders in or near American waters.
Congress authorized the President to call 80,000 state
militiamen to active duty, and the President appointed George
Washington commander in chief. The aging Washington
immediately named Alexander Hamilton inspector general and
second in command.

“Tam happy... to express my warm and cordial participation
in the joy which all true Americans have felt . . . by your
acceptance of the command of her armies,” John Quincy wrote
to the former President.

However much to be regretted is the occasion which has
again summoned you from your beloved retirement, there
is every reason to hope that the spirit of firmness and
dignity which your example has so powerfully contributed
to inspire and maintain will either obviate the necessity
of another struggle for our independence or once more

carry us victoriously and gloriously through it.22

To the President’s delight, construction and refitting of
American warships proceeded faster than expected, and by the
end of October, the navy had launched three frigates, armed
more than 1,000 merchant ships, and cleared American coastal
waters of French marauders. With offshore shipping protected
from French assault, the President ordered the U.S. Navy to
“sweep the West India seas” of French ships. Although the
French had captured more than eight hundred American
vessels by then, in fewer than four months after the embryonic
U.S. Navy went to sea, it had captured eighty-four French
ships. American squadrons gained control of Caribbean waters,
and on February 9, 1799, Captain Thomas Truxton’s
Constellation scored the first major victory in the quasi-war,

engaging and capturing the French navy’s big frigate
Insurgente off the island of Nevis.

America’s naval success stunned Talleyrand and the
Directory. France was already suffering from the embargo that
had closed American markets to important French exports,
such as wines, brandies, silks, linen, and porcelain, while
British ships prevented French ships from carrying sugar and
other essentials from the French Antilles back to France.
French fortunes were declining dramatically on other fronts as
well. Napoléon and his forces had invaded Egypt, and on
August 1, 1798, a week after French troops marched into
Cairo, Admiral Horatio Nelson’s British fleet surprised and
annihilated the French fleet of 55 warships and 280 transports
at Aboukir Bay, near Alexandria. The French army was trapped
in Egypt.

“The present situation of France,” John Quincy reported to
his father, “has produced a great and important change in her
conduct toward us. It is no longer an overbearing minister of
external relations [Talleyrand] who keeps three ministers

waiting five months without reception . . . attempting to dupe
and swindle them by his pimping spies. . . . No longer a self-
imagined conqueror . . . prescribing tribute as_ the

preliminaries to hearing claims for justice.”23 John Quincy told
his father that the French government now seemed determined
“to effect a reconciliation with the United States”—and with
good reason: plague had killed half the French army in Egypt,
and Napoléon had abandoned the rest of his troops and
secretly sailed away in the dead of night for France with a
handful of trusted aides. Within a year, invading English forces
would force the ill-fated French expeditionary force in Egypt to
lay down its arms and surrender. In the meantime, France
suffered a similar humiliation in Ireland when a British fleet
trapped and captured nine French warships and transport
vessels carrying a French invasion army into Donegal Bay.

As the aura of French invincibility began to dissipate, Russia
organized alliances to halt French expansion in Europe. An
Anglo-Russian army landed in Holland, while another Russian

force joined the Austrians and pushed French forces out of the
Bavarian and Italian Alps, Switzerland, and the Rhineland. In
Tuscany, Italian patriots rebelled and sent French forces
fleeing northward, while slaves in what is now Haiti staged a
massive rebellion, butchering more than 10,000 French troops,
3,000 French civilians, and the army’s commander in chief,
Napoléon’s brother-in-law. In France proper, royalists staged a
massive counterrevolution in the western and_ central
provinces. Besieged from all directions and stripped of
revenues from foreign plunder, France faced economic collapse
unless Talleyrand could restore the flow of supplies and
foodstuffs from her former ally, the United States.

Under pressure from the rest of the Directory, Talleyrand
ordered American seamen and other Americans released from
prison, reopened French ports to American ships, and ordered
an end to French attacks on American ships. He issued a
formal invitation to peace talks that conspicuously included
President Adams’s own words to Congress, pledging that
“whatever plenipotentiary the government of the United States
might send to France to put an end to the existing differences
between the two countries would be undoubtedly received with
the respect due to the representative of a free, independent,

and powerful nation.”24

Sensing a sharp increase in official European respect for the
United States, John Quincy urged his father to accept
Talleyrand’s invitation, and his father sent a new group of
peace commissioners to Paris.

With the massive retreat of French troops, central Europe
grew safe for travel, and after Louisa had recovered from still
another miscarriage, she and John Quincy left Berlin in mid-
July for a three-month vacation in the Silesian countryside, with
stops in Toplitz and Dresden along the way. John Quincy sent
his brother Thomas an astonishing forty-three pages of
beautifully written letters, which Thomas forwarded to a
Philadelphia literary weekly, Port Folio, for publication. They
later appeared in London as an elegant 387-page book titled
Letters from Silesia, by “His Excellency John Quincy Adams.”

Translated into French, they also appeared in Paris to great
acclaim. Although John Quincy’s literary ambitions centered on
poetry, he suddenly emerged as a renowned author of
magnificent prose.

When the Adamses returned to Berlin, they learned to their
astonishment that Napoléon had returned from Egypt and
landed at Saint-Raphael on the south coast of France near
present-day Cannes, setting off joyful street demonstrations in
Paris. He marched into that city a week later to the cheers of
tens of thousands, and the French army, its spirits revived by
his return, forced the Anglo-Russian forces to withdraw. A
month later, Napoléon masterminded a coup d’état that left him
in sole control of the French government. He retained
Talleyrand as foreign minister, ordering him to negotiate an
immediate peace with the United States and restore trade
relations. On September 30, 1800, the French and American
governments signed a new treaty of peace and amity that
respected American rights—and independence—under the
Neutrality Proclamation that George Washington had issued
seven years earlier.

New England Federalists, however, were furious, having
already geared up their shipbuilding facilities to build the new
navy. War had generated wealth for New Englanders for nearly
a century of perennial Anglo-French conflicts. When Secretary
of State Pickering, already at odds with the President over
other issues, added his voice to the cry for war, President
Adams dismissed him for insubordination, and Pickering
returned to New England harboring a bitterness for John
Adams that would affect the entire Adams family for years to
come—especially John Quincy. John Adams named Virginia’s
John Marshall to replace Pickering as secretary of state.

With little left to do on the diplomatic front in Berlin, John
Quincy Adams and Louisa spent much of the winter dining and
dancing at royal dinners and balls. John Quincy used his spare
moments to plunge into translations of German literature,
including the epic poem Oberon, a medieval legend about a

fairy king, and the fables of Christian Gellert.“ Free of any

tension-producing diplomatic obligations, the Adamses thrived
in the relaxed gaiety of the winter social season, and when
Louisa found herself pregnant again, she actually blossomed
for a change—eating heartily at holiday dinners and often
dancing into the morning hours at royal balls. For the first time
ever, she joined her husband on his vigorous, five-mile walks
each day. As she approached term, the king banned all traffic in
the street in front of the Adams home to ensure quiet, and the
queen sent a servant to wait on Louisa.

Until Louisa’s pregnancy, John Quincy had seldom attended
religious services, but in the winter of 1801, he added daily
Bible reading to his routine after the sudden death of a young
army officer at an otherwise joyful, turn-of-the-century New
Year’s party on December 31, 1799. The young man fell to the
floor in mid-sentence, without a final cry or gasp.

It was at first supposed he had only fainted. A surgeon
and physician were called in and every expedient
possible was used to bring him to life, in vain. I came
away ... to prevent the story from coming too abruptly to
my wife . .. and when the fact that the youth was
certainly dead had become unquestionable, the scene
that ensued was dreadful—faintings, hysteric fits,
convulsions, and raving madness marked the shock of
this calamitous accident. ... I passed the period between
the two centuries in communion with my own soul and in
prostration to the being who directs the universe, with
thanksgiving for his numerous blessings in the past

times.29

John Quincy feared the young man’s death was an omen of
worse things to come, and a few days later he learned that his
nation’s revered leader, George Washington, had died two
weeks earlier, on December 14, 1799. For once, it was Louisa
who had to calm and comfort her husband when the news
arrived.

In the days that followed, John Quincy discovered and studied
the sermons of John Tillotson, archbishop of Canterbury from

1691 to 1694 and advocate of simpler, more comprehensible
terms that eschewed obscure metaphors. A contemporary of
John Locke, he called for reconciliation between Christian
faiths and emphasized morality. John Quincy embraced
Tillotson’s thesis, reading and rereading the ten volumes of
Tillotson’s sermons for the rest of his life. As he began to
embrace religion, however, he had no idea that American
Federalists, infuriated by federal property taxes, had split
ranks and allowed Thomas Jefferson’s Democrat-Republicans to
strip his father of the American presidency.

With his former secretary of state, Boston’s Timothy
Pickering, calling for secession, New England Federalists had
turned against the President. “The five States of New-
England,” Pickering ranted, “can have nothing to fear...
[from] instituting a new .. . nation of New-England, and
leav[ing] the rest of the Continent to pursue their own imbecile
and disjointed plans, until they have .. . acquired magnanimity
and wisdom sufficient to join a confederation that may rescue

them from destruction.”2

After counting the Electoral College votes in 1800, Vice
President Thomas Jefferson and former New York senator
Aaron Burr Jr. had each won seventy-three votes, while John
Adams had garnered only sixty-five. Ironically, Adams would
have easily won reelection if Hamilton and Pickering had not
divided the Federalists, shunting sixty-four Federalist votes to
Pinckney. It was a politically fatal defeat for the President and
suicide for the Federalist Party, which would never again field a
viable candidate for national leadership.

The tie vote in the Electoral College sent the decision to the
House of Representatives, which elected Jefferson President on
the thirty-sixth ballot, on February 17, and relegated Burr to
political obscurity as vice president. In two of his last acts in
office, President John Adams named Secretary of State John
Marshall as chief justice of the Supreme Court, and to prevent
possible dismissal and humiliation of his son when the
Republicans took control of the Department of State, he
recalled John Quincy from Berlin, ending his seemingly

unobstructed rise to national leadership.

When he learned of his father’s defeat, John Quincy wrote to
console him, adding, “I hope and confidently believe that you
will be prepared to bear this event with calmness and
composure, if not with indifference; that you will not suffer it to
prey on your mind or affect your health.”

In your retirement you will have not only the consolation .
. . that you have discharged all the duties of a virtuous
citizen, but the genuine pleasure of reflecting that by the
wisdom and firmness of your administration you left...
[the] country in safe and honorable peace. ... In
resisting . . . the violence of France, you saved the honor
of the American name from disgrace. . . . By sending the
late mission you restored an honorable peace to the
nation, without tribute, without bribes, without violating

any previous engagements... . You have, therefore, given
the most decisive proof that .. . you were the man not of
27

any party but of the whole nation.<4

On March 4, Thomas Jefferson took the oath of office as
America’s third President at the first inauguration to be held in
the new, permanent federal capital of Washington City, as it
was Called at first. In his inaugural address, the new President
appealed for an end to the bitter conflict between Anglophiles
and Francophiles and between Federalists and Republicans.
“Every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle,”
Jefferson asserted. “We have called by different names
brethren of the same principle. We are all republicans; we are

all federalists.”28

In the written transcript of his address that he sent to
Congress, he purposely left the words “republicans” and
“federalists” uncapitalized. The election campaign, however,
had left John Adams too bitter to attend the inauguration, and
he never heard Jefferson’s speech. In any case, few Federalists
believed Thomas Jefferson could halt the secessionist fever
infecting the nation. The death of Washington in 1799 had left
the young republic without a strong leader to unite vastly

different, conflicting regional interests across the continent,
and Congress had become a battleground for those interests
instead of a center of collegial mediation, compromise, and
unification.

On April 12, 1801, after four miscarriages, Louisa Adams
gave birth to John Quincy’s first child. “I have this day to offer
my humble and devout thanks to almighty God for the birth ofa
son at half-past three o’clock in the afternoon,” he prayed as he

wrote in his diary.22 Three weeks later, the infant was baptized
George Washington Adams, and John Quincy prayed for “the
favor of almighty God that he may live and never prove

unworthy of [the name].”32 By then, John Quincy had received
his letter of recall, and the following day he presented it to his
friend King Frederick, then went to say farewell to Louisa’s

friend the queen. “In less than half an hour, all was over,”31

On June 17, Louisa and John Quincy Adams sailed from
Hamburg, Germany, with their infant son, and after an
uneventful Atlantic crossing, they disembarked in Philadelphia,
where brother Thomas Boylston Adams awaited with the
shocking news that their middle brother, twenty-nine-year-old
Charles, had died of alcoholism. Several days later, Louisa and
John Quincy separated for the first time since their marriage,
with John traveling northward for a reunion with his parents
and relatives, while Louisa took the baby to Washington, where
her parents had settled after fleeing London. All but penniless
when they arrived, they had turned for help to their son-in-
law’s family, and John Adams had not only loaned them money
but appointed Joshua Johnson superintendent of the Treasury
Stamp Office, drawing enormous political flak for his
generosity. By the time Louisa arrived, however, her father had
died, and the rest of the family was living in the home of one of
her married sisters.

After a joyful reunion with his family, John Quincy suddenly
found himself without prospects for a job in the public sector.
Republicans controlled government, and his mother and father
could only suggest his “applying yourself solely to your own

private affairs” by reestablishing a law practice.32

John Quincy bought a house in Boston, then traveled to
Washington for the first time to escort Louisa and baby George
back to Massachusetts. While in the capital, he dined with
Thomas Jefferson, his friend from his adolescence in Paris and
now third President of the United States. When he took office,
Jefferson promptly fired most of his predecessor’s appointees,
including Joshua Johnson. Jefferson apologized, saying he had
not known that Johnson was John Quincy’s father-in-law.

After meeting with the President, John Quincy took Louisa to
Mount Vernon to visit Martha Washington and show her the
baby boy who had joined legions of newborn American boys
bearing her husband’s name.

The Adamses arrived in Massachusetts in late November in
time for Louisa’s formal induction into the huge Adams clan at
her first Thanksgiving in America. After settling in their home
in Boston, John Quincy set up his embryonic law practice and
soon found it as boring as he had on his first try a decade
earlier. Boston, however, reeked of politics, and the scent
quickly lured him from his office—to the firehouse, for example,
to become a volunteer fireman and to the _ influential
congregation of the Old Brick Meeting House, where he
purchased a pew. He also joined organizations that generated
speaking opportunities before audiences of prominent
Bostonians.

In April 1802, he won election to the state senate on the
Federalist ticket and started two years of what he called “the
novitiate of my legislative labors.” He spent most of his time
tilting at political windmills—as he would the rest of his life. In
one sortie, he tried unsuccessfully to strip the legislature of its
control over the judiciary; in another he tried just as
unsuccessfully to block legislators from using public funds to
underwrite a new bank “whose shares were reserved to...

members of the legislature.” 33 About his futile political
battles, he wrote,

I was not able either to effect much good or to prevent

much evil. I attempted some reforms and aspired to
check some abuses, I regret to say, with little success. I
[lacked] experience, and I discovered the danger of
opposing and exposing corruption. . . . The mammon of

unrighteousness was too strongly befriended.34

Because Federalists often shared the same beds of corruption
with opposition Republicans, they soon found John Quincy’s
campaigns against corruption as much a threat to their own
political health as it was for their political foes. “A politician in
this country must be a man of a party,” he lamented. “I would
fain be the man of my whole country.” Then, with a malicious
grin, he added, “I have strong temptation and have great

provocation to plunge into political controversy.”32

At the time, each state legislature elected two of its own
members to the U.S. Senate. To remove John Quincy from its
midst without alienating powerful Adams family supporters in
Boston, the Massachusetts legislature pretended to honor John
Quincy by electing him to the U.S. Senate and sending him off
to Washington in the hope that it would not hear from him
again for at least six years. John Quincy, however, was about to
shock the Massachusetts legislature and the nation’s entire
political establishment with what became a _ courageous,
lifelong crusade against injustice.

