12

The End of the Beginning

Although President James Monroe believed John Quincy was
the most qualified candidate for the presidency, he remained
silent. “He thought it incumbent on him to have nothing to do
with party politics,” explained Egbert R. Watson, Monroe’s
private secretary. Watson said Monroe considered it “beneath
the dignity” of an outgoing President and “unjust to the people
. . . to throw the weight of his name and character on either

side of any contest.”

Having no organizational structure, political parties held no
nominating conventions, leaving it to state legislatures to
nominate presidential candidates—so-called favorite sons. To
find qualified candidates, however, states often had to adopt
sons of other states. The Tennessee legislature nominated
Carolina-born Andrew Jackson, while Kentucky nominated
Virginia-born Henry Clay. The Massachusetts legislature stood
alone in nominating a true native son, John Quincy Adams. A
group of rogue Republicans in Congress ignored the Georgia
legislature and nominated that state’s William H. Crawford,
while John C. Calhoun of South Carolina snubbed his state
legislature and nominated himself. With little national support,
however, Calhoun withdrew from the presidential race and ran
for vice president—a post he knew no one else would seek. To
ensure his securing the office, he ran on both the Adams and
Jackson tickets.

Secretary of War John C. Calhoun, of South Carolina,
recognized he lacked the support to contend for the presidency
and ran for vice president instead. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

In September 1823, Crawford suffered a paralytic stroke,
leaving Adams, Jackson, and Clay as the only active
presidential contenders. Adams was the clear early favorite.

By the end of 1823, however, Andrew Jackson had made
enough inroads in the Northeast to threaten John Quincy’s lead
in the presidential race. Surprisingly, John Quincy asked Louisa
to throw a ball to honor the popular western candidate.
Privately, John Quincy called Jackson “a barbarian and savage

who could scarcely spell his own name,”2 and he feared a
Jackson presidency as a danger to the nation. The only way he
saw to block such an outcome was to win the presidency
himself and relegate Jackson to political impotence as vice
president. Louisa’s ball was to serve as an opportunity to invite

Jackson to be his running mate—a partnership that would
ensure John Quincy the support of the many Jackson followers
in the East and a huge bloc of Jacksonians in the West, while
leaving Jackson in the political doldrums. Although the general
was too skilled a leader not to suspect John Quincy’s motives,
he nonetheless accepted, and Louisa’s ball proved one of the
most brilliant, most memorable social events in capital history.

More than 1,000 guests—bejeweled ladies in flowing gowns,
men in smart suits and uniforms—poured into Louisa’s
sparkling mansion. They dined, drank, and danced until early
morning, paying homage to what seemed like the ideal political
union between the brilliant statesman from Boston and the
heroic soldier and general from Tennessee. Anticipating the
huge turnout, John Quincy had the foresight to order pillars
wedged under the floor to add support to the second-floor
ballroom.

“The floor of the ballroom was chalked with spread-eagles,
flags, and the motto ‘Welcome to the hero of New Orleans,’”
according to John Quincy’s niece. “The pillars were festooned
with laurel and wintergreen, while wreathings of evergreens
and roses interspersed with small, variegated lamps, with a
lustre in the center.” Jackson stood next to Louisa, with guests
entering in pairs and bowing.

Officers of the army and navy and the diplomatic corps
appeared in regimentals and regalia, while plain citizens
disported themselves in pumps, silk stockings, ruffled
cravats . . . with gold buckles and a big seal of topaz or
carnelian, regulation frock coats of green or claret
colored cloth . . . gilded buttons, and Hessian top-boots
with gold tassels... .

In striking contrast with the diplomatic corps . . . were
gentlemen and representatives from the Far West, who
had not lost the free stride of the forest and the prairie or
its freedom of speech and manner. No more remarkable
was the sight of Pushmataha, the “Eagle of the
Choctaws” .. . than that of the woodsman and Indian
fighter David Crockett . . . besides such fellow

representatives from Tennessee as James K. Polk and
John Bell.3

With all of Washington society in or around the Adamses’ F
Street mansion, some wag with a poetic bent created lines that
every one in the capital sang in unison:

Wend your way with the world tonight.
Sixty gray and giddy twenty,

Flirts that court and prudes that slight,
State coquettes and spinsters plenty,
Belles and matrons, maids and madames,

All are gone to Mrs. Adams.

The poet went on to incorporate names of the Washington
elite in subsequent verses, all of which ended,

Belles and matrons, maids and madames,
All are gone to Mrs. Adams.

The ball was indeed a spectacle and a lasting social triumph
for Louisa, if not for John Quincy.

Andrew Jackson did nothing to unsettle the joy of Louisa’s
extravaganza—or to dispel the notion of an Adams-Jackson
political alliance. The hero of New Orleans even raised his
glass and delivered a warm and gracious toast to his hostess
and left all the guests convinced that he and John Quincy had
formed the most perfect political tandem since the Washington-
Adams ticket of 1789.

Jackson, however, soon dispelled the notion and announced
his intention to seek the presidency himself. Within days, he,
Calhoun, Clay, and Crawford launched a bitter campaign of
charges and countercharges about each other’s views on
slavery, banking, tariffs, and other issues, and although John
Quincy tried to remain above the fray, they dragged him into it.
“Every liar and calumniator in the country,” John Quincy
complained, “was at work day and night to destroy my
character... run down my reputation .. . defame and disgrace

me.”2

Andrew Jackson of Tennessee, the hero of the Battle of New
Orleans in the War of 1812, refused John Quincy Adams’s
invitation to be his running mate in the 1824 presidential
election. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

By midsummer, Jackson’s status as the hero of New Orleans
made him the popular front-runner among presidential
candidates, and an atmosphere of gloom engulfed the house on
F Street when both Louisa and John Quincy suddenly
abandoned the campaign. Physically and emotionally exhausted
by then, Louisa fell victim to a debilitating skin condition called
erysipelas, or St. Anthony’s Fire—a strep infection that left her
feverish, with headaches and burning, gangrenous skin
inflammations. Doctors sent her to bathe in mineral waters at a

Pennsylvania spa. John Quincy, meanwhile, left for
Massachusetts after receiving word that his father was failing.
To make matters worse, he was unable to elicit any information
from his son George, who was studying law at Daniel Webster’s
Boston office and was responsible for overseeing family affairs.
When John Quincy reached Quincy, he found his father
unattended—crippled by arthritis and nearly blind. Adding to
his shock, his son George Washington was drunk and
unconscious. Like many of his forebears, he had started
drinking in his idle time and fell prey to chronic alcoholism.
Even worse, he turned to gambling to pay for his habit and fell
deeply in debt.

George Washington Adams, firstborn son of John Quincy and
Louisa Catherine Adams, graduated from Harvard and
practiced law in Boston before succumbing to alcoholism.
(NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE, ADAMS NATIONAL
HISTORICAL PARK)

 

Helpless to rein in the sins of his son, John Quincy tended to
his father, arranged for permanent nursing care, and returned
to Washington, deeply discouraged and resigned to putting
State Department affairs in good order for his successor while
awaiting what he believed would be his inevitable loss in the
presidential election. In anticipation of defeat, John Quincy had
kept alert for a business opportunity in the private sector to
occupy his time after he left the White House. In July 1823,
Louisa’s fast-talking cousin George Johnson sold John Quincy
what he said was a stable, profitable local flour business,
Columbian Mills, for $32,000. Within weeks, John Quincy
discovered that Columbian Mills had been operating at a loss.
Worse, Johnson had not only doctored the books but disguised
structural damage at the plant, and John Quincy found he
would have to invest an additional $12,000 to restore the
building and replace or repair aging machinery.

As his new business faced financial collapse, John Quincy’s
political life seemed destined for the same fate. Andrew
Jackson won far more popular votes than his rivals—just under
153,000, compared with 114,000 for John Quincy and about
47,000 each for Clay and Crawford. None of the candidates had
a majority of Electoral College votes, however, with Jackson
winning ninety-nine; John Quincy, eighty-four; Crawford, forty-
one; and Clay, thirty-seven. Under the Constitution, the House
of Representatives had to decide the election, with each state
casting one vote under a unit rule.

By then, however, the states had ratified the Twelfth
Amendment to the Constitution limiting the number of
presidential candidates in a House runoff to three. Although
Clay had more popular votes than Crawford, they came from
states with fewer Electoral College votes and forced Clay out of
the race. He nonetheless retained enough political influence to
throw the votes of the three states he had won to the candidate
of his choice. Apart from their personal dislike for each other,
Clay balked at ceding the highest-ranking civilian post to a
military man, while Jackson had never forgiven Clay for
condemning the Tennessean’s military campaign in Florida as a
usurpation of congressional war-making powers.

At 6 p.m. on January 9, 1825, Henry Clay arrived at the house
on F Street and, according to John Quincy, “spent the evening
with me in a long conversation.”

He said that the time was drawing near when the choice
must be made in the House of Representatives of a
President .. . that he had been much urged and solicited
with regard to the part in that transaction that he should
take. .. . The time had now come at which he might be
explicit in his communication with me and he had for that
purpose asked this confidential interview. He wished me
as far as I might think proper to satisfy him with regard
to some principles of great public importance, but
without any personal considerations for himself. In the
question to come before the House between General
Jackson, Mr. Crawford and myself, he had no hesitation in

saying that his preference would be for me.

Clay had good reasons for supporting John Quincy. Not only
had they worked well together at Ghent, but Clay had an
intimate knowledge of John Quincy’s thinking. Both were
fervent nationalists with a deep belief in the nation’s “manifest
destiny” and the necessity of building a federally financed
network of highways and canals. John Quincy favored Clay’s
“American System,” and Clay had always supported John
Quincy’s foreign policy of American neutrality and
noninvolvement in foreign wars. Neither wanted to see a man
as reckless and uneducated as Jackson sitting in the White
House. Although John Quincy intended to retain the entire
Monroe cabinet, if elected President he would have to name a
new secretary of state to replace himself and a secretary of war
to replace William Crawford. Even if he and Clay, as they
claimed, did not discuss filling the two posts, there was no
need for them to do so. Clay had made it clear, when he
rejected the War Department post eight years earlier, that his
lust for the presidency made the State Department post the
only cabinet position he would ever accept.

On January 24, Clay’s Kentucky delegation announced it
would cast its vote for Adams, despite express instructions
from the state legislature to vote for Jackson. Jackson had
scored an overwhelming popular victory in Kentucky’s popular
election, while John Quincy had failed to win even a single vote.
All votes had gone to Clay and Jackson. Congressional
delegates from Ohio and Missouri—the other states Clay had
won—also cast their votes for John Quincy, and on February 9,
after only one House ballot, John Quincy Adams won election as
the nation’s sixth President. In doing so, he became the first
non-Virginian to win the presidency since his father’s election
thirty years earlier in 1796. He also became the first son of a
Founding Father and President to become the nation’s chief
executive. For the first time in three decades, northerners
flocked to Washington to attend the inauguration of one of their
own.

House Speaker Henry Clay of Tennessee finished fourth in the
presidential election of 1824 and threw his votes to John
Quincy Adams, who named Clay secretary of state. (LIBRARY
OF CONGRESS)

 

“The city is thronged with strangers,” complained the
southern-born socialite Sarah Seaton, whose brother published
the National Intelligencer, “and Yankees swarm like the locusts

of Egypt in our houses, our beds, and our kneading troughs!”2
John Quincy was more enthusiastic than Mrs. Seaton and
wrote to his “dear and honored father” to tell him of “the event
of this day, upon which I can only offer you my congratulations
and ask your blessings and prayers.” He signed the letter,

“Your affectionate son.”
The ailing former President answered immediately:

I have received your letter of the 9th. Never did I feel so
much solemnity as upon this occasion. The multitude of
my thoughts and the intensity of my feelings are too
much for a mind like mine, in its ninetieth year. May the
blessing of God Almighty continue to protect you to the
end of your life, as it has heretofore protected you in so
remarkable a manner from your cradle. I offer the same
prayer for your lady and your family and am your

affectionate father, John Adams.2

Contrary to its affect on former President John Adams, John
Quincy’s victory appalled many American political leaders, who

called it “a mockery of representative government.” 10
Outraged by what he considered the “monstrous union” of Clay
and Adams, Jackson cried out, “I weep for the liberty of my
country. The rights of the people have been bartered for
promises of office. . .. The voice of the people of the West have
been disregarded, and demagogues barter them as sheep in
the shambles for their own _ views’ and__ personal

aggrandizement.”11

Few members of the Washington political scene doubted that
John Quincy had promised, tacitly or otherwise, to reward Clay
for his support, and knowing how Clay lusted for the
presidency, all assumed that John Quincy would appoint him
secretary of state, the stepladder to the presidency for more
than two decades. Rumors of “bargain & sale” swept across the
political landscape, with some Jackson supporters growling
about possible civil war and secession in the West. The mood in
the White House turned less than relaxed a few days after the
House vote, as President Monroe hosted a reception for the
President-elect. The President was chatting with a guest when
Andrew Jackson, still recovering from a debilitating illness,
thrust his grim, gaunt face through the doorway. Armed as
always with two pistols, he snapped his head from side to side

until he spotted John Quincy. As the President and other
celebrants collectively held their breath, Jackson bounded
forward, broke into a warm smile, and, hand outstretched,
offered John Quincy his congratulations.

Five days after his election victory, John Quincy announced
his decision to appoint Henry Clay as secretary of state.

“So you see,” Andrew Jackson wailed in outrage, “the Judas
of the West has closed the contract and will receive thirty
pieces of silver. His end will be the same. Was there ever
witnessed such a bare-faced corruption in any country before?”
Others agreed that John Quincy and Clay had arranged a
“corrupt bargain” that undermined the election process and
stripped voters of their chosen candidate. New York senator
Martin Van Buren, who had backed Crawford’s candidacy, was
as outraged as Jackson, warning a Kentucky congressman that,
in voting for Adams, “you sign Mr. Clay’s political death

warrant.” 12 Corrupt or not, in appointing Henry Clay secretary
of state, John Quincy had also signed his own political death
warrant as President.

On March 4, 1825, “after two successive sleepless nights, I
[John Quincy] entered upon this day with a supplication to
heaven, first, for my country, secondly for myself and for those
connected with my good name and fortunes, that the last

results of its events may be auspicious and blessed.”13 at
11:30 a.m. John Quincy rode to the Capitol in a carriage with
his friend Attorney General William Wirt. President Monroe
followed in a second carriage, with several companies of militia
escorting the two vehicles, along with thousands of citizens
who, according to custom then, escorted the President to the
inauguration before a joint session of Congress. Missing was
Louisa Catherine Adams, whose entertainments had done more
to elect John Quincy than he had done for himself. Ill in bed,
still suffering the aftereffects of her strep infection, she was
unable to face the crowds.

John Quincy began his inauguration address in fine fashion,
countering Jacksonian polemics by proclaiming, “Our political

creed is ... that the will of the people is the source, and the
happiness of the people the end of all legitimate government

upon earth.”14 Greeted with enthusiasm at first, his speech
met with ever increasing disbelief, then outright disapproval,
as he asked that “all constitutional objections . . . be removed”
for construction of interstate roads and canals and other
‘Internal improvement” by the federal government. As he went
on, it became clear that his years in the foreign service, his
scholarly pursuits, and his refusal to campaign had left him
woefully out of touch with ordinary Americans, and his
references to classical civilizations and ancient republics
perplexed almost all the members of Congress.

President John Quincy Adams proved the most ineffective
President in early American history—only to metamorphose
into one of the nation’s’s greatest congressmen as a champion
of abolition, free speech, and the right of petition. (LIBRARY
OF CONGRESS)

 

“The magnificence and splendor of their public works,” he
waxed in Demosthenic oratory, “are among the imperishable
glories of the ancient republics. The roads and aqueducts of
Rome have been the admiration of all after ages and have
survived thousands of years after all her conquests have been
swallowed up in despotism or become the spoil of barbarians.”
Although some members misunderstood his reference to
barbarians, none failed to recognize his clear intention of
assuming powers reserved to the states under the Tenth
Amendment of the Constitution.

After John Quincy’s speech, Chief Justice John Marshall, a
heroic soldier in the Revolutionary War whom John Adams had
appointed to the court at the end of his administration, swore
in the new President. John Quincy had spent his life training for
the presidency and now left to review “military companies
drawn up in front of the Capitol” before returning home to join

Louisa and “a crowd of visitors” for a two-hour reception.
Later, John Quincy went to a White House reception and, after
dinner at home, attended the inaugural ball. It was to be one of
the last joyous moments of his administration.

He and Louisa spent the next six weeks moving, gradually
dismantling their home on F Street and settling into the White
House, selling furniture they did not need and buying furniture
they did need, including a billiard table for John Quincy. The
move was not simple. In addition to caring for their own two
younger sons, John IJ and Charles Francis, the Adamses were
still caring for Louisa’s orphaned niece and two ill-behaved
nephews, one of whom raced right into the White House
kitchen to flirt with maids. To add to the family’s immediate
problems, the Marquis de Lafayette, his son George
Washington Lafayette, his secretary Auguste Lavasseur, and his
valet Bastien arrived at the White House late in July for a huge
banquet. The feast climaxed Lafayette’s triumphant yearlong
U.S. tour as “the nation’s guest” to commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of American independence. He had just returned
from New England, where he had said farewell to John Adams
and now came to bid John Quincy good-bye. The two had
known each other since John Quincy was a winsome boy of
fifteen living with his father at Benjamin Franklin’s residence
in Paris. To Louisa’s dismay, her husband waxed enthusiastic
and insisted that Lafayette and his entourage remain at the
White House as his personal guests for the rest of their stay in
the United States—all of August into September.

“T admire the old gentleman,” Louisa complained, “but no
admiration can stand family discomfort. We are all obliged to

turn out of our beds to make room for him and his suite.”15

After celebrating Lafayette’s birthday on the night of
September 6, John Quincy bid Lafayette an official farewell in
the peristyle of the White House. With his cabinet surrounding
him and a huge crowd of Lafayette well-wishers looking on, the
President spoke with deep emotion: “We shall always look upon
you as belonging to us... as belonging to our children after
us.”

Congress invited sixty-seven-year-old Marquis de Lafayette to
tour America as a “guest of the nation” to celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of the victory at Yorktown. President John Quincy
Adams invited Lafayette to stay at the White House during his
last weeks in America. (FROM AN ENGRAVING IN THE
CHATEAU DE VERSAILLES, REUNION DES MUSEES
NATIONAUX)

 

You are ours by more than the patriotic self-devotion with
which you flew to the aid of our fathers at the crisis of
our fate; ours by that unshaken gratitude for your
services which is a precious portion of our inheritance;
ours by that tie . . . which has linked your name for
endless ages of time with the name of Washington... .

Speaking in the name of the whole people of the United
States . . . I bid you a reluctant and affectionate

farewell.16

“God bless you, sir,” Lafayette sobbed. “God bless the
American people.” He embraced John Quincy and, with tears
streaming down his face, rushed back into the White House to
collect himself before leaving American shores for the last
time.

Lafayette’s departure ended the few weeks of civil behavior
that the French hero’s arrival had provoked among Washington
political leaders. Even Vice President Calhoun now turned on
John Quincy in a political tidal wave of outrage over what
Americans perceived as “the theft of government” and
disregard of the popular will. In designating Clay his secretary
of state, John Quincy inadvertently provoked the founding of a
new political party, with a broad popular base spanning the
West and South.

Calling themselves Democrats, the new party set out from
the first to cripple John Quincy’s administration and ensure his
departure after one term. John Quincy tried to forestall the
inevitable by offering Jackson a cabinet post as secretary of
war, but Jackson all but laughed in his face and refused even to
consider serving an administration he was determined to bring
down.

While Jackson was building a political party to support his
own presidential ambitions, John Quincy held stubbornly to his
naive dismissal of political parties as antithetical to union. Even
more naively, he refused to take advantage of patronage to put
men in office who would support him and his policies. The
result was a cabinet and government bureaucracy that, for the
most part, worked to undermine both his policies and his
chances of winning a second term.

As Jackson and his supporters filled the press with charges
headlined “Corrupt Bargain,” John Quincy reacted scornfully,
calling the Democratic Party a “conspiracy” against national
unity. Henry Clay grew so angry at Virginia senator John

Randolph’s constant references to a “corrupt bargain” that he
challenged Randolph to a duel. Although both men emerged
unhurt, Clay managed to send a bullet through Randolph’s
sleeve.

The threat of duels notwithstanding, Jacksonians in Congress
stepped up their obstructionist tactics. When a group of newly
independent Latin American nations invited the United States
to send representatives to a conference in Panama to form a
pan-American union, Jacksonian congressmen purposely
debated the qualifications of John Quincy’s appointees until the
conference had ended, leaving the American delegates with no
conference to attend.

In addition to his political humiliations in Congress, John
Quincy faced unexpected personal humiliation when he and his
valet tried rowing across the Potomac River one afternoon,
with John Quincy intending to swim back. “Before we got half
across,” he explained,

the boat had leaked itself half full and . . . there was
nothing on board to scoop up the water... . I jumped
overboard .. . and lost hold of the boat, which filled with
water and drifted away. .. . Antoine, who was naked, had
little difficulty. I had much more .. . struggling for life
and gasping for breath. ... The loose sleeves of my shirt .
. . filled with water and hung like two fifty-six-pound

weights upon my arms.1Z

The President managed to strip and swim ashore, where his
son John II pulled him from the water, while Antoine scampered
out and dressed as best he could, before running to the Adams
house across the bridge to get a carriage. “While Antoine was
gone,” the President confided to his diary, “John and I were
wading and swimming up and down on the other shore, or
sitting naked basking on the bank at the margin of the river. . .
. The carriage came and took me and Antoine home, half

dressed,”18

Although he escaped injury, the President did not escape a
torrent of ridicule, and later in the year, in October, the

Tennessee legislature heaped insult on top of ridicule by
nominating Jackson for the presidency—three years in advance
of the next presidential race in 1828. Jackson immediately
resigned his Senate seat to begin a national campaign to
unseat John Quincy Adams—sooner or later.

Rather than reinforcing his presidency, John Quincy seemed
to go out of his way to undermine it. Apparently unaware of or
unable to address the needs of a semiliterate rural population
in his speeches, he always appeared to address Harvard
scholars or their ilk, insisting that “the great object of civil
government is the improvement of the condition of those who
are parties to the social compact.”

Roads and canals .. . are among the most important
means of improvement. But moral, political and
intellectual improvement are duties assigned by the
Author of our existence. . . . Among the first .

instruments for the improvement of the condition of men
is knowledge, and to the acquisition of much of the
knowledge adapted to the wants, the comforts and
enjoyments of human life, public institutions and

seminaries of learning are essential.12

In what he considered—and what really was—a_ brilliant,
forward-looking address to advance the nation, he called on
Congress to promote “the improvement of agriculture,
commerce and manufactures, the cultivation and
encouragement of the mechanic and of the elegant arts, the
advancement of literature, and the progress of the sciences.”
Among the sciences, he cited astronomy as the most important
and called for federal construction of astronomical
observatories, or “lighthouses of the sky,” to study the heavens.
He warned that failure to do so “would be treachery to the
most sacred of trusts.” If any congressmen still supported his
program at that point, he proceeded to lose them all with one
of the most politically inept statements of his career: “While
foreign nations . . . are advancing with gigantic strides in...
public improvement, were we to slumber in indolence .. . and

proclaim to the world that we are palsied by the will of our
constituents, would it not be to... doom ourselves to perpetual
inferiority?” 22

Even his most loyal supporters misunderstood the phrase
“palsied by the will of our constituents.” North Carolina
congressman Nathaniel Macon charged that “the message of
the President seems to claim all the power to the federal

government.”21 And General Edmund Gaines, whom former
President Monroe had sent to rid Amelia Island of pirates,
predicted that “the planters, farmers and mechanics of the
country” would see the next presidential election as “a great

contest between the aristocracy and democracy of America.”22

Jackson thundered a reply that devastated John Quincy, who
seemed unaware of the implications of what he had written and
said. “When I view . . . the declaration that it would be criminal
for the agents of our government to be palsied by the will of
their constituents, I shudder for the consequence. . . . The voice
of the people... must be heard. Instead of building lighthouses
in the skies, establishing national universities, and making
explorations round the globe... . pay the national debt... then
apportion the surplus revenue amongst the several states...

leaving the superintendence of education to the states.”23
While newspapers ridiculed John Quincy’s “lighthouses in the
skies,” Jackson addressed the needs and concerns of ordinary
people. He called for an end to debtors’ prisons, citing a blind
man in a Massachusetts prison for a debt of $6 and a Rhode
Island woman behind bars for a debt of sixty-eight cents. There
were five times as many debtors as criminals in prisons, most
of them indigent, with debts of less than $50, and forced to pay

for their food in jail—or starve.4 Jackson also called for reform
of bankruptcy laws to prevent employers from declaring
bankruptcy to avoid paying wages.

Although many of his proposals were two centuries ahead of
their time, John Quincy was out of touch with his America. In
what was clearly a clash of cultures—indeed, a clash of
generations—John Quincy saw man in general, and the

American man in particular, as having unlimited talents,
restrained only by lack of educational opportunities that he
believed the federal government could and should provide. In
fact, Americans were largely a society of small landowners and
laborers, tilling the soil, accepting their lot as all but
predestined, and largely intent on meeting their physical rather
than any perceived intellectual needs. The average American
man yearned not to attend school or college but to own a plot
of land—to work its soil, to plant and harvest enough to feed
himself and his family, and to sell any surplus at market. John
Quincy’s proposals were so alien to American thinking of his
time that his programs—along with his presidency—met with
nothing but ridicule and rejection, his chance for leadership
spent, his dream of advancing the nation, culturally and
economically, shattered.

Depressed, he moped about the White House, lost weight
noticeably, and reduced his presidential routine to early-
morning Bible reading, a daily walk or swim in the Potomac,
dinner with Louisa and the family, then an evening chat or a
game of billiards. In the course of the day, he kept up with
newspapers, signed letters, and received occasional visitors,
but grew so moody he stopped writing in his diary, unable to
understand why and how he had failed to make his countrymen
understand what he was trying to do for them and the nation.
His depression made Louisa’s life miserable.

“There is something in this great, unsocial house which
depresses my spirits beyond expression,” she complained in
her diary. Evidently weary of the burdens of married life, she
grumbled that a husband expected his wife to “cook dinner,
wash his clothes, gratify his sexual appetites,” and then “thank
him and love him for permission to drudge through life at the

mercy of his caprices.”24 She and her husband grew strangely
distant, and when he traveled to Quincy for his usual summer
vacation, Louisa went off on her own, up the Hudson Valley and
then to New Hampshire. Their estrangement would last for the
rest of their stay in the White House, although she appeared at
family dinners and public entertainments.

The mood of the country worsened as well. Planters, farmers,
craftsmen, and frontiersmen who made up the majority of
Americans were independent and self-sufficient—unwilling to
brook interference in their lives by a far-off federal
government. They developed a deep resentment for the
Harvard scholar who suggested he knew better than they what
they needed to know and what they needed to do. They wanted
less government, not more. They would read and learn what
they liked—or not. They would build their own roads if they
thought they needed any and grow and hunt what they pleased
when they pleased.

English-born First Lady Louisa Catherine Adams despised life
in the White House, saying, “There is something in this great,
unsocial house which depresses my spirits beyond expression.”
(LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

Sensing the outrage of ordinary voters, Congress blocked
every Adams proposal and brought federal government to a
halt. And still clinging to his belief that the public would
recognize merit, John Quincy refused to campaign for his
programs, refused to answer critics, refused to explain his
vision in terms the public could understand. In short, he
refused to lead or fight back—even after journalist Russell
Jarvis of the Daily Telegraph assaulted his son John II in the
rotunda of the Capitol.

Jarvis had attended a White House reception after publishing
a vicious attack on the President, and young Adams proclaimed
in a loud voice that Jarvis should have shown the propriety not
to show his face at the President’s home. Jarvis sent John II a
letter challenging him to a duel, and when John II ignored it,

Jarvis waited in the Capitol rotunda for the young man to arrive
with messages from the President for Congress. He went up to
John II, pulled his nose, then slapped his face—the standard,
public provocation to duel. Unskilled with swords or pistols,
John II faced certain death if he accepted the challenge. He
wisely walked away, and John Quincy responded with a letter of
protest to the Speaker of the House that his son had been
“waylaid and assaulted.” He demanded a congressional inquiry.

The second-born son of John Quincy and Louisa Adams, thirty-
one-year-old John Adams II. (NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE,
ADAMS NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK)

 

“Assault Within the Capitol,” ran the headline of a pro-Adams
newspaper, while Jarvis’s Telegraph called “the pulling of the

Prince’s nose ...a signal chastisement .. . of the Royal puppy.”
Congress held hearings, questioned both Jarvis and John II, and
did nothing. The President never said another word.

Politically impotent, John Quincy recognized that he would be
the first chief executive in the nation’s short history to
contribute nothing to his country. With little else to do, he
joined Louisa in breeding silkworms outside his office and
lengthened the time he spent walking, swimming, and
horseback riding each day.

The political misery that Jacksonians inflicted on John Quincy
hurt Louisa as well. Calling the White House a “dull and stately
prison,” she continually searched for ways to quash rumors
that she and her husband had imported the aristocratic
grandeur of European palaces to the executive mansion. She
opened White House doors to the public and turned her home
into a public museum that left her all but imprisoned in her
living quarters, making it “impossible,” she said, “for me to feel

at home or to fancy that I have a home anywhere.”22

In addition, she resumed the weekly receptions, or “levées,”Y
that Martha Washington, Dolley Madison, and, for a time,
Elizabeth Monroe had held. Like Elizabeth Monroe, Louisa
stood under the rotunda as visitors passed before her, one by
one, bowing or curtsying—shaking hands was forbidden—
acknowledging her welcoming nod and short greeting and
passing on to partake of refreshments. “All classes of society
mingled in the throng that crowded outside the audience
chamber and surged into the great East Room,” according to
one participant. Diplomats in powdered wigs and high-ranking
officers with medals mixed with farmers and hunters in muddy
boots and frontiersmen with jingling spurs.

John Quincy’s inability to discuss the mundane at public
functions, however, often stripped White House parties of the
mirth that had filled the mansion during the tenures of some of
his predecessors. What provoked John Quincy’s laughter—for
example, a misinterpretation he had read of Tacitus—left
others staring in disbelief without the slightest understanding

of what he was talking about. Only Louisa understood.

Going to the White House levée. First Lady Louisa Catherine
Adams hosted weekly “levées,” or open houses, for the public
to visit the presidential mansion and see the President and
First Lady. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

“Mrs. Adams, like her husband, had . . . a love of literature,”
explained one observer of the social scene of that era. “The
most scholarly woman who has presided over the White House,
she possessed the adaptability of a French woman or of an
American and could turn gracefully from her books or her
family cares to inaugurate certain much needed reforms in
official circles. By her grace, tact, and savoir faire, Mrs. Adams
did much to neutralize the effect of the President’s cold and

often forbidding manner. 26
The President, of course, had no intention of being cold or

forbidding—and, indeed, did not realize he was. He could not,
after all, alter the lines, shadows, and shape of his face. Though
his thoughts often contained a smile, it did not leak onto his
face or into his words. “I am by nature,” he said repeatedly, “a
silent animal, and my mother’s constant lesson in childhood,
that children in company should be seen and not heard,

confirmed me irrevocably in what I now deem a bad habit.”27

On July 4, 1826, the fiftieth anniversary of America’s
Declaration of Independence from Britain, John Adams died in
Quincy, Massachusetts—an hour after the death at Monticello
of his onetime vice president and longtime friend, Thomas
Jefferson. George Washington Adams was with his grandfather
when he died. John Quincy arrived with John II in time for the
funeral and burial at the local churchyard, after which he
returned to his father’s house and went into his father’s
bedroom. “That moment was inexpressibly painful,” he
moaned.

My father and my mother have departed. The charm
which has always made this house to me an abode of
enchantment is dissolved; and yet my attachment to it
and to the whole region round is stronger than I ever felt
before. I feel it is time for me to begin to set my house in
order and to prepare for the churchyard myself... . I
shall within two or three years . .. need a place of
retirement. Where else should I go? This will be a safe
and pleasant retreat, where I may pursue literary
occupations as long and as much as I can take pleasure in

them.28

His father’s death gave John Quincy more work to do than his
job as President. John Adams left a complicated will. For John
Quincy to assume sole ownership of the ninety-five-acre
property, the will required him to establish a trust for his
brother, Thomas Boylston, who lived in his father’s house with
his wife but had grown too dependent on alcohol to support
himself. Thomas’s drunken orgies so disgusted Louisa that she
refused even to visit the Quincy homestead with her husband,

and when John Quincy left to spend the summer at his
birthplace, she remained at the White House, neither writing
letters of any consequence to the other.

Meanwhile, midterm congressional elections only added to
the Jacksonian majority and further stifled John Quincy’s
efforts to serve the nation. Although the best-prepared chief
executive in American history at the time, he was the least
effective and least popular, and he did not understand why,
given his deep love for his country. “I must await my allotted

time,” he sighed. “My career is closed.”22

As the new, decidedly hostile Congress assembled in
Washington, John Quincy’s son John II provided the President
and Louisa with a bright moment by marrying Louisa’s niece
Mary Hellen in the Blue Room of the White House.

“The bride looked very handsome in white satin, orange-
blossoms, and pearls,” wrote John Quincy’s niece, who said that
she and the other three bridesmaids had “an amusing time...
arranging flowers and ribbons.” They then “passed the cake...

[and] cut slices to distribute among their friends.”30 Even the
President joined in the festivities that followed the cutting of
the cake by entering “with spirit into the mazes of the Virginia

reel.”31 after the wedding, Louisa’s nephew Thomas, who had
loafed about the White House after dropping out of Harvard,
ran off with one of the young White House maids and,
mercifully, left John Quincy with one less family member to
support.

By spring of 1828, the President’s daily activities were devoid
of consequence for the nation:

I rise generally before five—frequently before four. Write
from one to two hours in this diary. Ride about twelve
miles in two hours on horseback with my son John.
Return home about nine; breakfast; and from that time
till dinner, between five and six, afternoon, I am occupied
incessantly with visitors, business, reading letters,
dispatches, and newspapers. I spend an hour, sometimes
before and sometimes after dinner, in the garden and

nursery; an hour of drowsiness on a sofa; and two hours
of writing in the evening. Retire usually between eleven

and midnight.32

The President’s political inactivity triggered a barrage of
scurrilous attacks by Jacksonian newspapers, which took aim at
every member of John Quincy’s cabinet as well as John Quincy
himself. The attacks left Henry Clay so distraught he took a
medical leave of absence. Although John Quincy did not want to
allow his enemies to topple him from office without defending
himself, everything he tried failed. Invited to preside at a July 4
groundbreaking for the heralded Chesapeake and Ohio Canal,
a symbol of the very national improvements he espoused, he
addressed a friendly crowd of more than 2,000 spectators, then
took a gilded spade to turn the first shovel of dirt—only to feel
the shovel clang and rebound sharply, then slip from his hands
after hitting a hidden tree stump. As murmurs of
disappointment spread through onlookers, the President tried
again—and again. Finally, he did something he had never done
in public: “I threw off my coat and, resuming the spade, raised
a shovelful of the earth, at which a general shout burst forth
from the surrounding multitude, and I completed my address.”

It was the first time in months that an audience had cheered
the President, and he left elated, inviting the officers who
escorted him home to join him for drinks in the White House.
Although it was too late, John Quincy had evidently learned a
lesson about relating to the general public: “My casting off my
coat,” he wrote later, “struck the eye and fancy of the
spectators more than all the flowers of rhetoric in my

speech.”33 He was, of course, a master at interrelating with
czars, kings, counts, and courtiers, but had simply never had
the chance to befriend ordinary citizens—at home or abroad.
Although eager for the first time to enter the election fray, it
was all too new to him, and he let others do the electioneering.
They attacked Jackson and his allies viciously, with Clay
allegedly coaxing the editor of Cincinnati’s Gazette to charge
Jackson with having maintained an adulterous relationship with

his wife, Rachel, before she had divorced her first husband.
The Jacksonians fired back with equally vicious libels against
the Yankee “aristocrat” with an “English wife,” who had spent
public funds to purchase a billiard table for her husband’s
amusement in the White House.

In the end, election campaign rhetoric made little difference.
The hero of the Battle of New Orleans was simply too popular,
and the public was thoroughly convinced that the aristocratic
New Englander from Harvard had ignored the will of the
people and purchased his election by appointing Henry Clay as
secretary of state. Unlike John Quincy, Jackson had formed a
new and well-organized political party that operated at both
local and state levels and acquired consummate skills in
obtaining newspaper publicity.

As the 1828 election approached, New England textile
manufacturers set up a drumbeat of demand for higher
protective tariffs. The War of 1812 had cut off cloth imports
from England and given New England manufacturers a
monopoly. After the war, however, renewed competition from
larger, more-efficient British mills saw American markets
flooded with less costly, high-quality British cloth, and
Congress responded to complaints from New England mills by
passing protective tariffs in 1816 and again in 1824.
Agricultural interests in the South—especially cotton growers—
protested, fearing that their best customers, the British cotton
mills, would retaliate and curtail purchases of American cotton.
Ignoring such protests, other raw materials producers and
manufacturers demanded similar tariff protection—for wool,
cotton, hemp, flax, iron, distilled spirits . . . the list grew
endless—with the final bill called a “Tariff of Abomination” by
its opponents. Passed by a huge veto-proof congressional
majority, the bill left John Quincy no choice but to sign it into
law. Southern states reacted with outrage, with South
Carolina’s legislature calling the tariff unconstitutional and
blaming John Quincy for not having vetoed it. Georgia,
Mississippi, and Virginia followed suit and cost John Quincy the
entire South in the 1828 election.

When the votes were counted on December 3, Jackson had
humiliated John Quincy Adams—with 647,276 Americans voting
for Jackson and 508,064 for Adams. In the Electoral College,
Jackson captured 178 votes, more than twice John Quincy’s 83
votes. “The sun of my political life sets in the deepest gloom,”
John Quincy sighed, “but that of my country shines unclouded.”
To ease the pain of his loss, he took “a ride of an hour and a

half on horseback.”34

Louisa stepped forward to try to cheer her husband by
organizing a huge party to celebrate his return to private life.
“The defeated party ... are more smiling and gracious and
agreeable than they ever were before,” Mrs. Samuel Harrison
Smith, wife of the owner of the National Intelligencer, wrote to
her son.

At Mrs. Adams’s drawing room last week, every one
attached to the administration, as well as the members of
the cabinet, appeared with their best looks and best
dresses. Mrs. Adams never on any former occasion was
so social, attentive, and agreeable. Instead of standing in
one place, making formal courtesies, she walked through
the rooms conversing with every one in the most
animated manner. To add to the gaiety and brilliancy of
the evening the great audience chamber was lit up, the

band of music stationed there, and dancing took place.35

Shortly after the election results appeared in the
newspapers, Rachel Jackson saw the story alleging her
adulterous relationship with Andrew Jackson before she
divorced her first husband. Shocked to the core as she read,
she collapsed—a stroke, perhaps, or a heart attack. She died
several days later and was buried on Christmas Eve without
seeing her husband assume the presidency.

On March 4, 1829, Andrew Jackson was inaugurated as
seventh President of the United States. Ignoring tradition, John
Quincy refused to attend either the inauguration or the new
President’s White House reception afterwards. “I can yet
scarcely realize my situation,” he shuddered in disbelief,

saying, “posterity will scarcely believe . . . the combination of
parties and of public men against my character and reputation
such as I believe never before was exhibited against any man
since this Union existed.” He continued:

This combination against me has been formed and is now
exulting in triumph over me, for the devotion of my life
and of all the faculties of my soul to the Union and to the
improvement, physical, moral and intellectual, of my
country. The North assails me for my fidelity to the
Union; the South, for my ardent aspirations of
improvement. Yet . . . passion, prejudice, envy, and
jealousy will pass. The cause of Union and of
improvement will remain, and I have duties to it and to

my country yet to discharge.36

Although the vast majority of American voters had rejected
John Quincy and his vision for America, he refused to accept
their judgment and vowed to continue his struggle to lead them
and the nation to greatness. His only uncertainty was how to do
it.

