CHAPTER  V.BATTLES AT PEACH ORCHARD, GLENDALE AND MALVERNHILL.Company A had in its ranks men of every trade and pro-Our minister might havefession, not excepting the clergy.been a good soldier in the army of the Lord, but was not asuccess in the Army of the Potomac.At the lirst fire heI said to him, "Youscattered and could not be rallied.have been telling the Ijoys to get ready to die, but youare not in good marching order for the other shore your-" That is not it," replied Levi; "I should not haveit always made me nervous to hear a gun fired andenlisted ;I don't believe I can get used to it." As will be shown laterhe never did.self."Returning to our works we were ordered to throw upAt night cheering began ontraverses between companies.our right. An aid rode down the line and gave orders toColonel Hincks to have the regiment cheer. "What for?""I do not know," was the reply; "itsaid the colonel." Giveis orders from General McClellan to General Dana."my compliments to General Dana and say that we did ourSoon we were or-cheering in front of the line yesterday."dered to pack up and leave everything not absolutely nec-essary to carry. We were ordered into line and remainedThe next morning we found theunder arms all night.BATTLE AT PEACH OBCHABD.33retreat had begun, and, before we had recovered from oursurprise, were ordered in to support Tompkins's RhodeIsland battery, and the enemy was soon upon us.At the headquarters of the commissary department allwas confusion. A pile of hard-tack as large as FaneuilHeads of commissary whiskey barrelsHall was set on fire.were knocked in and the whiskey ran in streams.This wasalso set on fire and men were burned as they tried to drinkBlankets, clothing, stores of all kinds were destroyed,and one would think as an army we were going out of busi-ness, but such was not the case, as we had enough on ourhands to last us the next seven days.it.one.We made a stand at Peach Orchard and found that ourcorps was to cover the retreat of the army. We wereslowly driven back to Savage Station, where a battery wentinto position and we lay in the rear as its support.Onewho has never supported a battery can form no idea of thisduty, which is to lie just as snug to the ground as you canand take those shells coming from the enemy that the batteryOur position at Savage was a dangerousdoes not want.Shells were constantly bursting in our ranks and ourl)attery was being severely tested.It did not seem thatour lines could be held much longer, yet we knew that ourwagon train was crossing the bridge and we must stand ourground until they were safely over. We heard a cheer, andlooking to the left saw Meagher's Irish brigade moving for-The entire corps, forgetful of danger,ward on the run.sprang to their feet and cheered them wildly. On theywent ; grape and cannister ploughed through their ranks,but they closed up the gaps and moved on up to the mouthof the rebel batteries, whose guns were captured, and the—34NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.firing that had been so disastrous ceased.held the line until night, when our army was withdrawn.The Irish brigadeIt was the hottest day of the year.As we changed frontmany fell from sunstroke.Captain Wass was so badlyaffected that he lost his reason and never fully recovered.Lieutenant Hume was left by the roadside and was soonAt night we were stationed at thecaptured by the enemy.bridge until the last regiment was over, when we crossedand destroyed the bridge.After we had rested a few hours we were ordered back,and sunrise found us engaged with the enemy. In the after-noon the terrible battle of Glendale was fought.This wasAbout two o'clock p.m. we were ordered toJune 30.charge the enemy, who were in a belt of woods.To dothis we must charge over an open field.Faces turned paleas we looked over the ground. We grasped our musketsfirmer and waited for the order. We had kept our knap-sacks until this time, — they had become priceless treasures,filled as they were with little articles for our comfort madeby loving hands, and with letters from dear ones at home,but we threw them into a pile, and the voice of Colonel"Forward, double-quick," and weHincks was heard:Here wemoved across the field and entered the woods.met a line clothed in Union ])lue, and thinking it was the7th Michigan, of our brigade, — a regiment loved by everyofiicer and man of the 19th, — we reserved our fire, andcried, "Don't fire, boys, we are the 19th Massachusetts."A galling fire in our faces drove us back, but we promptlymoved forward again, still thinking it was the 7th MichiganAgain we wereand that they would see their mistake.repulsed, and l)elieving we were mistaken, and that the lineBATTLE AT GLENDALE.;35was composed of rebels in our uniforms, we charged with aAs they rose to receive us we saw that this time wewill.were not mistaken, as they were rebels clothed in part in ouruniforms. We had a hand-to-hand tight for a few moments,when we discovered that we were being flanked and with-drew to the edo-e of the woods.Under a terrible iire we changed front.Our brave MajorHow fell, never to rise again ; Colonel Hincks was supposedto be mortally wounded and was carried from the fieldLieut. David Lee was killed, and the ground was strewnFor a moment thewith our dead and wounded comrades.regiment was in confusion, but Captain Weymouth, assistedby Sergeant-Major Newcomb and others, rallied the men onthe colors and the line was at once reformed and our posi-Capt. Edmund Rice was in command of thetion held.regiment. He was noted for his coolness and bravery, andthe men had confidence in him.As I looked down the lineof Company A many places were vacant.Ed. Hale, VolneyP. Chase, Charles Boynton and several others were killed,while the list of wounded could not be ascertained at thatCompany A had lost men by death, but this was thetime.first time any of our number had been killed in action.Charles Boynton was one of my townsmen. He was aneccentric man and had troubled Captain Merritt by hispeculiar ideas of drill, but he was as brave and patriotica man as ever shouldered a musket. He had no patiencewith the slow movements of the army, and I have oftenheard him say that he wanted to fight every day and closeup the job. When advancing in line he would constantlyrush ahead of the company, his only desire being to get aI do not think it would be showinsj dis-shot at the rebels.36NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.respect to his memory should I relate one or two of the littledialogues between Captain Merritt and Boynton. Our regi-It was formulatedment had a peculiar drill in the manual.by Colonel Devereaux, and is nearly what is used by theAfter loading we stood with our little fingerarmy to-day.on the head of the rammer until the order was given toOne day on drill Captain Merritt lookedshoulder arms.down the line and saw Boynton with his hand by his side."Put your little finger on the head of the rammer, Boyn-"I won't do it," repliedton," sang out Captain Merritt." Because it is allBoynton.nonsense ; my gun is loaded, and do you suppose I wouldstand up in battle like a darned fool with my little finger onthe head of my rammer?No, sir, I propose to drill just asI intend to fight."" Won't do it !AVhy not? "Another day the order was, "Eight shoulder, shift arms."The proper way was to make three motions, but Boynton"Make three motions, Boynton," said Cap-did it in one."Didn't I get my gun on my shoulder astain Merritt.quick as any man in the company ? " was the reply.Cap-tain Merritt was discouraged and ordered me to punishBoynton, but I explained his peculiarities, and assured thecaptain that he would earn his thirteen dollars a month whenfighting began. He let the matter drop. Had the Unionarmy been composed entirely of men like Charles Boyntonthe war would have ended long before it did.We held our position until midnight.It was the saddestThe dead and wounded of l)oth armiesnight I ever spent.The wounded were constantly call-lay between the lines.ing on their comrades for water, and we could hear calls forMississippi, Georgia and Virginia, mingled with those forBATTLE AT MALVERN HILL.37Michigan, New York and Massachusetts.Brave men fromour regiment crawled over the field, giving water to friendAbout midnight the order was whisperedand foe alike.down the line to move.I had l)een from rio;ht to left of thecompany keeping the men awake, as we expected the order.As still as possible we crawled over the field. We had gonebut a short distance when, looking back, I saw one memberof the company had not started.Thinking he had fallen"asleep I returned, and shaking him said, " Come, come !As I drew close to him my eyes rested on the face of Jona-than Hudson, cold in death. He had been killed in the earlyevening as we lay in line and his death was not known tohis comrades near him.It was the saddest sensation I everexperienced. When we arrived at the road we found manyof our wounded.Colonel Hincks was on a stretcher, andas the ambulances were full he was carried a long distancebefore one could be found.Captain Devereaux was alsoliadly wounded and had to ])e carried. We started with thebody of Major How in a blanket as we had no stretchers,])ut being so very heavy we were forced to leave him.Without any regimental formation we began our wearymarch to Malvern Hill, where we arrived at daylight, wereat once ordered to support a battery, and witnessed one ofthe most terril^le artillery l^attles of the war.In the after-noon our })rigade was ordered to the woods and held theThe next morning, in a drenching rain,right of the army.we started for Harrison's Landing. We marched in threelines, but it was not an army, it was a mob.Artillery wasstuck in the mud, wagons were abandoned and ])urned byThe only thought of every one was to get tothe roadside.Some did not stopHarrison's Landing as soon as possible.38NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.at the landing but took boats for Washington. Amongthese was our minister, Levi. He had managed to keep outof every battle, and now deserted, joining the advanceguard in Canada.Harrison's Landing when dry was a sandy plain ; whenwe arrived it was a sea of mud.Without shelter, overcoatsor blankets we dropped in the mud, and being so exhausted,having been mthout sleep, except the little naps caught inline of battle, for seven days, we soon forgot our misery.It was two days before we could reorganize our companies.Men were coming in who we expected were killed orcaptured, but July 4 upon calling the roll, we found thatmore than half of the men who had left Massachusetts withus less than a year before had either been killed in battle,died of disease or were sick or wounded in general hospital.The death-rate at Harrison's Landing was fearful. Menwho had stood the retreat now broke down and soon died.Every hour in the day we could hear the dead march, asThe subject forcomrade after comrade was laid at rest.discussion around the camp-fire was the disaster to theNewspapers called it "an important changeUnion army.of base." We knew that some one had been outgeneralled,and although the men had confidence in General McClellan,we believed that while we had been digging and dying beforeYorktown we should have been advancing and fighting.Looking at the campaign in the most charitable light pos-sible, the fact remained that on April 4 the finest army evermustered began the advance on Eichmond ; that we hadbeen within five miles of that city, and that July 4 found thearmy on the banks of the James River, with less than halfof the number it had three months before. We were notBATTLE AT MALVEBN HILL.39disheartened. Many had expected that 1862 would see theend of the war, but it now looked as though those who werespared would see the end of their three years' enlistment.The losses in officers had been such that many promotionsFour enlisted men were promoted secondwere made.lieutenants, and I was one of the number.I was assignedto Company I, Capt. J. F. PlymjDton.By a misunder-standing between Colonel Hincks and Lieutenant-ColonelDevereaux, First Sergeant Driver and myself did not receiveour commissions until August, although we continued asacting second lieutenants, the two commissioned by recom-mendation of Colonel Hincks not being assigned to duty.It was impossible to obtain officers' uniforms, so I boughta pair of brass shoulder-straps, sewed them on my well-wornblouse, borrowed a sword of Lieutenant Mumford and wenton duty, as verdant an officer as could be found in the armyof the Potomac.About the middle of August I was ordered to report toFirst Lieut. John P. Eeynolds for special duty. We wereto take charge of the oruard of the division wao;on train thatOur duty was an impor-was ordered to Fortress Monroe.tant one. We knew we were liable to attack at any timeby guerillas, and constant vigilance was required. Weoften met small parties of mounted citizens who rode pastour train. We believed they were "taking us in," but wehad not arrived at the time when men were arrested on sus-picion, so we let them pass but kept our train well covered.We arrived at Fortress Monroe in due time, turned overthe train and reported to the regiment at Newport News,they having marched a few days after we were orderedaway.40NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.While our duty as the advance guard had been arduous,we had not suffered as much as those who marched with theThey had marched rapidly over dusty roads,regiment.under a broiling sun, and many had been sunstruck. Amongthe number was Capt. William A. Hill. He was not able tospeak above a whisper for several days, and his condition wasserious ; but his courage was good and he remained on dutyThe men having rested a day, and beingwith the regiment.now veteran soldiers, had forgotten their hardships, andwhen we arrived were nearly all in the James River huntingfor oysters.On August 24, the Ijrigade embarked on the steamship"Atlantic" for Washington, arriving at Alexandria the28th, — just one year from the day we left Massachusetts.BATTLE OF FAIRFAX COURT HOUSE.41