CHAPTER  VI.BATTLES OF FAIRFAX COURT HOUSE, FLINT HILL ANDANTIETAM.My position had changed during the past year fromcorporal in Company A to second lieutenant in Company I,and it took me some time to get accustomed to the newoffice. Up to the time I left Company A no man had beenpunished ; but the morning that I reported for duty in Com-pany I Captain Plympton had one man on a barrel andanother on knapsack drill, and I thought I had made a mis-take in not taking sparring lessons before being promoted.I found the men of Company I as good-hearted a lot asThe leaderthere was in the regiment, only a little wild.of the company was a young boy ; he was aljout seventeenyears old, and a private soldier, yet he was the one whosettled all disputes. He was well informed in regard to themovements of the army, and had ideas respecting futurecampaigns that he was ready to discuss with officers or men.Soon after I joined the company he called on me and madea little speech of welcome, saying that the l)oys were glad Ihad been assigned to the company, and assured me theywould make it pleasant for me.Such a reception was veryI was but twenty years of age and doubted mygratifying.ability to control these men, but I commanded the companyfor nearly two years, and punished but one man during the42NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.time.That boy has since become known and honored byThe friendship formedevery comrade in Massachusetts.that day for George H. Patch continued until his death, andthe memory of that light-hearted, true soldier will be pre-cious to me while life shall last.Leaving the transports at Alexandria, we first marched toChain Bridga, then to Tenallytown, Md. No one seemedto know where they wanted us. We went into camp andwaited for orders, which, when received, were to march atAt day-once for Centre ville, to reinforce General Pope.break, August 30, we crossed the bridge at Georgetown,and reached Fairfax Court House the next morning, havingmarched sixty-three miles in sixty-four successive hours.It was the hardest march we had made, — twenty-four hoursThe shoes of the menof the time it rained in torrents.were in bad condition ; many marched bare-footed, and itwas impossible for them to keep in the ranks. We didnot have a hundred men in the ranks when we reached theline of battle.At Fairfax Court House we found everything in confu-Pope's army had been defeated at the second Bullsion.Run and were in full retreat.Without time to make coffeewe were ordered in, and deployed as skirmishers to theright of the town, as it was expected the rebel cavalry wouldattack the flank. We remained in this position until thearmy had passed, when, with the 1st Minnesota, we wereThe rebel cavalry came downselected to cover the retreat.on us, and we had some sharp fighting as we fell back. AtNight had come on and weFlint Hill we made a stand.did not care to be bothered with the rebels any longer.The 1st Minnesota formed a V with two sections of Tomp-BATTLE OF FLINT HILL.43kins's Rhode Island battery at this point, the 19th support-ing the battery. On came the rebels, right into the trap weThe Minnesota boys opened fire, followed by thehad set.The 19th charged with a yell ; the rout was com-battery.plete, as all not killed or wounded turned and fled. Wehad no time to follow them, as we were quite a distancefrom the main army. When we rejoined the column ourtwo regiments were mistaken for the enemy, and fired uponby our own ranks.Assistant-Surgeon Hill was killed,Captain Russell disabled by his horse being shot, and severalmen wounded.soil.The next day we again crossed the Potomac to MarylandThe prospects were not pleasant to contemplate. Wehad done little but march in retreat the past six months. Aline officer has little chance to see what is going on outsidehis regiment, and his opinion is of little importance, but Ibelieved then, and time has only strengthened my belief,that the leading officers of the Army of the Potomac wereperfectly willing General Pope should be whipped. He hadtaken command of the Army of Virginia with a swell order :" Headquarters in the saddle, spades to the rear, muskets tothe front," and they were glad to see the conceit taken outThere is a great deal of human nature shown inof him.the world, — even in army commanders.We now took up our line of march through Maryland.We were not the only ones who had crossed the Potomac,as the rebels had already crossed and were marching north,and we must head them off" if possible.It began to look asthough they would capture Washington before we capturedRichmond. We marched through Rockville, where we hadspent our winters so pleasantly, and met many old acquaint-44NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.ances, but missed several of our gentlemen friends who, welearned, had joined the rebel army.Some of the ladies, who loved the stars and bars, jokedus on our " On to Richmond " movement, and were confi-dent the war would soon end with the south victorious.The events of the past few months had been such that wehad slio^ht s^round for an aro^ument : l)ut we assured them wewere satisfied, and all we wanted was to get General Lee onOur march through Maryland wasthis side of the river.delightful ; the farther we got into the interior the moreloyal the people l)ecame, and our welcome was cordial.We arrived at South Mountain while the battle was lieingThe 16th of September wefought, but took no part in it.reached Antietam, and formed in line of l^attle. On themorning of the 17th, with our brigade in the centre, weadvanced in three lines of battle, over walls and fences,Thethrough fields, under a terrible fire of artillery.regiment was growing nervous but did not break.ColonelHincks halted us, put us through the manual of arms, end-Having become steady, we moveding with parade rest.forward to a strip of woods, and came upon the enemyGrape and canister, shot and shell, vol-strongly posted.leys of musketry greeted us, — and our men fell as grainbefore the scythe.One-half of our ofiicers and men were either killed orwounded.Colonel Hincks was the first to fiill, again ter-Capt. George W. Batchelder was killed,ribly wounded.and the command of the regiment and companies changedAt the timefast, as one after another officer went down.we were so hotly engaged in the front we began to receivea fire from our left and rear, and discovered that we wereBATTLE OF ANTIETAM.45This wasbeing flanked, and must change front to rear.done by the 19th Massachusetts and 1st Minnesota. Wewere now under command of Colonel Devereaux, and wereordered to take a position near a stone wall. We fired aswe fell back, holding the enemy until we had reformed ourlines, when we again went in and continued fighting untildark, when we were ordered to support a battery. . Wethen had time to count the cost of the battle.ColonelHincks was reported dying, and we mourned the loss of ourCaptain Batchelder was dead. He had beenbrave leader.my tent-mate since I had been an oflicer, and had renderedme valuable assistance.Every one loved him ; he was anHaving graduated at Harvard, heideal volunteer soldier.entered the army as an enlisted man in the Salem Zouavesat the first call for men, and had worked hard to bring theregiment to the state of efiiciency which it had reached.I had not seen my brother since we had advanced in line.He was left general guide of the regiment, and his place wasAs soon as we halted I went to the company,on the left.The following day I searched thebut he was not there.hospitals, but could not find him, and on the morning of thelUth, the rebels having left our front, I went where theirlines had been and found him, with Jacob Hazen of Com-pany C and George Carleton of Company B, near an oldhaystack. He had been shot in the right side of the neck,it had cut thethe ball passing out of the left shoulder ;spinal nerve, and he could not move hand or foot.I sawat once that he could not live and had him placed in anIt was theambulance and carried to our field hospital.saddest duty of my life. We had left home together, andhad often talked of a happy reunion around the old fireside46NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEQIMENT.when the war should end. Now I must wrfte to my oldmother that one of the three who had bade her good-by in'61 would never return.This was war, terril)le war !As I was kneeling by hisside, hearing his last words, a woman's voice said, "Is heI explained to her the fact that I was inyour brother ? "command of my company and could not stay with him, butWith tears streaming-could not bear to have him die alone.down her motherly face she promised me she would notleave him, but would see him buried and would send meword w^here he w^as laid, — which promise she faithfully kept.The name of this good w^oman was Mrs. Mary Lee of Phila-She had a son in Baxter's Fire Zouaves, whodelphia, Pa.Several years ago, when Post 2,was with her that day.G. A. E., of Philadelphia, was in Boston, I saw that one ofthe old battle-flags Avas the Fire Zouaves, and was carriedby Sergeant Lee. He proved to be the son I had met thatsad day at Antietam ; a few months later I visited hismother in Philadelphia, who was working just the same forthe soldiers as she had done during the w^ar.While my brother lay wounded on the field inside therebel lines an officer of the 8th South Carolina came along,and seeing 19 on his cap asked to what regiment he l^elonged.Being informed that it was the 19th Massachusetts, he saidhe had a brother in that regiment named Daniel W. Spof-ford. My brother told him that his brother was woundedin the battle, and might be on the field. He searched forhim but did not find him, as he was able to go to the rearEeturning, he had my brotherbefore we changed front.carried to the haystack wdiere I found him, and renderedThe name of the South Carolinaall the assistance possible.BATTLE OF ANTIETAM.officer was Phineas Spoflbrd.Both brothers survived theThe Union soldier resides in Georgetown, Mass.,the rebel in South Carolina, but he often visits his nativewar.State.I also missed my boy Patch. He was last seen helping asergeant from the field. He turned up in Libljy Prison afew days later. My old company had met with other lossesFour men had deserted on the eve of battle.than death.They had taken the canteens of the company to go in searchof water. No doubt they are searching yet, as they did notreturn. Two were non-commissioned officers, and all wereintelligent men.The regiment was now commanded by Capt. H. G. O.Weymouth.Again we crossed the Potomac, and went tocamp on Boliver Heights, near Harper's Ferry. We didnot lose the battle of Antietam because we held the ground,but made the mistake of remaining inactive while the rebelswithdrew to the other side of the river, so we gainednothing.Soon after the battle we received a large numl)er ofrecruits, — the best class of men that had joined the regi-ment. Many of them had waited, hoping that the warwould be over, and their services would not be required,but seeing the disasters that had come to the army, resolvedto come and help us.Several of them were dischargedas commissioned officers, and all rendered very valuableservice.We remained at Harper's Ferry until October 30, whenwe received marching orders, and the army marched upLoudon valley.The nights were cold, and we sufferedWhile in l)ivouac near Paris or New Baltimoreseverely.48NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS EEGIMENT.two feet of snow fell, covering us as we slept.Ordersagainst foraging were very strict. We were not allowed totake hay from tlie stacks for bedding, or in any way molestThe idea of General McClellan seemedprivate property.to be to carry on the war without hurting any one's feehngs,but once in a while we broke over.One night CorjooralPhelau and Jack Robinson discovered hens at a neighbor-ing farm-house, and finding the house not guarded tookThe people were muchtheir muskets and went on duty.While Phelan entertainedpleased to be so well protected.the family Jack went on duty outside to protect the hens.Soon a squawking was heard, and Corporal Phelan graspedhis musket and rushed to reinforce Jack. They secured threegood hens, and forgot to go back to the house, but reportedto camp. When they arrived I discovered that they hadWith downcast eyesplunder, and called them before me.they told the story of their shame and begged for mercy.As an oflScer I must do my duty, and they must be jiunished.I ordered them to cook one of the three hens and deliver itto me.With sad hearts they obeyed the order.BATTLE OF FREDEBICKSBUBG.49