CHAPTER  I.THE CALL TO ARMS.At the breaking out of the war I was a resident of thequiet but patriotic town of Groveland.Sumter had l)eenfired upon and all was excitement.I could not work, andon the 18th of April, 1861, walked to Haverhill with myelder brother and Mark Kimball. • We went to the armoryof the Hale Guards, who were making active preparations tomarch, and I returned home that night resolved to go withThe next day we walked to Haverhillthem if possible.again, and I at once interviewed Captain Messer, but wasinformed that the company was more than full, so I couldnot go with it.I had said nothing to my brother or Mark of my intention,but as we were walking home I found that we all had thesame desire, — to enlist at once."We talked the matter overand concluded that as Company A of the 1st Battalion ofEifles, an old militia company located in West Newbury, andthen under arms, would soon be ordered away, we wouldThat night we walked to West Newbury (fivejoin it.miles), found the company at the armory in the town hallCompany A was one of threeand enrolled our names.that composed the 1st Battalion of Rifles, commanded byThey had been organized severalMaj. Ben. Perley Poore.2NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.years and were known as "Poore's Savages." They werearmed with Winsor rifles and sabre bayonets, the rifle andThe uniform wasbayonet weighing about fifteen pounds.dark green, trimmed with light green, and as I donned it forthe first time it was hard to tell which was the greener, thesoldier or the uniform. We had a peculiar drill.Most ofit, as I can remember, consisted of running around the townhall in single file, giving an Indian war-whoop and firing intothe corner of the hall as we ran.I was a soldier now.I did not walk the streets as I haddone, but marched, always turning "a square corner."People grasped me by the hand and congratulated me onmy courage.(I did not see where the courage came in.)The Sons of TemperancQ, of which my brother Isaac andmyself were members, presented us at a public meeting withtwo suits of underclothes and havelocks, housewives, testa-ments, etc., so that before we received our army outfit wehad enough to load a mule.We waited for orders to march, but none came, and frombeing heroes we began to be looked upon with disgust, andAs we would meetwe were the most disgusted of all.friends on the street they would say, " Is it not a]:)out time"to have another public meeting to bid you fellows good- by ?or, "You will want some more shirts before you leave."Somortified did we become that, instead of marcliing downthrough the village to drill, we sneaked away through a backstreet.The company began to get demoralized. Men were leav-ing every day, going to other States or to regiments that hadAt last we rebelled, and sent ourbeen ordered to the front.ofiiccrs to the Governor with a vote passed by the company,PRIVATE "JOHNNIE" ADAMS.April, 1861.THE CALL TO ARMS.that unless we were ordered into camp at once we wouldAfter a few days we were furnished with a largedisband.tent for the men, a wall tent for the officers and a supply ofOur camp was located on the land of one of ourrations.members, Private Sylvester, and was named " Camp Sylves-ter." We were without arms except three guns for guardCompany Aduty, as our old Winsors had l)een turned in.was officered as follows : Captain, Moses P. Stanwood ; FirstLieutenant, J. Warren Brown ; Second Lieutenant, Ben-jamin Wilson ; Third Lieutenant, Isaac H. Boyd ; FourthThe third and fourth lieuten-Lieutenant, Jones Frankle.ants were soon discharged, as army regulations only providedLieutenant Boyd went into the ranks. Lieutenantfor two.Frankle was made major of the 17th Massachusetts.Our discipline in Camp Sylvester was not as strict as itwas later in the war. We mounted one guard.After wehad been once around we concluded that the lieutenantsought to stand their share, so we put them on.One nightwe caught a calf and after the officers were asleep we turnedhim into their tent. We did many things that later wouldhave sent us to the guard-house.About the second week in July we were ordered to Lynn-field to join the 19th regiment. We were the second com-pany in camp. Company C of Rowley arriving about twoOur tents were a peculiar pattern, neitherhours before us.wall nor A, but between the two, having accommodationsfor ten men, and each tent had three windows or ventilators.For a time we were under the command of Col. LymanDyke, who also commanded the 17th regiment, located near us.At Lynnfield I was promoted to sixth corporal, and myI was one day detailed for guard, the 17thtroubles began.4NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.and 19th regiments doing guard duty together. When Iposted my relief I had one more man than posts, so I madeThe officer of the day asked me what I dida new post.I said that I put him on in rearwith the supernumerary.of the ice-house. He desired to know who gave me author-ity to create new posts, and I replied that I supposed I wasto use up my men.As soon as the guards were postedthey began to call "Corporal of the Guard." When I wentto them they wanted a drink of water.I asked the officerof the day if it was my duty to carry water to them. HeSo I toted the water pail the two hours mysaid it was.At night the men went to their quarters.relief was on.Ifound where they slept, and made arrangements to call them."I would put my head into a tent and call, " Third relief !and instead of the men coming out, a boot with an oath cameAs I could not get enough for a relief I turned outat me.the drummer and had him beat the long roll.This broughtout the officer of the day l)ut very few of the men, as theydid not know what it meant any more than I did.Collect-ing what I could we started to relieve the guard, but I soonfound that I had more than men enough, as at nearly everypost we found the musket stuck into the ground and the manmissing. When relieved in the morning I was disgustedwith being an officer, and longed for the freedom of a private.Company A went into campwith about sixty men, and every day some new man wasvoted in, as we had not given up the old militia method ofelecting our members.Skeleton companies were arriving,consisting of an officer and a few men, who were givena letter and assigned a place in line. Among the first toHis company was given thearrive was Captain Mahoney.Recruits were fast arriving.!THE CALL TO ARMS.Captain Mahoney was an energetic officer andletter E.Long before dayljreak, with hisanxious to drill his men.first sergeant, McNamara, he would turn out the recruits,and as we lay in our tents we could hear him calling, " LeftLeft !McNamara, tread on that man's heels !"It was not very long Ijefore we had the required numberof companies, the last to arrive being the Boston Tiger FireZouaves, and my story from this point will include the regi-ment as well as Company A.One day in August we saw a military man looking overthe camp. We soon learned that it was Colonel Hincks,who had just returned from three months' service with theLi a few days he was assigned to theSth Massachusetts.command of the 19th and from that moment what had been auniformed mob became a regiment of soldiers.With himcame Lieutenant-Colonel Devereaux, who had l)een captainof the Salem Zouaves, and soon after Maj. Henry J. How.One of the Salem Zouaves was assigned to each company asa drill-master, and we soon saw that our three months' drill-ing had lieen worse than useless, as we had to l)egin overagain, and it "was hard to teach old dogs new tricks;" butthe Zouaves won our respect and every man was anxious toVery soon a change took place in the linedo his best.officers, — a Zouave was commissioned in nearly every com-Company A retained Captain Stanwood, ])ut lostpany.both lieutenants, C. M. Merritt, who had been an officer inthe 8th, being made first lieutenant, and Isaac H. Boyd, whohad enlisted as a private, second lieutenant.On August 27 we were ordered to strike tents and prepareThat night, for the first time, we slept on theThe next dayground, with only the blue sky for shelter.to march.6NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BE9IMENT.Our knapsacks were slung for thewe took cars for Boston.first time and loaded with everything that it was possible tostow away.Being anxious that my " best girl " should see me in thefull garb of a warrior, I arrayed myself in heavy marchingorder and went to an ambrotype saloon to have my pictureIn an am-taken.brotype everything is reversed, so my musket is at my leftshoulder, haversack and canteen on the wrong side, — in fact,I was wrong end to in every respect.I have seen that picture since the war.Our wagon train was larger than that of an army corps inEach company had a four-horse wagon, head-active service.quarters two, quartermaster four ; I think there were twentybesides the ambulances. We arrived in Boston in the after-It was the second time I had been in the city, and asnoon.we halted on the Common, and no friend came to bid megood-by, the first feeling of homesickness came over me,and I began to realize that at last we were real soldiers andthat the enjoyments of camp life at home were fast falling tothe rear. We went to New York by the Fall River line.Ihad never been on a steamboat before and was very sick.Landing in New York, we marched up Broadway. Myknapsack weighed a ton and I was so sick that I could nothold up my head, yet dared not fall out for fear I should getlost. We were marched to a barrack and given some tliinI had already two testaments in mysoup and a testament.knapsack, but I took this, although I wished they had put alittle more money in the soup and passed the testament.Ido not remember what route we took from New York, Imtwe went part of the way by Ijoat and arrived in Philadelphiathe next morning.OUR JOUBNEY SOUTH.