CHAPTER  XV.THE ESCAPE.Frank and I had escape on the brain. We thought ofnothing else, and were constantly watching our chances.One day I passed the guard and went out to the hospital,but my feet were bare, and I was advised by a sick manI had kept my old boots,who had been out not to try it.although they were worn out, so Captain McHugh cut oft' thetops, sewed them to the bottoms, making a kind of mocca-sins, and I was ready for the road.Our old mess of three were to go together. On the after-noon of November 23 Frank and I were walking around theDirectly in front of our hut we saw three prisoners,camp.with their guards, come to the guard line and throw over thewood they had brought in.The sentinels on the beats hadbeen talking together, and, having finished, marched directlyfrom each other, leaving a space between them uncovered.The prisoners with their guards started to return to thewoods. "Now is our chance, John," said Frank, and with-out waiting for McHugh, with our hearts beating like triphammers, we passed over the dead line, and were outsidefollowing the others before the sentries faced about. Wekept with the other prisoners until we reached the woods,then pretending that we saw our party over a little hillstarted to join them, and entering a place where the busheswere thick, dropped and waited.There were several details;139THE ESCAPE.out for wood, and that was no doubt the reason why theguard did not stop us when we went to join our imaginaryThey soon marched in and passed very near us, butsquad.we were not noticed, and waited for darkness before wemoved.We had a small map of the country and knew the routewe wanted to take, but how to strike it was the question, asthe night was dark and we did not have the stars to guideus. We struck out at random and soon came to a roadthis we followed until we arrived at a plantation.Frankstood guard while I went forward to reconnoitre.I creptup to the house and was looking around the corner when anegro girl came out, and, in a way peculiar to the race, called,I spoke to her ; she turned her head," Joe ! Oh, Joe ! "screamed, and started on the run, but I followed. For aboutfive minutes we had as pretty a " go as you please " race asShe was soon reinforced by a manone could wish to see.I halted and he came to me. He said, " I knowwith a club.you ; you are a Yankee, and have escaped from the camp."I informed him that he was right, and that I wanted to bedirected to the main road." All right," he said, " I will helpyou, but the first thing you want is something to eat," and,joining the girl, went into the house and brought out meat,Frank came up, and webread and a dish of butter-milk.ate the first square meal we had seen for months. We thenformed in single file, the negro in the advance, and had gonebut a short distance when we heard voices, so we went intoIt proved to be some ofthe w^oods while he kept the road.They asked the negro who went into theHe answered, "Only some of the boys."Theywoods.called us to come out, but we did not come, so they came inour old guard.140NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.after us. We ran into the woods, but turned and came outagain into the road.We had lost our guide before we had found our road, butcontinued on until we came to a broad avenue, and takingthat walked as fast as possible for several hours, finallycoming to a steep bank at the end. We afterwards learnedthat this was an abandoned railroad. We struck across thecountry and near daylight came upon a plantation. The negroquarters were some distance from the mansion, were abouttwenty in number and located in a square. We flanked themansion and made our way cautiously to the negro quarters.Seeing a light in one of the cabins we crawled up, and look-ing through the cracks between the logs saw an old coloredwoman cooking. We rapped on the door and called," She started, asldng, " Who's thar ? " We answered" Auntie !that we were Yankees escaped from the prison. She openedthe door, looked at us, then to the right and left, and said," Come in." Going back to the fire she gave a bundle of ragsthat was lying before it a kick and out rolled a negro boy.She ordered him to tell her brother that two Yankees were atthe house, and that he must come and take care of them. Assoon as the boy had gone she invited us to eat. A hot corndodger was on the hearth and she fried us a slice of bacon.We were tired and hungry, and appreciated her kindness.We must have walked thirty miles since leaving the prison,but found we were only five miles away and in the wrongdirection.Very soon the boy returned with the brother. He waspleased to see us, shook hands and requested us to followliim. He took us to his house, which was outside the squareand better than the rest, but we remained at a safe distanceTEE ESCAPE.141until he went in and sent the children away, " because," saidhe, " children got heap of mouths, and would tell that youwere here." We entered the house, and retired with ourclothes on, in the bed just vacated by the man and wife.The plantation was owned by A. R. Taylor, and our goodHe was very intelligent, havingfriend was the driver.travelled all over the country with his master. He fullyunderstood the danger he was in, and that if we were foundin his house he would hang to the nearest tree, but he laughedat it and said, "Negroes were cheap now, and one would notbe missed." We remained in bed all day, locked in ourroom, the man and his wife going away to work. We had acold lunch, and before starting at night they made us a nicesoup.We began our journey soon after sunset.The night wasclear, the moon shining brightly.Our friend went with usto the Lexington turnpike, and giving us directions left uswith many good wishes for our success. We tramped alongOur road laywithout speaking, and made very good time.through the town of Lexington, and we intended to goaround it, but, like all other southern towns, it has no out-skirts, and before we knew it we were in its centre.Lightswere burning in several houses, and we could hear talking,but pushed on and were safely through. On the other sidewe met a negro, who gave us valuable information. WeThe country was so open that when day-walked all night.light came we could find no place to hide, and as a last resortwent into a barn, and covering ourselves with hay, were soonfast asleep ; but our slumbers were disturbed by an old manwho came in to feed the cattle, and for their fodder took ourcovering. He had two dogs that jumped upon us.142NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.It looked as though our march to freedom was ended, butwe drove away the dogs and Ijegan to talk with the old man.One of the many resolutions we had made at the beginningof our journey was that we would not ])e recaptured by anyone man. We had seen two persons brought back by oneman and did not think it appropriate. We had providedourselves with stout clubs, and it looked as though we shouldOur friend said, " I can't hear ahave a chance to use them.word," and thinking that he meant he would hear no expla-nation, we got in position to use our clubs.Frank said, "I guess he is deaf."Then we asked him bysigns if he was; he answered, "Yes." We then told himthat we were conscripts going to join General Bragg's armyFrank wore an old rebelat Augusta, and had lost our way.jacket, and it would have been hard to tell by our clothingwhat we were. He appeared satisfied, however, and put uson the road. We had gone but a short distance when weheard the barking of dogs, and knowing if the bloodhoundswere on our track it was good-by liberty, we entered a brookand travelled up stream several miles to throw them off thescent, then came out and lay in the woods until night.When it came time to resume our journey we could notmove, as we were exhausted with our long tramp of the nightbefore. We had eaten nothing since we left our coloredfriend at Taylor's plantation. We crawled out of the woods,and seeing a house, dragged ourselves to it.After waitinga while a negro came out, and we attracted his attention.He saw our helpless condition, and taking us to an old shed,made a bed on some husks and brought a quilt fi'om his houseto cover us. He then went for our supper, l)ut returned inhaste with a piece of corn-])read and the information thatTHE ESCAPE.143we must leave at once, as the rebel patrol was at the houselooking for us, having learned from the old man that we wereTired and sore, we returned to the woodsin the woods.and remained until morning.Our plan was not to travel by day, but hunger drove us.We moved along cautiously, and suddenly came upon theDogs of all shapes and sizes wel-cabins of "white trash."comed us, and a white woman came out with several childrenIt was hard to tell which was the mostclinging to her dress.afraid, the woman or we poor wanderers. We asked her ifshe could direct us to Boatride's plantation, one of the placesBen, the colored man whom we had met near Lexington, hadShe "reckoned not," but we reckoned that wementioned.could find it and moved along.This danger proved to us that it was not safe to be seenby dajdight, and we returned to the shelter of the woods.While there a negro boy came along a path, and when oppo-site to us we spoke to him.At first he was frightened, butas we stood up he came to us and said, "You are Yankees."We asked him how he knew.He said, " I can tell hj the" some rebel soldiers had told him that Yankeesblue pants ;wore blue clothes. We soon became well acquainted, and heHe kept his word, and saidpromised to bring us food.at night he would come and take us to his mother's house.Just after dark he came with another Ijoy, and we weresoon made welcome at his home.They were expectingus, and the table was set.Roast pork, sweet potatoes, hotbiscuits, butter and plenty of new milk were on the bill ofWhat a feast I To sit in a chair at a table, and eatfare.with a knife and fork like a human being ; we could hardlybelieve it was real.144NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.The family consisted of the mother, two daughters and thisThe daughters were delighted with usboy, besides a baby.and the mother named the baby for me, so (if he is alive)there is to-day in South Carolina a young man thirty-fiveyears old bearing the name of John Gregory Bishop Adams,Theybesides several others belonging to the boy's family.also said we were the handsomest men they ever saw.Well,we must have been.I had on the clothes described in aprevious chapter, was twenty-three years old, and, havingnever shaved, my face was covered with white hairs an inchFrank looked better, but did not wear his partylong.The old lady said master toldclothes on this occasion.them not to go out after dark because the Yankees wouldcatch them, but wondered what he would say to see themThey were owned by a Dr. Vose, and I should judgenow.he was a kind master. We were not anxious to leave ourgood friends, but felt that we must be on our way, so webade them good-by, and, guided by the boy, began ournight's march. He went with us about two miles and gaveus in charge of a man who travelled with us until nearlymorning, then hid us in a barn on the plantation of a Mr.Williams.The next day was Sunday, and we were on exhibition frommorning until night. We were stowed away in the loft,and our first visitor was a man with our breakfast.Afterthat a constant line of white eyes could be seen in the dark-The usual salutation was,ness as the procession filed past." Hello, boss ! how has you been ? "Then followed all sortsOne asked if we toted ambitions (meaningof questions.arms) . We told him that we had some ambitions left. Hesaid that was good, because we might have to use it.TheyTHE ESCAPE.145asked if we belonged to Mr. Grant's or Mr. Sherman's com-pany ; but while they were ignorant of many things, theywere all loyal and ready to do anything for us.They were very superstitious.We left the barn at night and ate supper in the field. Anegro guided us several miles, then gave us in charge of twoothers, who promised to remain with us until morning.With the negroes as guides we seldom travelled in the road,for they knew all the short cuts.Our new acquaintanceswere not very sharp, as they had had a hard master, butthey rejoiced that the Yankees had killed him.The face ofone looked like a skimmer, for his master had fired a charo;eComing toof shot into it.a fence, Frank and I were getting over in diflerent places,when they pulled us down, and said all must get over in oneHere we saw a manplace, because there was luck in it.crossing a field with a lantern.Calling their attention to itthey said it was not a man, but a Jack-o-lantern going to thegraveyard. When we arrived at the main road our guidesleft us, as they had never been so far from home before. Wewere glad to part with them, yet they did the best they could.Following the Pike road until daybreak, we came to aplantation that answered the description Ben had given us ofHe said that his brother Dick lived there andBoatride's.would help us. We made our way to a cabin, called up acolored man, and asked him if his name was Dick. He didn'tknow, didn't know Ben, didn't know anything that he pro-posed to tell, but at last light broke through the clouds. Wefound he knew enough, only feared to trust us. He said thatcolored people had to be very careful, as all kinds of wayswere used to trap them. He hid us in the barn.The col-ored women came in, and although they did not speak to us,.146NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.left food in abundance where we could get it. The old mas-ter came in twice, but not having been introduced we heldour peace.At night Dick came for us and took us to his house. Hehad invited his friends, and the house was full. They sang tous, and, besides giving us a nice supper, they packed a hav-ersack with bread and meat for us to take.Beino; on themain road, we thought it best not to take a guide, but foundtravelling quite difficult, as the road was lined with refugeesfleeing from Augusta, and we often had to flank them, whichmade our progress slow.Morning found us about fifteen miles from Augusta. Wehunted up a negro, and using Dick's name for reference, heput us into the second story of a barn. We climl)ed up ona plank which he removed so no one could get at us, neitherThrough the cracks of the barn we couldcould we get out.see men, single and in companies, going to join GeneralBragg's army at Augusta. The negro said that Sherman wasexpected there, and our plan was to get as near as possible,One night morewait until the city was taken, then enter.and we would be within a few miles of our destination.When it became dark our man put up the plank and wecame down. We made about ten miles that night. The set-tlements were growing thicker and the roads and woods werefull of refugees. We halted at a cabin where they were hav-The negroes were seated ining a first-class minstrel show.a circle around the fireplace and the old banjo was a-ringing.We walked into the room.The music ceased, and theythought the d — 1 had come. We explained our positionWhile they were anxious toand asked them to care for us.do so, they could not make up their minds where would be aTHE ESCAPE.147It was suggested that they hide us in the cabin.safe place.This had two rooms, but the master had locked the door ofThe partitions did not run to theone and taken the key.One of the boys climbed up and pulled up a board soroof.that we could drop down into the other room. Making a lad-der out of stools and negroes, we ascended, then dropped.We found a bed in the room, and a hole in the bottom of thedoor, made for cats to pass in and out ; this was used as adinner hole, the negroes passing rations through it. Weawoke in the morning much refreshed, but when I looked atHe was as black as a negro, and heFrank I was startled.In reaching our roombroke out laughing when he saw me.we had passed through several years' collection of soo't andhad taken some with us, and, not having a key to the bath-room, were forced to keep darh all day.The negro came at night and unlocked the door, havingThey said,obtained the key through the house servant."We are going to take you to see a white man." WeButanswered, "Oh, no ! we take no stock in white men."they replied, "He is one of you'ns. We talked with himto-day, asked him if he w^ould like to see a Yankee, and heThen we told him we had twosaid he reckoned he would.hid, and he asked us to bring you to his house." We hadthe most perfect confidence in the negroes, and followed themto a house where we found a true Union man. His name wasL. H. Packard, from Kent's Hill, Maine. He prepared sup-per and made us feel at home.Mr. Packard had lived inthe south eight years, had been married, but his wife wasdead, leaving two little girls, one five, the other seven yearsHis life had not been a happy one since the war, asof age.he was resolved not to enter the rebel army. He had worked148NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEQIMENT.in a flour-mill and in several other industries, and was nowmaking shoes for the rebels. He gave me the address of hissister in Maine, and I promised to write to her if I lived toreturn home.He could give us no information in regard to Sherman'sLike ourselves, he had expected they would come toarmy.Augusta, but they had not, and he feared they had gonetoward the sea. We remained with him several hours, andmade his heart glad by the news we brought from God'scountry. When we parted he gave us forty dollars in con-federate money, and I gave him a little badge of the 2d corps.He took us to the trundle-bed where his little girls were sleep-The name of theing.sister in Maine was Mrs. H. H. Bulen. As soon as I reachedhome I wrote to her, sending my photograph.They awoke and kissed us good-by.In the month of October, 1889, two ladies called on me atthe State House ; one was Mrs. Bulen, the other her brother'schild, the younger of the two whom I saw twenty-five yearsbefore in a trundle-bed in South Carolina. My good friendPackard died a few years ago in this State, having returnedHis daughter remembered seeingnorth soon after the war.us that night, and also remembered the corps badge whichher sister, who resides in Philadelphia, had.Our friend Packard sent one of the negroes with us asHe wasguide, armed with an old-fashioned horse pistol.apparently very brave, would march in advance of us, andsay, " I'd like to see anybody take you'ns now ;" but hearingthe least noise, would forget that he was our protector andfall back in our rear. He was the only armed guide we hadon our journey, and our experience with him was such thatwe did not care for more.THE ESCAPE.149We were in doubt what to do, as Sherman, not coming toAugusta, had forced us to change our plans, but conckidedwe had better cross the Savannah River and try to strikeOur guide turned us over to another, whohim in Georgia.advised us to remain with him until the next night, whichwe did.After supper, in company with the negro, we started forthe river. He knew all the short cuts through the swamps,also the location of creeks, and coming to one he wouldcross on a log, but we, not knowing in the darkness whereThen he would turn aroundto step next, would walk in.and say "Creek thar, boss," a fact we had already learned.In the distance we heard a strange noise, which grew louderas we walked along. We asked what it was, and wereinformed that it was the shouters ; that they were having ashouting meeting on the plantation where we were going.Arriving at the plantation, we found it a singular village.The houses were set on posts some eight feet from theground, as the river overflows in some seasons of the year.No white people were there, as it was owned by the manwho owned and lived at the place where we found Mr.Packard, and this swamp plantation was in charge of theOur friend called him out, told himdriver named Isaac.who we were, and what we wanted ; he said, " Come rightin," and turning to the meeting, of which he was in charge,said, "Meeting dismissed without prayer."All gatheredaround us. We sat up until morning, talking of the northand of freedom, — subjects they were anxious to hear about,— and they asked many intelligent questions.The past few days my feet had been bare, — my old bootsnot being able to stand the rough service required of them.150NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.'An old colored woman kept her eyes on my feet, and Ijeganto untie her shoes ; taking them oft', she came to me andsaid, "Honey, take these shoes.""Oh, no," I replied," you will not get another pair, and a cold winter is coming.""No matter if I don't," she said, "ain't you suff*ering all thisfor me, and hadn't I ought to go without shoes if they willhelp you get home ? " and she forced me to take them. Theywere rudely made, the uppers being untanned and sewedwith rawhide, while the bottoms were pegged on with home-made pegs, but they did me good service, and I wore themAnother gave meinside the Union lines three months later.a pair of socks, and, washing my bleeding feet, I was oncemore comfortable.We could find no trace of Sherman's army, and remainedwith Isaac two days. We slept in the barn, and were wellsupplied with food ; we also had plenty of peanuts, as theygrew on this plantation, and were called "ground peas." Atnight the negroes held another meeting, and at their request Iread the Bible to them. My scripture lesson was the thirdchapter of John. They asked me to pray, but I excusedI never attended a meeting where all were so ear-myself.They sang one song wherenest.all shake hands, and the words were, "My brother, ain't youmighty glad you're going to leave this sinful army," etc. Theykept time with their feet and hands, closed their eyes, andswayed from side to side as they sang.The singing was grand.The next day we decided that it was ]:»est to cross theThe rebels had cut holes in all the boats, and sunkriver.them ; but the negroes were sharp, and had taken them up,repaired them and sunk them again, so all they had to do wasturn the water out and they were as good as new.THE ESCAPE.151"VYe enibarked just as night was closing in, a negro takingThe entire inhabitants followed us to the shorethe paddle.and knelt in prayer for our success ; no cheers were given,]:)ut with hats, aprons and bandannas, they waved their fare-wells. They remained until they saw us safely landed on theGeorgia shore, and we felt that we had parted with dearfriends. Our boatman secreted his boat and guided us to theturnpike.We travelled without interruption for al)out two hours.The moon was very bright, and all was quiet save the soundof our own footsteps. We had just crossed a bridge whenwe heard horsemen approaching, so dropped by the roadside,under the shadow of a tree. We did not dare breathe as thefive rebel cavalrymen rode past. Eenewing our journey, wesoon saw a fire by the roadside, and creeping up to it saw arebel picket on duty, his three comrades sleeping by the fire.Thinking it dangerous to go on, we turned up a lane andfound a negro, who secreted us. From him we learned thatthe roads were all picketed, and that the mounted patrolswere constantly riding up and down.Danger was on everyhand, but we still had faith. We remained with the neg-rothrough the day, and at night started again ; we could nottravel in the road, as the pickets were very thick, but madeour way slowly through the w^oods.Arriving at a planta-tion, we found the negroes much excited.One of the girlsstarted for the mansion, saying she was going to tell master.We caught her and told her she must take care of us, but shewould not talk, and turned back to the house, where all thecolored people were gathered. We followed and walked in.I was the spokesman and told our story.They asked if wecame through the yard. We said we did ; they could not152NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.see how we got through, as ten rebel cavahymen were sleep-l\^ile we were talking a white womaning on the piazza.She was quite good-looking, had long, curly hair,She said, "I will" we thanked her, but said we didn't careThis pleased the negroes, as sheappeared.and her dress was clean and becoming.take care of you ;to trust a white woman.was a slave and a field-hand besides.The story she told us the next day was a sad one.Theoverseer of the plantation was a brute, but had charge of allShe was employed in the house and he desiredthe slaves.to make her his mistress, but she repelled his advances andwas severely whipped ; again he urged her, with no betterresults. He then drove her to the swamps to work, and shewas employed carrying heavy logs on her shoulders.ThisHer brother,was one of the damnable features of slavery.named Pat, was the driver.(I have several times used theword driver^ and some may not understand its meaning. Thedriver is an intelligent, faithful slave, selected by the over-seer as foreman. He turns out the slaves in the morning byblowing a horn, gives them their tasks, and has charge ofthem in the field.)She took us to his house, which wasbetter than the rest, and we slept in the room with Pat andhis wife.We were awakened in the morning by the firing of cannon,and the negroes came rushing in with the news that ShermanThe firing grew nearer and nearer, musketrywas coming.could be plainly heard, and through the cracks in the logs ofthe house we could see smoke where barns were burning.The negroes grew more and more excited and reported often." They are coming, boss, they are coming.Massa Sherman'scompany will soon be here ! They done burn old Sam Jones'sTHE ESCAPE.153barn, and they are fighting down l)y the creek ; fo' night youwill be with them."Our hearts beat hard and fast.Wheeler's rebel cavalrywere forming, and after advancing, fell back. We were surethat night would find us safe under the old flag. We con-gratulated ourselves on our good judgment, talked of thefoolishness of those who had tried to escape through themountains, when our plan was so much easier, and concludedthat of all the men who had escaped we were a little thesmartest.Night came on.The negroes said they would not crossAll night thesethe creek until after dark, and we waited.faithful negroes kept watch for us, and in the morning, withlong, sad faces, reported that "Massa Sherman had donegone down the river." We could not follow by day, butstarted quite early in the evening. We had gone but a shortdistance when we struck a company of cavalry camped onthe roadside. We entered the swamp to flank them, but itwas so dark that we lost our way, and after travelling allnight, tearing our clothes and scratching our faces and hands,we came out where we entered, and again passed the day atPat's house. We were rather discouraged, and the coloredpeople felt about as badly as we did, yet did all they couldOur friend, the white slave, made us gin-to cheer us up.gerbread and biscuit to take with us, and said many com-forting words.With a firm resolution to get through the lines we beganIt was a dark, rainy night, and we had toour journey.guess our route. We came to a place where the roadFrank was sure he knew the road we ought to take,forked.and I was just as confident that he was wrong. We scolded154NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.each other for an hour, not daring to speak above a whisper.These cat-fights occurred nearly every night, and we madeOne not in our place might think itup in the daytime.strange that we should lose our temper, but we were strainedup to the highest point, and were nervous and irritable.ItI have knownwas the same with nearly all who escajoed.two men who were fast friends who were never the sameNot so with Frank and I. Heafter they were recaptured.was such a dear, good fellow that he gave in to me nearlyevery time.Finding we were on the wrong road we struck across thecountry and came upon a nice cabin near a large house."We were listening under the window, and could hear theAs we stood there a womanhum of a spinning-wheel.opened the shutter and, as the day was just breaking, shesaw us. We entered the house and found a yellow man inbed. He said, "Go away from here." We told him whowe were, but he would do nothing for us. We had ourclubs, were in good fighting condition and holding themover him made him swear that he would not tell he had seenThe woman was friendly and gave us directions how tous.reach the creek, but we dare not take the road, fearing theThis was the firstyellow fellow would forget his promise.instance where a man with a drop of negro blood in hisveins had refused to help us. We turned into the woods,but they were so thin that we were forced to cut down smallpine trees and stick them in the ground where we lay down.It was so cold we could not sleep, and as we dare not travelthrough this open country, we kept alive by rolling over andBesides beino; cold we suflered forover on the oround.food, as we had eaten nothing since the previous day. WeTHE ESCAPE.155could endure it no longer, and late in the afternoon resumedCalling at a cabin, a negro baked the last morselour tramp.of meal he had in the house for us, and after we had eaten it,Here we found a new trouble.directed us to the creek.Kilpatrick's cavalry had burned the bridge, and we had " onewide river to cross."We made a raft out of pieces of plank, and went over allFrank was on the forward end of the raft ; as weright.reached the opposite bank he caught a grape-vine and swunghimself on shore. He left the raft and so did I, the onlydifference being that he was safe on land while I went intoHe fished me out,the water and came up under the raft.and with my clothes nearly frozen on me we continued ourArriving at an old mill we called up the miUer.journey.He let us in, but was afraid to keep us, as the rebel picketswere very near, and liable to come there at any time, so weI was too wet to lie down, so wemust keep in the woods.ran along in the edge of the woods. We saw places whereSherman's army had camped only the day before, and thefires were still smokino;.As we were running along we saw a negro coming towardsDriven by hunger, we hailed him andus on horseback.asked for food. He said he was going to mill, but wouldreturn in aljout an hour and would take us to a place wherehe could feed us.We waited until he returned, when he told us to keep himin sight and follow along in the woods ; we had gone only ashort distance when he ])egan to whoop and put his horse intoa gallop. What was up we could not make out until, look-ing towards a shanty, we saw a rebel soldier walking towardsus on crutches. He came near and said, "Come out, boys.156NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.and have a talk." We looked at each other, then at theJohnnie Reb. There were two of us with two clubs, and, sofar as we could see, only one rebel, and he a cripple ; so weThe negro came riding back, and we asked Mmcame out.what it meant. He looked frightened, but said, " I know thisman ; his father raised me. He fought, but he never wantedto fought." The rebel said it was not safe to stay there, butdesignated a place where he could meet us ; he mounted thehorse behind the negro, and we went through the woods.Arriving at the place designated, we saw our Johnniejumping and coming all sorts of gymnastic performances.We demanded an explanation ; he said, " I am as sound aman as there is in the Confederacy.I was slightly woundedat Atlanta, and was sent to guard your boys at Anderson-I saw them starved to death and swore that if everville.I could help one get away I would. Now is my chance,and I'll be dog-goned if I don't do it." He was a typicalrebel in every respect, a regular Georgia cracker ; hair long,high cheek bones, tall and slim, but he talked well andAfter the negro had turned out the horseappeared earnest.he came to us and he and the rebel talked over the situation.The trouble was what to do with us now we were with them.Johnnie suggested taking us home ; the negro said it wouldnot do, as his wife's sister would betray us ; but Enos (hisname was Enos Sapp) said the Yankees had her husband aprisoner and he reckoned she would be mighty glad if someThey talked over all the chances ofone would help him.the rebels finding us. We listened with much interest.At last Enos said, " Gentlemen, I am going to take you toit may make a row, but I am boss of my ownBeing in his hands, we could do nothing but gomy house ;ranch."THE ESCAPE.I57The house was only a short distance off.with liirn.Enoswalked on his crutches. He said if the war lasted thirtj^years he should use them until the end. When we arrivedwe found two log houses ; in one were two women and fivechildren ; the other was the servants' quarters.Poor as ourfriend was he owned slaves ; one, the man we had seen inthe woods; the other, the man's mother, a poor broken-down old woman. He introduced us to the women as twofriends of his. They sat in the corner of the fire-place smok-ing corn-cob pipes, and said very little to us, not becausethey were displeased \mi because it would require an effortto talk. We made ourselves at home.One of the womenasked me if I would have a smoke. As I had little chanceto indulge in my favorite hal)it I gladly accepted her offer.She took the pipe out of her mouth and handed it to me.That broke the ice ; we talked upon various subjects, mostlyof war.Enos's \diQ said the Yanks used them better thantheir own men, as the rebels took her best horse and theYanks left the old one.They didn't seem to know or carewhat army we belonged to.Supper was announced and wewent outside to the other house.I suppose this was theThe table was set, but there was not a wholedining hall.The old colored womanplate on it or two pieces alike.waited on the table, poured the tea and passed the food.Our host was a religious man and asked a blessing at thetable, but he had a hard time carving the pork and remarkedthat it was tough as h— .After the vesper meal we returnedThe pipes were the first thing, and as theyto the mansion.all wanted to smoke, they fixed up a new one for me.Enosthen told them who we were, and we saw indications of fearon their faces.The sister, whose husband was in a Yankee158NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.prison, asked if we knew Sam. We could not recall him,but without doubt had met him, and assured her that wher-ever Sam was, if in a Union prison he had enough to eat, agood bed and all the comforts of life, more than he wouldThey questioned us about our Yankeehave at home.They said they had heard that they wore goodwomen.clothes and had jewelry ; we told them they had been rightlyinformed, and they said, "Why, you all have no slaves ; whereOur answer was that our womendo they get them ? "worked. We told them of the mills in Lowell and Law-rence, of the shoe shops in Lynn, and other places where"Well," they said, "we would likewomen were employed.nice dresses and jewelry, but we could not work ; no womanSo those poor deluded creaturescould be a lady and work."were happy in thinking they were ladies, while they woredirty homespun dresses, ate hog and corn-bread, and smokedpipes in the chimney corner.When it came Ijedtime Frank and I were puzzled whatThe rain came down in torrents and we had been soto do.wet and cold, besides being very tired, we thought it bestto remain over night, but there were only two beds inthe room and eight people for them ; where did we comeOne of the women got up and from under one ofin?the beds brought out an old quilt and a blanket ; she saidwe could make a " shake-down " before the fire. We wereglad of that, for we had had no chance to skirmish sincewe started, and there 7vere too many of us for a bed.Thewomen went behind a curtain that was let down in frontof the beds, undressed the children, tucked two in onebed and three in the other ; the man and ^vdfe slept withtwo, the sister with three.THE ESCAPE.159Both of us could not sleep at once, so we divided the watch ;After they thought we were asleep theneither slept much.wife said to Enos, "I don't like this ; I feels sort of jubus.If my uncle knew these men were here they would hang you"Don't care a d—n," said Enos ; "I saidbefore morning."that I would help them and I shall do it ; what did they allNot a thing; I tell youdo for you when I was fighting?this is a rich man's war and a poor man's fight.I have gotmy eyes open."After that we felt safe and went to sleep.We turned out the next morning feeling much refreshed,but the rain continued to fall and we could not travel,although every hour was precious to us.Frank made the women happy. They had some old shoesthat were ripped, and being a good cobbler, he repairedthem. We said if we had some stock we would make themnew ones, and they wanted us to wait until they got theIt rained hard when night came, but we must l)e onstock.the road, and the negro was sent with us. We clasped thehand of Enos, gave him our address, and told him if we couldever be of service to him not to fail to call.I have neverheard from him since, but remember him kindly as one ofthe few rebels who gave me a kind word and treated me likea human being.army had just passed over the ground, — fences were gone,barns had been burned, there was no crowing of the cock inthe morning and the grunting hog was a thing of the past.At daylight, wet to the skin, we halted at a negro cabin. Hewelcomed us, but, like everything else, had been "cleanedout." He was old and the only one left on the plantation,Our armyall the rest having gone with "Massa Sherman."We travelled all night.Everything indicated that the;160NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.had passed the day before, and he was delighted with themsaid they had bands just like the circuses and guns that theyloaded in the morning and fired all day.After drying our clothes l^efore the fire and cooking anash-cake he took us to a Imrn across the road and covered usSherman was but ten miles away, and we feltwith husks.confident that this was our last day in the rebel lines. Weplanned to leave the road and travel through the fields.Ifthe pickets halted us, we were to run and let them fire. Webelieved that they could not hit us in the darkness, and thatthe firing would alarm our pickets, who would protect us.;THE CAPTUBE AND BETURN TO COLUMBIA.161