CHAPTER  VIII.BATTLES OF CHANCELLORSVILLE, THOROUGHFARE GAP ANDWOUNDED AT GETTYSBURG AND ORDEREDGETTYSBURG.HOME.At midnight, May 2, we were ordered to fall iu, andmarched to the banks of the Rappahannock, where a pontoonwas again being thrown across.It looked like the 11th ofDecember over again. The officers were called together andordered to select twenty-five men from the regiment, whowould volunteer for whatever duty they might be called uponto perform. One officer was to go with them, and before thewords had fully dropped from the lips of Colonel DevereauxLieut. Johnnie Ferris said, "Please let me be that officer,colonel," and he was accepted. We found it hard to gettwenty-five men because all wanted to go, and while the callwas for volunteers we had to select them.At daylight it was found that the enemy had left the city.Our volunteers crossed, and were on the other side to wel-come us when we came over. We were the first in the city,l)ut soon met General Sedgwick's division marching in fromthe left, having crossed below us. We found that Sedgwickwas to storm the heights and we were to support him. Gen-eral Hooker, with the rest of the Army of the Potomac, hadmarched up the river and engaged the enemy at Chancellors-ville, and we were to hold this city.In column by regimentsGeneral Sedgwick advanced up the hill. We saw the white64NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.flag of Massachusetts as the 7th, 10th, and, I think, the 37thadvanced. A rebel battery opened upon them but the linedid not waver, and on, on, even to the cannon's mouth theywent.The battery was silenced, captured, and its support fled.We followed close in the rear, and when some two miles fromthe city were ordered back for provost duty. We expectedCoats were brushed, brasses brightened, anda "soft snap."in every respect we " braced up." We turned in early for agood night's rest, but at nine p.m. were turned out and double-quicked to the left of the city, as our pickets at that pointAt daylight "Johnnie [reb] camehad been fired upon.marching home again," and filled the earthworks on the leftWhere they came from we could notand front of the city.tell, but they were there, and had a battery which was usedto stir us up with good results.From provost soldiers we changed to sappers and miners.Dirt flew fast as we dug trenches for our own protection, andto obstruct the passage of artillery. We had several menslightly wounded but none killed.On the morning of the 5th we fell back to our rifle pits inthe city, recrossed the river, remaining on duty until thepontoons were taken up, and then marched back to our oldcamp. We had not slept an hour since May 2, and wereI slept all night and awoke thinkingcompletely tired out.it was time for breakfast and found it was three p.m.We moved our camp to a delightful spot on the top of thehill, resumed our daily drills, and were once more underIt was very hard to get leave of absence,strict discipline.but Lieutenant Shackley made application, giving as a reasonthat he required an officer's uniform, having just been pro-BATTLE OF THOROUGHFABE GAP.G5Mose was absent ten days, andmoted, and it was granted.then returned, having purchased two pairs of stockings, alinen duster and a Ijrush ])room, but he had enjoyed his vaca-tion, and had two cents left of his two months' pay.June 16, marching orders came ; we waited until all hadmoved, then with two pieces of the 1st Rhode Island artillerytook our place in the rear. Two companies were ordered tomarch half a mile in the rear of the column, and Major Ricewas placed in conmiand of this detachment. We marchedover ground which we had travelled before. The roads wereAt times the woods onvery dusty and the sun scorching.each side were on fire, and our men suffered badly. June 20we arrived at Thoroughfare Gap, where we remained threedays, to repel an advance through the gap. On the 26th wereached Edward's Ferry, crossed the Potomac, and at noonhalted at old Camp Benton, where we had camped in 1861.What changes had taken place since we were there before !Then we were light-hearted, happy ))oys, expecting to be athome in a year at least. Now those who remained werebronzed and war-worn veterans marching back to meet theenemy on northern soil.Our old camp was a fine wheat field and nearly all tracesof our former occupancy were removed. We passed throughFrederick City to Uniontown, Md., where we arrived the30th, and were ordered on provost duty. We expected toremain here for some time, and on the morning of July 1Captain Palmer and myself were ordered to dress in our bestand make the acquaintance of the families in town, so wecould understand where the officers would be the most wel-come. We had just started on this pleasant duty when theassembly sounded. We returned and found we must march66NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.at once, and ive did march thirty-five miles, not halting untilnine o'clock at night, when we bivouacked on the field ofAll day weGettysburg, two miles from the battle-ground.had heard heavy firing and knew that a battle was beingAt daylight on the 2d we were ordered into linefought.of battle on the left of Cemetery Hill, where we remainedunder a severe artillery fire until about five p.m.We had seen the advance of the 3d corps and the warmreception they met ; we saw them falling back and the enemyLieut. Sherman Robinson and I were lying sideadvancing." Some one must go and helpby side watching the battle.At that moment a staff* officerthem, Jack," said Robinson.rode up to Colonel Devereaux, and then we heard the familiar" We are in for it," said Rob-command, " Attention, 19th !"inson, and with the 42d New York, we double-quicked to apoint where the line had broken and the rebels were advanc-I was in command of the color company,ing on our flank.had just removed the covering from the colors when a regi-ment on our left broke ; with other officers I rushed to rallythem, and was returning to my place in line when I wentI heard an officer say, " Jack is down," before I reallydown.knew that I was shot.I could not rise, and Sergeant Smith"Put him on my back.and Private Collopee came to me.Smith," said the latter, and under a terrible fire he carriedme from the field.Our lines fell back as fast as we couldgo, and I expected that Collopee would be obliged to dropme, and I should fall into the hands of the rel;)els, but hekept on and landed me in the field hospital of the 3d corps.Everything indicated that we were again defeated, but whenour men arrived at the stone wall, by unanimous consentthey turned about, and with that wild hurrah that only YankeeBATTLE OF GETTYSBURG.67soldiers can give, drove the rebels beyond our formerlines.I found myself surrounded by men wounded and dying.An assistant surgeon was in charge and I asked him to lookat my wound. He did, and said that I could not live twenty-I suggested that he stop the blood, as he mightfour hours.be mistaken, but he had no time to waste on me and wentUpon examination I found that I was wounded inalong.three places, and all were bleeding badly, but I could nottell where the bullets had entered or come out.The battle was yet raging ; men were coming in thick andfast, the last arrivals being mostly rebels.Collopee hadwaited until the surgeon said that I should die, when herushed back to the regiment with the information.In ashort time Lieut. Mose Shackley appeared before me withone of his company named Younger."Jack, old boy,they say you are going to die, and I thought you wouldlike a canteen of coffee before you passed up your check,"" What are you lying on ? " he asked, as itsaid Mose.was quite dark." and goingto a rebel who was slightly wounded but was comfortable,having a rubber blanket under and a woollen blanket overhim, he said, " There is a darned sight better man than youare, with no blanket under or over him," and captured oneMaking me as comfortable as possible, urging mefor me.to keep a stiff upper lip, he said he would like to remainwith me, but there was lots of fun at the front, and he mustI replied, " Only the ground ;return.I remained in this place until late at night, when a sur-geon came with an ambulance, and said I must be moved tothe 2d corps hospital, as this was too near the line of battle.68NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENTHaving no stretchers they placed me on a board, and loadedThis movement started my wounds bleeding again,me in.and I thought that the words of the assistant surgeon wouldprove true, but they drove me a mile I should judge, anddumped me by the road side with other wounded.I re-The day was fine, onlymained here until the next noon.very warm.All was still except an occasional picket shot.The silence was broken by one heavy gun, and the shellThen openedwent whistling over us, followed by another.the heaviest cannonading ever heard on earth.Shells })urstSolid shot ploughed up theover me, and on all sides.ground and I expected my time had come. Many of thewounded could crawl away, but I could not, and muststand it.When the shelling opened nearly all of the non-comba-tants were at the front, and they now made the best timeI lay near a gate way, wherepossible to get out of danger.they passed. Down would come a pack mule loaded withcooking utensils sufficient to start a stove and tin-ware store ;then a lot of colored servants, or a runaway horse.I wouldshout and kick ; was sure that I should be either killed byshell or trampled to death. Would beg some skedaddler toget another, and take me away. He would stop, look onme with pity and say he would, but before he could captureanother, a shell would come along, and his place be vacant.At last I saw a staff officer whom I knew riding to the front,and called to him. He heard me, drew his sword, and drovea couple of men to me, who, finding a stretcher, had mecarried to the rear of the barn, where an ambulance wasfound and I was placed in it. My first sergeant, Damon,had been lying near, and I urged that he ])e taken with me,BATTLE OF GETTYSBURG.69and my request was granted. Damon was wounded in theleg, the bone was shattered, and it was necessary that theleg should be amputated as soon as possible.We started for the rear.The driver was anxious for oursafety, and it is possible he might have thought of himself;at any rate he drove over a corn-field on the jump. Part ofthe time I was in the top of the ambulance, part on the floor.Damon and I would come together hard enough to drive thebreath out of each other ; but we were only passengers hav-ing a free ride, so we could not complain. When at last wereached our destination I expected we were both jelly, andwould have to be taken out in a spoon, but we had heldtogether, that is, I had, but Damon's leg was all broken up,and was soon amputated.They laid us on the ground on the side of the hill, near astream called Cub Run.This was the field hospital of the2d corps, Dr. Dyer, my regimental surgeon, in charge. Hesoon visited me, and found that one bullet had entered mygroin and had not come out, the other had passed throughmy right hip.I asked him what he thought of it and hesaid, "It is a bad wound, John, a very bad wound." Ofiicersof the regiment began to come in, and soon there were sevenThey told the story of the battle.of us lying side by side.Lieutenants Robinson and Donath had been killed, also manyof our bravest and best men. My company the day beforeOnly Lieutenanthad numbered fifteen, ofiicers and men.They also told me how wellRice and five men remained.our boys had fought ; that at last we had met the rebelsin an open field and had won a substantial victory.Theydescribed to me Pickett's charge. How they had come acrossthe field in three lines of battle, expecting to sweep every-)70NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.thing before them, but when they arrived at our lines theyfound our boys ready and waiting ; that the result was moreprisoners than we had men in our line, and our boys hadcaptured four rebel flags besides.revived me, and my wounds pained me less than before.It was glorious news ;itNo matter how serious the battle, there is always a humor-So it wasous side to it which an old soldier never loses.at Gettysburg. When the fire was the hottest on the centrethe battery that the 19th was supporting lost nearly all itsThe captain came to our regiment for volunteers tomen.Captain Mahoney was the first to hear theman the guns.call. Going to Company E, he said, " Volunteers are wantedto man the battery. Every man is to go of his own free willCome out here, John Dougherty, McGiveranand accord.and you Corrigan, and work those guns."LieutenantShackley jumped to his feet and said, " Come on, boys, wemust keep her a-humming," and they stood by the guns untilthe fight was over.Ben Falls, who was now a sergeant, had captured a rebelComing in with it over his shoulder an officer said,color." You will have to turn that flag in, sergeant. We must sendit to the war department at Washington.""Well," saidBen, "there are lots of them over behind the wall. Go and(I told this story several years ago at aget one ; I did."Since then I have heard it told by others, and itcamp-fire.is located and dressed up in other ways, but it is my story,and true, at that.We lay side by side until the morning of July 4, when theambulance came to take us to the station. One after anotherI said, "Save a good place for me," but waswas loaded in.informed that the orders of the surofeon were not to take me.COLOR-SERGEANT BENJ. F. FALLS,With flags of I9fh Massachusetts carried at battle of Gettysburg.BATTLE OF GETTTSBUBG.71I sent for the surgeon, who came and said that I must not bemoved for two weeks.I saw the ambulance drive away,then buried my face in the ground and cried like a baby.Other wounded were brought to fill the vacant places.Duncan Sherwood of Company A was one, so I had com-Mike Scannell had also remained, being wounded inpany.the arm, and rendered valuable service to Sherwood andmyself.Directly in front of us were two amputating tableswhich were always busy. We saw several men whom weknew placed on them and removed, minus a leg or an arm.The groans of the wounded were constant, and the dead werebeing carried past us nearly all the time. On my left lay ayoung boy. He suffered much, but did not complain. Onenight, when it was time to go to sleep, he wliispered, " Goodnight, lieutenant, I think that I shall go up before morning."I urged him to keep up his courage, but he said it was no use,he should die.In the morning I looked and saw that the poorboy had answered the last roll-call. He lay by my side untilafternoon, before they could find time to take him away.Ihad forgotten to ask his name, and no one knew him.Hisgrave no doulrt bears the mark "unknown," and the recordsof his regiment say, "missing in action."I remained here six days, and my wounds received noattention only such as my comrades gave.They kept mycanteen filled with water, which I used freely, to preventinflammation. Do not think that I blame the surgeons. Nonobler men ever lived than composed the medical staff" ofthe Army of the Potomac ; but there were twenty thousandwounded men. Union and rebel, on the field of Gettysburg,and the cases requiring amputation must receive attentionfirst.72NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.One day I was made happy.Adjutant Hill came to see me.Lieutenant Shackley andThey had ridden back fif-Some of the boys had found a chicken, andteen miles.they had made a broth and brought it to me in an old coffeeIt was the first thing that had tasted good, and I sharedpot.Some think soldiers are hard-hearted.it with Sherwood.No hearts more tender can be found than in the breasts ofbrave men. When those officers parted from me that daynot one of us could speak, and tears ran down our cheeks aswe pressed each other's hands.My mind had been quite active, and I had come to theconclusion that I would move my lodging as soon as possible.One surgeon had said that I would not live twenty-four hours,another that I must remain where I was two weeks.Itstruck me that to die in twenty-four hours or stay where Iwas two weeks would neither be pleasant for myself northose near me.I talked the matter over with Sherwood. We counted ourcash and found we had five dollars each, and we formed asyndicate. We made Mike Scannell our agent, with instruc-tions to bring some kind of conveyance to take us off theThe next morning he reported with a citizen, a horsefield.The whole lot was not worth tenand side-spring wagon.dollars, but we paid our money and were loaded and on ourway to Littletown, where we arrived in due time, and weredriven to a church which had been converted into a tempo-rary hospital. We found it nearly full, but they made roomI had a nice place on top of the pews in the broadfor us.aisle.There was no organization of the hospital. Two of thetown doctors were doing all they could, being assisted byBATTLE OF GETTYSBUBG.73the women. No doubt our Massachusetts women would dothe same kind of work should the emergency arise, but I can-not speak in too high praise of the women of Littletown.They would dress the shattered arm of some poor boy, washthe blood from the wounds of another, thinking only of whatIt was like getting home.they could do to relieve suffering.My wounds were in a frightful condition.They had notbeen dressed, and the maggots were crawlinej into them. Assoon as we were settled the ladies came to see what theyThey were anxious to dress our wounds, but itcould do.required more hospital accommodations than the churchafforded, so they washed our hands and faces, and made usas comfortable as possible. A real motherly woman askedI had eaten little except the chickenwhat I wanted to eat.Billy and Mose brought me, and when she said she hadchicken broth, I said, "Bring me two or three." As soon aspossible she came with a large pan full of broth, but theAt my suggestiontrouble was I could not sit up to eat it.she brought the prettiest girl in the room, who put her leftarm around me and let me lean my head on her shoulder,while she fed me with the broth.Oh, it was nice ! Eitherthe broth or the young lady's presence revived me. My newfriend's name was Lucy.She said, "Don't take breakfastuntil I come, because I will bring yours from home." Brightand early Lucy was on hand with a pan of milk toast.Shehad seen me eat the night before and had broui^ht enouo;h forAs she was called away for a few moments, I spoke tosix.the boys who were near, and they soon reduced the surplus.While I had the best carethey could give I was growing worse.I had a high fever,and my wounds were getting inflamed. At times I would lieWe remained here two days.74NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT." Are you going?" they asked.One day I rallied and found thein a stupor for hours.Soon two menchurch deserted except Lucy and myself.Lucy said, "No.came in.Mother told me if any were not able to be moved to bringthem home, and we would care for them ; he is not able, andThe temptation was strong to stay, but amust not go."moment's reflection told me that I required hospital treat-The men thenment, and I explained the danger to her.carried me to the train and placed me on the floor of a bag-gage car. Lucy came with us, fixed my head all right, and,as a good sister should, kissed me good-by, and we were offI was so weak that the i^ear name of Lucyfor Baltimore.passed out of my mind, and I have never seen her since, buthave ever prayed that the blessings of Heaven be showeredupon her, for her constant care the last day in the old churchsaved me from fever.The ride to Baltimore was terrible.The air was bad.Groans of the wounded were constant, and could be heardI did not believe it was possibleabove the rattle of the car.for me to live to reach the station, but I survived, althoughmany of our number did not.We arrived in Baltimore about three o'clock in the morn-ing, were placed in ambulances and driven over the roughThe nextpavements to the Newton University Hospital.day, for the first time, my wounds were dressed ; the sur-geon placed a large syringe where the ball had entered andforced water through the opening ; maggots, pieces of cloth-ing and bone came out ; then they probed for the ball whichhad entered the groin, found it had struck the bone andglanced downward, lodging in the leg, where it yet remains.We received the best possible care from the surgeons andBATTLE OF GETTYSBUBG.75attendants.Ladies ^dsited the hospital every day loadedwith delicacies for our comfort.I did a foolish thing while in the hospital which came nearending my earthly experience.One day an officer, slightlywounded, came in and said the paymaster was at the CustomHouse and if we could get there we would receive two months'pay. On the bed next mine lay Lieut. "Bob" Stewart ofthe 7 2d Pennsylvania, wounded in the leg ; neither of ushad a dollar, and the thought of two months' pay in ourpockets was pleasant. We talked it over that night ; Bobwas sure he could stand it, l)ut thought I had better not try ;still I was anxious to go, so we bribed the nurse, and thenext morning, after the surgeon made his rounds, we took acarriage and with the nurse started for the Custom House.I fainted before we had gone a block, but kept on and wasable to sign the roll which a clerk brought to the carriage,and received the money. We returned to the hospital and Isuffered from fever all day, and when the surgeon made hisrounds the next morning he was alarmed at my condition.I dared not tell him what we had done, for the nurse wouldIn front of me was a man who suf-be discharged if I did.fered from a shell-wound in the back ; he was forced to lieon his face and was very restless.I told the surgeon thatthis man suffered so much that it made me nervous, and heordered him changed to another ward.It was several daysbefore I regained what I had lost by my foolishness.I had been here a little more than a week when one dayMr. Robinson, the Massachusetts agent stationed there, camein and asked me if I had a brother named Asa Adams ; inform-ing him that I had, he asked if I would like to see him. Myanswer can be imagined, and in a short time he came in with76NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.my brother, who had left home when the news reached himthat I was wounded. He had been to Gettysburg, searchedthe field hospitals, found where I had been, but no one couldinform him where I was, as I did not leave my address ; hewas returning home and stopped in Baltimore, and calling onthe Massachusetts agent, found where I was located. Assoon as I saw him my mind was made up to go home ; thesurgeon said it was impossible, but I begged so hard that heconsented, and in due time I was placed on my stretcher andThe cars were so arranged thatcarried to a hospital car.the wounded were hung up by the stretchers, being placedI was hung up in mine, but the motionon rubber springs.of the car was such that I could not bear it so was takenMore dead than alive wedown and placed on the floor.arrived at Jersey City. We found that the mob had posses-sion of New York and we could not cross the ferry.Afterbeing carried from place to place, we were placed on a steamerand taken to Bedloe's Island, where we remained several days,then to the Fall River boat. We found great excitement atthe boat ; several negroes were on board who had been drivenOthers jumped from the wharf and swam outfrom the city.They reported that the mobto us after we were underway.intended to fire the city that night.I received every attention on the boat, was placed in theladies' cabin, and the lady passengers were constant in attend-ance, anxious to do something to relieve my sufferings.Handkerchiefs were wet with cologne and given me, andwhen the boat reached Fall River I had a large stock, markedEvery few momentswith nearly every letter in the alphabet.some good woman would bend over me and say, " Shall Iturn your pillow?" and wishing to please them I would say,BATTLE OF GETTYSBURG.11^'If you please," although it had been turned two minutesbefore.We arrived at Fall River in the morning.I was placedon my stretcher, carried to the train and taken to Brockton,where I was loaded into an express wagon and driven to theHere I was placed under the care of Dr. E. E. Dean,hotel.and in the afternoon was driven to Sharon, the home of mybrother, where I remained three months, attended by Dr.Dean and nursed by my dear mother and sister.From Sharon I was taken home to Groveland, where Iremained until December, reporting to the department atWashington and my regiment, by surgeon's certificate, everyI enjoyed the convalescent period much.twenty days.Colonel Devereaux, Captain Boyd and Adjutant Hill, withMark Kimball and several others, had been ordered to LongIsland on recruiting service, and I visited them often.I alsosat on the platform, with my crutches, at war meetings andwas quite a hero.I found quite a change since 1861 ; thenmen were very anxious to get to the front, now they werejust as anxious to keep away. We had all learned that warwas no picnic.78NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.