CHAPTER  IX.EEGIMENT ORDERED HOME.RECEPTIONS.MY FIRST CALLUPON GOVERNOR ANDREW.RETURN TO THE FRONT.In December I resolved to return to the regiment. Mywound was not healed and my surgeon protested, but I wasanxious to see the boys. Upon my arrival at Washingtonwhat was my surprise to find that I had been discharged byorder of the War Department November 5, as being una-With Col. Gardiner Tufts, theble to perform military duty.Massachusetts State agent, I visited the War Departmentand was informed that I should receive my discharge throughmy regimental headquarters.If ever a man had the blues Ihad. My sickness had cost me several hundred dollars, Iwas unable to perform any kind of labor, was out of money,and could not settle with the government until my paperswere received ; but Colonel Tufts could always make thepath of a soldier smooth and he was able to secure me twomonths' pay. From Washington I went to the regiment,which was camped near Stevensburg, Va.I waited untilafter January 1 for my discharge, but it did not come, andmy wound was so bad that the surgeon ordered me home.Colonel Rice was in command of the regiment. Colonel Dev-ereaux being in command of the Philadelphia brigade.Icalled on Colonel Devereaux, who was very indignant tolearn that I had been discharged ; he said he would see aboutit, and I knew that meant something.BEGIMENT OBDERED ROME.;79One clay the colonel sent for me and said, " Jack, I havea letter from Governor Andrew asking that the regimentre-enlist for three years more or until the end of the wardo you think they will do it?" My answer was, "I don'tknow; there are not many left to re-enlist." He said, "Iwish you would go to your old company. A, and talk withThe regiment was encamped on athem," and I consented.side hill in shelter tents, and the weather was cold and rainy.I went to Company A ; the mud in the company street wasankle deep and everything was as disagreeable as possible.I talked with him andGiles Johnson was first sergeant.asked him to "fall in" the men.Thirteen responded to thecall, — all who were on duty of the grand company whichhad left Massachusetts in 1861.I repeated the story thecolonel had told me, then asked for a response from them;for a moment all were silent, then Ben Falls said, " Well, ifnew men won't finish this job, old men must, and as long asUncle Sam wants a man, here is Ben Falls." Then spokeMike Scannell :" It is three years, as you know, since Ihave seen my wife and children.I had expected to go homewhen my time was out and stay there, but we must nevergive up this fight until we win, and I am with you to theOthers expressed themselves in the same way, andend."when I said, "All who will re-enlist step one pace to thefront," every man in line advanced.I then saw men of other companies.Ed. Fletcher ofCompany C said, "They use a man here just the same asthey do a turkey at a shooting match, fire at it all day, andif they don't kill it rafile it off in the evening ; so with us,if they can't kill you in three years they want you for threeI next saw Michael O'Leary ofmore, but I will stay."80NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.Company F and asked him if he would re-enlist. Mike threwhis cap on the ground, struck an attitude and said, " By thegods above, by the worth of that cap, I never will re-enlistuntil I can be with Mary Ann without the stars and stripesBut I said, "Mike, they are all going towaving over me."Then Michael O'Leary must stay."do it." "They are?A large majority signed the re-enlistment role, and Decem-ber 20 they were mustered in for three years more, or untilIn this instance, as in nearly everythe end of the war.other where the soldiers and the government were concerned,The conditionsthe government did not do as they agreed.of the re-enlistment were, that the soldier should at oncehave thirty-five days' furlough and transportation to hisOur men did not receive theirs until Feb. 8, 1864,home.nearly seven weeks after they had re-enlisted. The weatherwas very severe, many were sick and all were unhappy.To my mind the re-enlisting of the three years' men in theThey knewfield was the most patriotic event of the war.what war was, had seen their regiments and companies sweptThey did notaway until only a little remnant remained.have the excitement of the war meetings to urge them on, butwith a full knowledge of the duties required and the prob-ability that many would fall before their term expired, withuncovered heads and uplifted hands they swore to stand bythe flao; until the last armed foe surrendered.I could not wait until the regiment received orders to comehome, so came alone, took oft" my uniform, put on citizen'sclothes, and began to look for employment. About the 12thof February I saw by the newspapers that the regiment hadI could not keep away, and went toarrived in Boston.AlmostBeach Street Imrracks, where they were quartered.MY FIRST CALL UPON GOVERNOR ANDREW.81the first man I met was Colonel Devereaux, who said, "Whatare you here for?" My answer was, "I wanted to see theboys." Drawing a paper from his pocket he said, "Get auniform and equipments, and report for duty in half an hour.""But my uniform and equipments are at home," I replied." Can't help it," said Colonel Devereaux, "I propose that youcommand your company in the parade to-day."So I wentout, bought a cheap uniform, hired a set of equipments and" So muchreported for duty.of General Order No. 492 as discharged First Lieut. JohnG. B. Adams, 19th Regiment Massachusetts Volunteers, ishereby revoked, and he is restored to duty without loss of pay,provided the vacancy has not lieen filled, evidence of whichlie must furnish from the governor of his State." We weregiven a reception and dinner in Faneuil Hall; GovernorAndrew, not being able to attend, was represented by ourold commander, General Hincks.I found that the paper read :From Boston we went to Salem, where we were royallyentertained, and then broke ranks with orders to report atWenham in thirty-five days.While our receptions weregrand, and showed that our hard services were appreciated,our joys were mingled with sadness.Everywhere Ave metfriends of the boys who did not march back with us, and oureyes were often filled with tears as we clasped the hand offather, mother, sister or wife of some brave boy who hadmarched by our side, but now slept his last sleep in the rudegTave where we had tenderly laid him.The next day I went to the State House to see GovernorAndrew. I had never met a live governor before, and as myfeet reached the executive chamber my heart beat faster thanIt did when advancing at Gettysburg.Meeting the messen-82NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.ger at the door I was explaining my errand when the dooropened, and the governor seeing me said, "Come in." Onentering he said, "Well, my boy, what can I do for you?"I began to tell my story, when he interrupted me with, " Iknow all about it, and it is all right."Pointing to a rosterof our regiment my name was in the list of first lieutenants,"There, you see that is all right,"but it was at the bottom.I replied, " Not quite ; I was the thirdsaid the governor.in rank when discharged, now I am the tenth.""Oh, wewill fix that," said he, and taking my name out moved themdown one and put me in my proper place.All the timehe was doing this he was talking and laughing, making meI was so pleased with the inter-feel perfectly at home.view that I would have signed an enlistment roll for thirtyyears if he would have promised to be governor during thetime.The orders to the officers were to do all in our power toobtain recruits while we were at home, but although weworked hard we made little or no progress. Men were enlist-ing for coast defence regiments quite fast, but the 19th hadno attractions, and I only recruited one man while at home.The thirty days were like one long holiday ; the towns gavereceptions to the men, Company A being received by thetown of West Newbury. The time soon came when we mustmarch away, and at the end of thirty days every man reportedat Wenham. We mustered five more than we brought home,— three deserters whom we had captured and two recruits.Two boys, Kogers and Fee, who were not old enough, stoleI carried a newaway with us and were mustered in the field.sword, presented by the citizens of Groveland, and severalother officers were remembered in like manner.RETUliN TO THE FEO^'T.83Great injustice was done to fighting regiments in allowingthem to return without being filled to the maximum. Whilethe State was filling its quota it was, as far as active serviceEvery old regiment had manywent, nearly all on paper.brave and well-qualified non-commissioned officers who couldnot be promoted because only two officers were allowed eachcompany, and, besides, we were placed in line to do the dutyof a regiment, when we were no larger than a company ofheavy artillery. Yet our men did not complain ; with bravehearts, but with eyes filled with tears, they again bade good-by to loved ones, and marched away to face dangers thatthree years' experience had demonstrated would make vacantplaces in their thinned ranks.Colonel Devereaux did not return with us, and the regi-ment was in command of Lieutenant-Colonel Rice. We hada nice passage to New York, spent St. Patrick's day andEph. Hall's birthday in Philadelphia, and in due time arrivedin Washington. I was detailed officer of the day. LieutenantThompson officer of the guard. A little incident occurredhere which I think is not known to the officers, but it showsthe honor of the men of the 19th.After I was detailedColonel Eice sent for me and said, "We leave here at sixo'clock to-morrow morning. The officers vrill stay up in theI want you to keep every man here to be ready tocity.move at the time stated."After the officers had gone I fellin the men and informed them that we were to move at sixA.M. ; that as they were tired I should post no guard, andas Lieutenant Thompson and myself had business in the citywe should not be able to stay with them, but would see themThompson and Iall at half-past five the next morning.returned about three o'clock, and when the colonel came at84NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.six every man was in line ready to march.The next nightThe officer of the day put on awe spent at Alexandria.strong guard, and half the men got out in some way andThompson and I were complimentedmade things lively.by the colonel for faithful performance of duty when weshould have been court-martialed.In a few days we arrived at our old camp and began anewThe first night it snowed quite hard, andour army life.we who had been sleeping in nice, warm ])eds enjoyed thedamp, cold ground, with snow for our covering.Activedrilling began, reviews were frequent, and it was apparentwe were soon to enter on an active campaign.Lieutenant-General Grant took command of the army, and we all feltUnlike most of his pred-that at last the boss had arrived.ecessors, he came with no flourish of trumpets, but in aAfter a grand review by him wequiet, business-like way.were ordered to division headquarters with the 20th Massa-The 19tli drilled in thechusetts for an exliibition drill.manual of arms, the 20th in ])attalion movements.Bothregiments were highly complimented for their excellentwork.The discipline of the army at this time was very strict.So many substitutes were l^eing received that the deathpenalty for desertions was often executed. We were calledout to witness the first and, so far as I know, the only execu-Thomas R. Dawson had been a membertion by hanging.of Company A, 19th, 1)ut was transferred to the 20th Massa-chusetts when our men re-enlisted. He had been a soldierOnein the English army, and wore medals for l)ravery.night while on picket he left his post, and, l)eing under theinfluence of liquor, went outside the lines and committed anRETURN TO THE FRONT.85Dawson protested his innocenceassault upon an old lady.of the terrible crime, but acknowledged that he was drunkThe woman swore against him, andand had left his post.the sentence of the court-martial was that he be hanared.The officers and men of the 19th did all in their power tosave him ; we signed a petition to President Lincoln askingfor his reprieve, and sent it by a Catholic chaplain, DawsonThe President would have been pleased])eing a Catholic.to grant our prayer, but he said the complaint from armyofficers was that he was destrojdng the discipline of the armyby so often setting aside the findings and sentences of courts-martial, and he dare not do it.April 14 was the day assigned for the execution. The 2ddivision of the 2d corps was formed in a hollow square, ranksDawson was placed in an openopened, facing inward.With him rode the provostwagon, seated on his coffin.marshal and his spiritual advisor. The band was in advance,playing the dead march.Files of soldiers, with arms re-versed, marched on each flank, and in front and rear. Asthey passed our lines Dawson smiled and bowed to those herecognized. When he arrived at the scaffold, which hadbeen erected in the centre of the square, he ran up the steps,and before the black cap was pulled down said, " Good-by,comrades, officers and men of the 19th.I thank you forwhat you have done for me. May you live long and die ahappy death; I die an innocent man."The cap was thendrawn down, the drop cut, and poor Dawson was launchedinto eternity, but not so soon as was intended ; the rope wasnew and stretched so much that his feet touched the gi'ound,and the provost marshal was obliged to take a turn in theIt was a horrible sight, and set me forever againstrope.86NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.execution by hanging.After he was pronounced dead bythe surgeon he was taken down, placed in liis coffin, andThe troopslowered in a gi'ave that had been prepared.marched past and looked into the grave.I presume that the impressions desired were producedupon the minds of the men, ])ut the remarks were that it wastoo bad to hang men when they were so hard to get, and ifthey had let him alone a few weeks Johnnie Reb would havesaved them the trouble.The monotony of camp life was relieved by details forOur ranks were being increasedthree days' picket duty.by the return of detailed men and the arrival of recruits.Many were ordered to the ranks who had not carried aThe transportationmusket since the day they enlisted.beino- reduced to one wagon to a brigade, several who wereordered back were drivers of the festive mule. Among thisnumber was Will Curtis of Company A.One day in pass-ing the wagon train a mule set up one of those unearthlyWill looked at him, and said, "You need not laughsnorts.at me ; you may be in the ranks yourself l^efore Grantgets through with the army."BATTLE OF THE WILDERNESS.87