CHAPTER  XII.EXPEEIENCES IN KEBEL PRISONS,LIBBY, MACON.We were hurried to the rear, the rebels relieving us ofour hats, belts and other personal property as we went.Captain Hume had been a prisoner before and thought heunderstood the rules of civilized warfare. A rebel officerCaptain Hume said, " Don't give it todemanded my belt.Private property is to be respected, and all hehim, Jack.But the rebel was nothas a right to claim is your sword."so far advanced as this in his study of the articles of war, andturning on Hume, with his revolver and a volley of oaths,I gave him mine withoutmade him give up his belt.Sergt. J. E. Hodgkins of Company Kmore argument.had received a nice little ounce hat from home. A bigrebel standing near the battery on the hill saw it and, like ahawk after its prey, sailed for it, snatching it from his head andthrowing him his old one, which would weigh five pounds.This treatment was a surprise to us. Few regiments in theArmy of the Potomac had captured more prisoners than the19th, yet I never saw private property of any kind takenfrom a rebel or heard an ungentlemanly word spoken ; on thecontrary, had often seen the boys share their rations withthem and in every way make them comfortable.When well beyond the lines we were halted and tookaccount of stock. We found that we numbered sixteen hun-dred men and sixty-seven commissioned ofiicers.105EXPERIENCES IN REBEL PRISONS.As we had placed our colors in the rear of the line, — hav-ing dug a pit for Mike Scannell and the other sergeant, — wetrusted they were safe, but soon a rebel horseman rode by with" How came youthem, and trotting in his rear we saw Mike.to lose the colors, Mike? " I asked."I'll tell you," said he." We lay in the pit dug for us, and the first we knew the rebelscame rushing over and said, 'You damned Yankee, give me'Well,' I said, 'it is twenty years since I came tothat flag.'this country, and you are the first man who ever called mea Yankee.You can take the flag for the compliment.' "We could not understand how the rebels got in our rear,but from the l)est information we could obtain, learned thatthe 2d and 5th corps were ordered to advance their lines.The 2d did as ordered. By some mistake the 5th did not,The reb-and there was a large gap between the two corps.els had seen this, and keeping us hotly engaged in the front,had sent a division around our left flank, and the result waswe were "gobbled."The officer who had charge of my squad was Lieut. Wm.D. McDonald, Company C, 8th Alabama, Wilcox's oldbrigade, Anderson's division, A. N. V. He was disposed tobe kind to us, as he had formerly resided in New York andknew Yankees were human, but he was soon relieved andThe provost guard took charge,ordered back to the front.and we were marched to a field just outside the city of Peters-burg and camped for the night. We were visited by squadsof thieves, each reducing our baggage, which was none tooTheSome of our men had a few hard tack.large at first.officers had no rations.The next morning we were ordered to a small island in theAs we marched over a little bridgeAppomattox River.106NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.guards were stationed to take our haversacks, canteens andother property yet remaining, but we soon saw the game andsent over a few empty lianded, who, coming down the shore,took charge of the traps we threw to them. By this flankmovement we saved our property. We remained on the islandthat day. No rations were issued and we began to realizeour position. We were among a new race of people and sawthe beauties of an inflated currency. On our side of the linethe '' New York Herald " (doul>le sheet) sold for five cents ;on this side the "Richmond Examiner," a little, dirty paper,was one dollar, — everything in the same proportion. Everyfew minutes a large, lank, lantern-jawed rebel would comeup, look us over, and ask about the only question they had" What did you uns come down here to fight we unson hand :It mattered little what the answer was, he would passfor?"on if he did not find any plunder and ask the same questionThe captain of our guard was a spruceof the next group.little chap and wanted his boots shined ; but the so-calledConfederacy was out of boot-blacking, so he sent one of hismen to us for that article.After asking several and receiv-ing various answers he called to his officer, "Captain, theyall don't tote it."About three o'clock on the morning of the 24th we wereordered to fall in and were marched through the city to thedepot, packed in the cars, and were "on to Richmond,"where we arrived about noon. We were given a rousingMen, women and children thronged the streetsreception.and were sure they had captured the entire Union army.They said, "Right smart lot of you all this time, I reckon."The men swore, the women spit at us, the children joined inJust before we turned down Carey Streetthe general cry.EXPEBIENCES IN BEBEL PBISONS.107to go to Libby we halted.I was standing a little aside fromthe rest, thinking over the situation and whistling to keeptogether what little courage I had left, when a rebel officerrode up and said, " We will take that whistle out of you in aCorn bread is gitting pretty mouldy down inlittle while.It was my intention toI said I guessed not.Libby."whistle as loud the last day as I did the first." Oh, I haveheard lots of you fellows talk, but Dick Turner soon fixesThis was the first promise of starvation.them," was his reply.We moved forward and soon stood in front of Libby prison.I could almost read over the door, " He who enters here leaveshope behind." We marched in and passed to the rear of theroom. As I looked out of the window I saw them carry outfour of our dead boys in blankets, all of them naked, havingbeen stripped of their clothing. We hardly knew what wasto come next but had not long to wait, for Dick Turner, whohad charge, ordered part of us to fall in.Lieutenant Chub-buck had kept a small revolver in his pocket until this time,but now threw it out of the window into the canal in rear ofthe prison. We were ordered to stand in line, unbuttonour clothing, and, as Turner passed down, were made toopen our mouths that he might see if we had any greenbacksin them. He said those who gave up their money shouldhave it again, but those who did not would lose it.I hadsixty-two dollars and had just time to put ten between thesoles of my shoe.After he hadpicked a squad he ordered them to the front of the room,away from the rest.The rest I gave to Turner.The front door was guarded by a thing I supposed theycalled a soldier, dressed in a black, swallow-tailed coat, hishead crowned with a stove-pipe hat and armed with a sport-108NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEQIMENT.ing rifle. He was so thin that he could never be hit by abullet, as he could hide behind his ramrod in time of danger.I called to the boys, " See what they call a soldier," but ashe brought up his musket to fire I found it was alive and Iretired in good order.Lieut. Thomas J. Hastings of the 15th tore a piece oflF hisshelter tent to use as a towel and was made to mark timeAfter our names, rank,while the rest were being searched.regiment, place and date of capture were recorded we weremarched to a room in the third story. The one next to ourswas filled with our men. A brick partition wall divided us,but some of them made a hole through, and, as they had notbeen searched, passed a few things to us. Mark Kimballgave me ten dollars, Mike O'Leary a razor, another gave meThe razor and spoon I carried all through mya spoon.The money I returned toprison life, and have them yet.Mark some two weeks later. We were not allowed to restlong, as I suppose they thought we required exercise, andwere marched to another room over the office.The roomswere perfectly bare. We had no blankets or dishes, aseverything had been taken from us. We sat down on thefloor, about as blue a collection of humanity as was everassembled.In a short time Turner came in to look us over.I askedhim if it was not about time for dinner, as no rations hadl)een issued since we had been captured, two days before.He did not like my question and swore at me for severalminutes, winding up by saying that no rations would belucky if I gotissued until the next day, and I should beI replied that as I was not acquainted with theany then.other hotels in the city I guessed I would wait. He sworeEXPERIENCES IN REBEL PRISONS.109some more, said he reckoned I would, — and I did.Atnight we lay down on the hard floor and tried to sleep, butwere so hungry we could not.Besides our hunger we hadmany other things to contend with. When we entered theroom we thought it was vacant but were mistaken, for wediscovered that it was inhabited by "very many curiousthings that crawl about and fly on wings."Morning came at last. We got up, washed in an old tankin one corner of the room, wiped our faces on our shirts,and waited for breakfast.While waiting; I went to the win-dow to look out.In a second I found myself on the floorThe guard in front hadand heard the report of a musket.iired at me, l)ut a comrade had seen him as he brought up hispiece and had pulled me down.Had he not done so someother fellow would have written this stor3\receive them.About ten o'clock rations came in and we eagerly fell in toThey consisted of a piece of corn bread aslarge as a quarter of a brick and twice as hard, bean soup,and a very small piece of rotten bacon. How to draw thebean soup was the question, as we had nothing to draw it in.Lieutenant McGinnis was in rear of me. He said he musthave some soup, and, taking a broken pane of glass, he fellin and the line moved on. When it came my turn the negrowho issued the rations dipped in his gill dipper and I heldout my hands. He turned it in. The soup ran through myMcGinnis held out hisfingers, but I secured a few beans.pane of glass and drew four rations, one on each corner. WeHungry as we were the smell sat-did not touch the bacon.isfied us. We went upstairs and sat down to dinner.I atehalf my bread, and thinking it unwise to make a pig of myselfat my first banquet in Richmond, placed the rest on the win-110NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.dow sill, sat down and looked at it, then ate a little more anda little more, until all was gone, and I was as hungry asbefore.The next day some negroes came in to swab the floor, andamong them we of the 19th recognized little Johnnie, ColonelDevereaux's servant. We had left him at White HouseLanding, sick with fever, when we started on the retreatdown the Peninsula in the spring of 1862, and supposed hedied in the hospital, but he must have been captured, as hereI was near enough to whisper "Johnnie." Hehe was.recognized me and also saw Lieutenant McGinnis, but saidThe next day when he came in he dropped somenothing.soap near where I stood. He looked as though he was hav-ing a hard time of it.Our enlisted men were not confined in Libby but in an oldThree days later wetobacco warehouse across the street.saw them march past on their way to Belle Isle. We watchedThe linesour chances and exchanged greetings with them.between officers and men in the 19th were not closely drawn.Most of the officers had come from the ranks and the onlydifference was in the pay. We would have been glad tohave remained with them, but the rebels ordered otherwise.We remained in Libby about a week, receiving re-enforce-ments nearly every day, until our squad of officers numberedOne morning we were ordered to fall in.over a hundred.The same old blankets were given us, dirty and torn, butbetter than none. We were told that we were going south.A very small loaf of white bread was given each man, buthaving no way to carry it and being very hungry, we ate itbefore we left the prison. We filed out and marched pastThis place was used for the confinement ofCastle Thunder.EXPERIENCES IN REBEL PRISONS.Illpolitical prisoners. We saw several women and one of themhad a palm-leaf fan. On one side was the stars and stripes.As we looked up she turned that side to us and some onesaid, "Boys, see the old flag."Major Turner rode back andsaid, "Break the head of the next man who says 'old flag,'"so we did not cheer, but the sight gladdened our hearts.We crossed the river to Manchester. A large crowd wereThey told us that our men were dying fastat the station.down south and that "you all will get your little piece ofland down in Georgia," a prophecy which proved true in verymany instances.The train backed into the depot and we were ordered to"get aboard the coach." A passenger car was in front, andwe marched in, thinking that we were to be transported ingood shape ; but when every seat was taken, they continuedto come in, and our entire party, numbering more than ahundred, packed into this one car.We rode all day without food or water, and found our-selves the next morning at Lynchburg. We were confinedin the cars until noon, and it is impossible to express inwords what we suffered. We could not walk about, thecar was so crowded ; we would get down on the floor, standup, look out of the window, but nothing could drive awayOutside the cars were hucksters sellino-the terril^le hunger.bread, pies and fruit, and the sight made us wild. Menopened the windows, took rings from their fingers, and soldthem for loaves of bread.I had no rings or anything val-I had my ten dollar greenback in my sHoe,but the orders were very strict in regard to the people tak-ing greenbacks, and I dare not try to pass it for fear theguard would see me and confiscate it.uable to sell.112NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.At noon we were ordered out of the car, and after somedelay rations were issued, consisting of twenty small hardtack and a small piece of bacon not properly cured and cov-This was to last us four days, as weered with maggots.were to march from Lyncli])urg to Danville, our cavalryAs Ihaving destroyed the railroad between the two places.had eaten nothing for thirty-six hours I ate twelve of myhard tack, leaving eight for the next three days.I did notcare much for the bacon, but tied it up in an old rag, and,finding a stick, carried it over my shoulder.They marched us five miles, and camped for the night.The sun was so hot that most of my bacon melted and randown my back, but the maggots still lived. We were com-manded by a major who had lost an arm in the service, andhad also l)een a prisoner. He was a first-class man andunderstood how to march men ; would turn us out at day-light, march until nine or ten o'clock, then rest until three.He always selected our camp near a stream of good water,I am sorry Iand did everything possible for our comfort.cannot recall his name, as he was about the only man I metin the south who considered our comfort in any way.Our enlisted men joined us here. We were not allowedto visit them, but, passing them on the road, had a chanceto chat a little.Our o'uard was not thought sufiicient to take care of us,and it was constantly receiving reinforcements from theAt every cross-road we were joinedcradle and the grave.by old men on horseback and in carriages, and boys fromten to sixteen years of age, armed with shot-guns and pistols.We could get along very well with the men, l)ut the boyswere anxious to shoot a Yankee, and we had to keep our eyesEXPERIEXCES IX REBEL PRISONS.113Lieutenant McGinnis was much interested in theopen.boys, and would ask them if their fathers allowed them toplay with a gun, and if they were not afraid to lie out doorsevenino-s.Our march was through a splendid country and the dayswere fine. We had many good singers among the officers,and as we marched through a village they would strike upIt would pass down the line and be taken up bya song.the men.Passing through Pittsylvania they were singing"Home Again."I saw several women who were watchingWhether the tears were of sympathyus wipe away tears.for us, or because the scene recalled loved ones in the rebelarmy, we did not know, but it was the only manifestationof anything but hate I ever saw from a rebel woman.Just before we went into camp one night a citizen walkedbeside us for a short distance and I saw him exchange glancesAfter he passed on Captain Humewith Captain Hume.said, " We will have something to eat to-night.That manis a mason ; he says we are going into camp soon and hewill come down and bring me some food." We soon afterThe captain's brother-filed out of the road and into a field.mason came and walked around until he saw Hume, thenpassed near and dropped a package containing bread andAlthough not a mason at that time I shared themeat.refreshments furnished by the craftsman.We continued the march until July 4, when we arrivedHere we were turned over to the provostat Danville.Our humane com-guard and placed in an old warehouse.mander left us, and our best wishes followed him. Wewere brought back to the realization that we were prisonersby the brute in command. We were very hungiy, but that;114NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEOIMENT.did not trouble them, and we waited until afternoon forAt night we were taken out and marched to therations.depot. Although it was the anniversary of our nation's birthwe saw no demonstrations of any kind, and I do not believethat a citizen of the town knew it was a national holidaybut we remembered it, and while waiting for the train to bemade up sung " Star Spangled Banner " and other patrioticsongs. We collected quite a crowd, but they manifested nointerest, only stood and looked at us.The train ready, we were ordered on l)oard and packed inclose box cars, — fifty-six in a car.Only one door wasallowed to be opened, and that was filled with rebel guards.We had no room to lie down, ])ut were forced to stand or sitcramped up on the floor. We lay our heads on each other'sshoulders and tried to sleep, but it was too hot. We hadno water, but one of the oflicers had an old two-quart pail,and by coaxing, the guard filled it twice out of the tank of theI never passed a more uncomfortal)le night, andlocomotive.when we arrived at Greensborough, N. C, in the morning,and were allowed to get out of the cars, we were happy.Here we were re-inforced by some of Wilson's cavalry ofli-They had been shamefullycers, captured on the raid.treated, — some were bleeding from wounds received fromthe guard. When they loaded us again some were allowedon top of the car, and I was one. Our guards were a lot ofhome guards, and, like all such, were making a war recordby abusing us.insulting us.On our car was a loud-mouthed fellow who was constantlyAfter a while he became quiet and was nearlyOne of the oflicers near touched me, and motioningasleep.to keep still, drew up his feet, straightened out, and the fel-EXPEBIENCES IN BEBEL PBISONS.115Turning to me helow went flying off the top of the car.said, "Jack, didn't something drop?" I said I thought so,but guessed it wasn't best to stop the train to find out, andwe never learned whether he landed or not.We arrived at Augusta, Ga. , on Sunday, and were marchedto the park. Here citizens visited us and we had a chance toThe questions were about the same as attalk with them.Petersburg. "What do you uns come down to fight we unsfor?" etc. Talk about Yankees being anxious to trade!There was not a man, woman or child but wanted to barterI sold a hat cord to a woman for twenty dollars,with us.bought a dozen Qgga for ten dollars, and invested the rest inThe crusta blackberry pie.was ironclad, and I had to l)ombard it 1)efore I could get atI ate the inside, but left the crust for the womanI shall never forget that pie.the berries.to fill again.We took the cars at night, and next morning arrived atMacon, where we left the train, and our men went on toAndersonville.116NIKETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.