FERNI  .EA  E  et rhe$  REFERH sy aT! HE cf EHBARAi3765%TEFSij5lean  e3y.REJIes neERENPieter  MEOFDSESRI N 2 Lieb R A SRYte  eH Ee.  OORT)  D2S  4B EST  BOOKSCečeb,THE  CONFESSIONSOFEAN  JACQUES  ROUSSEAUhe publishers  will  be pleased  to send,  upon  request,  anlustrated folder setting forth  the purpose  and scope ofHE  MODERN  LIBRARY,  and  lisiing  each  volumethe series.  Every  reader  of books will find titles he hasen  looking for,  handsomely  printed,  in  unabridgededitions,  and  at  an  unusually  low price.Digitized  by the  Internet  Archivein 2022  with  funding  fromKahle/Austin  Foundationhttps://archive.org/details/confessionsofjea0000unse_q5k5THECONFESSIONSOF—JEAN  JACQUESROUSSEAUA ATHE  MODERN  LIBRARY:  NEW  YORKRandom  House  IS  THE  PUBLISHER  OFTH EMODE  REN. {LE  ioB  Rea,BENNETT  A.  CERF  -  DONALD  S.  KLOPFER  +  ROBERT  K.  HAASManufactured  in the  United  States  of AmericaPrinted  by Parkway  Printing  Company  .  Bound  by H. WolffCONTENTSBOOK  IBirth  of  Rousseau—Family  of  Rousseau—Death  of  his  mother—Childhood—His  love  for  reading—His  brother  runs  away  fromhome—Ascribes  his passion  for music  to  his aunt  Suson—His  fatheris  compelled  to  leave  Geneva  owing  to  a  quarrel  with  a  Frenchcaptain—Rousseau  is  sent  to  Bossey  with  his  cousin  Bernard  to  beeducated  by the  Protestant  minister  Lambercier—His  attachment  tohis  cousin  Bernard—Mademoiselle  Lambercier—Curious  mode  ofpunishment—Its  effects—Precocious  sensuality—The  incident  of thecombs—Accused  of  breaking  them—Obstinacy—Severe  punish-ment—Reflections—Anecdote  of  the  walnut-tree  and  the  aqueduct—Returns  to  Geneva  with  his cousin  Bernard—Their  boyish  amuse-ments—A  youthful  lover—Mademoiselle  de  Vulson—MademoiselleGoton—Placed  with  M.  Masseron  to  learn  the  business  of an  attor-ney—Dismissed  in disgrace—Apprenticed  to  M. Ducommun,  an  en-graver—Brutality  of  his  master—Its  effect—Incited  to  steal  by  afellow-workman—The  asparagus—The  apples—Reflections—Con-tempt  for  money—M.  de  Francueil—The  incident  at  the  Opera—Taste  for  reading  renewed—Disposes  of his  clothing  to  pay  for  theloan  of books—Neglects  his  work  for the  sake  of reading—ExhaustsLa  Tribu’s  stock  of  books—Effect  of  so  much  reading  upon  hismind—Shut  out  of the city with  his fellow-apprentices—DeterminesPDs  3544sofegruneaway  trom  nis  masterjesssl,BOOK  IIReflects  upon  his  condition—Wandering  life—Reaches  Config-non—Kindly  treated  by M.  de  Pontverre,  the  curé—M.  de  Pont-WVviCONTENTSverre’s  character—He  advises  Rousseau  to  renounce  the  Protestantfaith—Arrives  at  Annecy  and  sees  Madame  de Warens  for  the  firsttime—His  reception—Madame  de  Warens—Her  history  and  char-acter—M.  Sabran  suggests  that  Rousseau  shall  enter  the  hospice  forcatechumens  at  Turin—Sets  out  for  Turin  in  the  charge  of M.  andMadame  Sabran—Followed  by his  father  as  far  as  Annecy—Reflec-tions  on  his  father’s  conduct—Description  of  the  journey  to  Turin—Robbed  by  his  travelling  companions—Arrives  at  Turin—Thehospice  for catechumens  and  its inmates—Meditations  upon  religion—Tuition  in  the  hospice—Arguments  with  the  priests—The  con-duct  of  the  Moor—Anxiety  to  leave  the  hospice—Publicly  abjuresthe  Protestant  faith—The  ceremony—Turned  out  of  the  hospicewith  a  trifling  sum  of  money—Independent  manner  of  living—Lodges  with  a  soldier’s  wife—Endeavours  to  obtain  casual  employ-ment  in Lyons  as  an  engraver—Poor  success—Meets  with  MadameBasile—Madame  Basile—Description  of  her—Rousseau’s  passionfor  her—Interruption—Treachery  of  the  clerk—Sudden  return  ofM.  Basile—His  anger—Rousseau  is  forbidden  the  house—Entersthe  service  of the  Comtesse  de  Vercellis—Her  character  and  house-hold—Comte  de la Roque—The  servants  conspire  against  Rousseau—Death  of  the  Comtesse  de  Vercellis—Her  remarkable  dyingwords—The  incident  of the  ribbon—Rousseau  falsely  accuses  a fel-pp.  45-89low-servant  of  stealing  it—Reflections..©.BOOK  IIIReturns  to  his  former  lodging—Conduct  towards  the  girls  at  thewell—Pursuit—The  man  with  the  sword—M.  Gaime—Rousseau’sindebtedness  to  him—The  “Savoyard  Vicar”—Enters  the  service  ofthe  Comte  de  Gouvon—Kind  reception  and  treatment—Mademoi-selle  de  Breil—The  incident  at  the  dinner-table;  fier or  fiert?—TheAbbé  de  Gouvon  acts  as  tutor—Progress—Difficulty  with  Latin—The  King  is  spoken  to—Brilliant  prospects—Receives  a  visit—In-fatuated  with  M.  Bacle—Strange  determination  and  conduct—DisCONTENTSvilmissed  in  disgrace—The heron-fountain—Journeys  on  foot  to  An-necy  with  Bacle—Arrival  at  Annecy—Parting  with  Bacle—Recep-tion  by Madame  de Warens—Takes  up  his  residence  with  Madamede Warens—Household  of Madame  de Warens—Merceret—ClaudeAnet—Attachment  to  Madame  de  Warens—Life  and  occupations  |at  Annecy—M.  d’Aubonne—Rousseau  unconsciously  examined  byhim—Unfavourable  decision—Reflections  upon  himself—Stupid  re-mark—M.  Gros—Studies  for  the  priesthood—Another  difficultywith  Latin—The  Abbé  Gâtier—His  misfortune—The  “SavoyardVicar’—M.  Corvezi—M.  d’Aubonne’s  revenge—L’  Amant  de  lui-méme—Fire  at  the  house  of  the  Grey  Friars—The  miracle—‘‘Let-tres  de la Montagne”—Result  of the  study  for  the  priesthood:  “Noteven  good  enough  for a  priest’—Taste  for  music—Enters  the  houseof M.  le Maitre  to  learn  the  art—Life  in  the  choir-master’s  house—Venture  de  Villeneuve—Person  and  attainments—Rousseau  infatu-ated  with  him—The  choir-master  leaves  the  authorities  of the  cathe-dral  in  a  fix  during  the  Easter  festival—Rousseau  and  the  choir-master  set  out  for  Lyons—Practical  joke  on  M.  Reydelet—M.  leMaitre  deserted  in  the  streets  of Lyons  while  in a  fit—Reflections—Returns  to  Annecy  and  finds  Madame  de  Warens  has  left  for  ParisPp.  90-135BOOK  IVM.  le Maitre’s  music  confiscated  at  Lyons—Life  at  Annecy  in theabsence  of  Madame  de  Warens—Adventure  with  Mesdemoisellesde  Graffenried  and  Galley—M.  Simon—Personal  appearance—Hisdouble  voice—-Ridiculous  blunder  of the  countryman—Goes  to  Fri-bourg  with  Merceret—Their  peculiar  relationship  during  the  jour-ney—Visits  his  father—Loses  his  way—Kindness  of  the  innkeeperat  Moudon—Sets  up  as  a  music-teacher  in  Lausanne—Composes  apiece  for  a  concert—Performance—Fiasco—Precarious  livelihood  inLausanne—Memories  of Madame  de  Warens—Visit  to  the  Lake  ofGeneva—Vévay—Reveries—Journey  to  Neufchatel—Better  successvilCONTENTSwith:  nusic-teaching—Meets  with  the  Archimandrite  of  Jerusalemat  Boudry—Enters  his  service  as  interpreter—Addresses  the  Senateof Berne—Visit  to  the  Marquis  de  Bonac—Detention—The  ThreeRousseaus—Occupation  at Soleure—Goes  to Paris  to enter  the serviceof  Colonel  Godard—Ambitious  ideas  during  the  journey—Firstimpressions  of Paris—Miserly  behaviour  of Colonel  Godard—Satir-ical  verses—Leaves  Paris  in  search  of  Madame  de  Warens—Thecountryman  and  the  dinner—Arrival  at  Lyons—Mademoiselle  duChatelet—Adventures  with  a  workman  and  an  abbé—Disgust  withthe  people  of  Lyons—Poverty—A  lucky  meeting—M.  Rolichon—Journey  from  Lyons  to  Chambéri—Scenes  by the  way—Meets  Mad-ame  de Warens  again—Enters  the  service  of King  Victor  Amadeuspp.  136-181BOOK  VResidence  at  Chambéri—Madame  de  Warens’  diplomacy  regard-ing  her  pension—Claude  Anet:  his  character  and  intimacy  withMadame  de  Warens—Duties  of the  land-survey—Life  at  Chambéri—War  between  France  and  Austria—Love  for  the  French—Ra-meau—‘Treatise  on  Harmony”—Pére  Caton:  his  accomplishmentsand  sad  end—Gives  up  the  land-survey  to  become  a  music-teacher—Describes  his  pupils—-Madame  Lard—Her  conduct  towardsRousseau—The  Comtesse  de  Menthon—Her  spiteful  behaviour—Madame  de  Warens  makes  a  strange  proposal—Reflections—Ful-filment  of  the  promise—Further  reflections  on  the  character  ofMadame  de  Warens—lIll-success  with  fencing  and  dancing—M.Grossi,  the  Royal  physician—Anecdotes—Death  of  Claude  Anet—Mercenary  remark  of  Rousseau—Extravagance  of  Madame  deWarens—Goes  to  Besançon  to  take  lessons  in  composition—Againvisits  his  father—Luggage  confiscated  at  Rousses—The  reason—Return  to  Chambéri—End  of  the  war—Comte  de  Lautrec—TheCONTENTS~1Xopera  of  Jephtha—Gauffecourt—M.  de  Conzie—Voltaire—Desirefor  rambling—Reflections  «on  civil  war—Death  of  his  uncle  Ber-nard  and  his  cousin—The  papers  concerning  the  fortification  ofGeneva—Experiments—An  explosion—Injuries  and  illness—Variedpassions  and  restlessness—Declining  health—Country  residence—pp.  182-232Plans  and  arrangements—Les  Charmettes..BOOK  VIPeaceful  life  at  Les  Charmettes—Recollections—The  periwinkle—Health  still  further  declines—A  strange  malady—Religious  prin-ciples  of Madame  de  Warens—Partial  recovery—Return  to  Cham-béri—M.  Salamon—Attracted  to  study—Return  to  Les  Charmettes—Love  for  animals—Plan  of  study—Difficulties—Daily  routine  atLes  Charmettes—Study  of  astronomy—Anecdote:  a  witches’  gath-ering—Theology—Strange  ideas—Happy  days—Returns  to  Genevato  claim  the  fortune  left  by his  mother—Shares  his  fortune  withMadame  de  Warens—Studies  anatomy—The  result—Journeys  toMontpellier  to  see  a  noted  physician—The  wedding  party—Mad-ame  de  Larnage—Declares  himself  an  Englishman—Madame  deLarnage  makes  love  to  Rousseau—Invited  to  Saint-Andiol—LeavesMadame  de Larnage—Visits  the  Pont  du  Gard—Impressions—Theamphitheatre  at  Nimes—Comparisons—Boards  with  a  doctor  atMontpellier—Sets  out  for  Saint-Andiol  to  visit  Madame  de Larnage,but  suddenly  determines  to  return  to  Madame  de Warens—Reasons—Arrives  at  Chambéri—Cool  reception—Finds  himself  supplantedby M.  Vintzenried—M.  Vintzenried:  his  character—Grief  at  beingsupplanted—Accepts  the post of tutor  to  the children  of M. de Mably—Characters  of his  pupils—The  affair  concerning  the  wine—Findshimself  ill-adapted  for  a  tutor  and  leaves  the  service  of M.  de Mably—Returns  to  Madame  de Warens—Disappointment—Extravaganceof  M.  Vintzenried—Sets  out  for  Paris  with  his  system  of  musical|, at  te DD:  240202notationak nln eisaiPietheassottxCONTENTSBOOK  VIIReflections  concerning  the  Confessions—Stays  at  Lyons  on  theway  to  Paris  to  ‘visit  acquaintances—Mademoiselle  Serre—Rous-seau’s  attachment  to  her—Arrives  at  Paris—Introduced  to  the  Acad-emy  of Sciences  by M.  de  Réaumur—A  commission  is appointed  toexamine  the  musical  system,  and  they  declare  it  “not  new’—Ra-meau’s  criticism  of  the  system—Difficulties  of  getting  his  systempublished—Failure  of his  system  of musical  notation—Indolent  lifeat  Paris—Advised  by  Father  Castel  to  “Try  the  women”—Mes-dames  Dupin,  de  Beuzenval,  and  de  Broglie—Description  of  Mad-ame  Dupin—Declares  his  passion  for  her  and  is  repulsed—M.  deFrancueil—Serious  illness—During  his  delirium  conceives  the  ideaof composing  an  opera—Convalescence—Composes  the  opera,  LesMuses  Galantes—The  Comte  de Montaigu  appointed  ambassador  atVenice—Rousseau  becomes  his  secretary  and  sets  out  for  Wenice—Plague  at  Messina—Quarantine  at  Genoa—Residence  and  experi-ences  in  the  lazaretto—Arrives  at  Venice—Duties  as  ambassadorialsecretary—Meanness  of  M.  de  Montaigu—The  ambassador’s  care-lessness  with  regards  to  tne  duties  of his  office—Rousseau  performsthe  duties  of ambassador—Veronese  the  actor—Captain  Olivet  andhis  vessel—Careless  conduct—The  bill  of  exchange—Renders  thehouse  of Bourbon a service  by forwarding  an  important  despatch—Anger  of M.  de Montaigu—The  ambassador’s  household —Domen-o  Vitali—Vitali  conspires  to  obtain  Rousseau’s  dismissal—M.  deMontaigu’s  conduct  towards  Rousseau—Violent  quarrel  with  theambassador—Rousseau  abruptly  leaves  his  service—The  amuse-ments  of  Venice—Passion  for  Italian  music—The  music  of  thescuole—The  hidden  singers—Lofty  ideas  of  their  beauty—Disen-chantment—The  affair  with  the  padoana—Dines  with  Gaptain‘Olivet  on  board  his  vessel—Zulietta—Her  description  and  conduct—Affair  with  Zulietta—Rousseau’s  strange  conduct—“Give  up  theladies  and  study  mathematics”—Resolves  to  go to  Paris  to  complainCONTENTSxiof  the  ambassador’s  conduct—Breaks  his  journey  at  Geneva  andsees  his  father  again—Meaf  trick  of M.  de Montaigu  regarding  theluggage—Arrives  at  Paris,  but  is unable  to obtain  satisfaction—Theend  of  M.  de  Montaigu—Becomes  acquainted  with  Ignacio  Em-manuel  de  Altuna—Meets  with  Thérése  le Vasseur—She  becomesRousseau’s  mistress—Her  confession—Completion  of  Les  MusesGalantes—M.  and  Madame  de  la Popliniére—Churlish  conduct  ofRameau—The  opera  is performed  at  the  house  of  M.  Bonneval  atthe  King’s  expense—The  Duke  de  Richelieu’s  approval—Fétes  atVersailles—Rousseau  is commissioned  to  alter  Voltaire’s  drama,  LaPrincesse  de Navarre,  set  to  music  by Rameau—Writes  to  Voltaireupon  the  matter—Voltaire’s  letter  in reply—Rehearsal  of the alteredwork—Opposition  to  it—Illness  through  disappointment—Treach-ery  of Rameau—The  work  is performed  and  meets  with  success—Enmity  of Madame  de la Popliniére—Reasons—Death  of his  father—Gauffecourt  assists  him  to  recover  the  balance  of  his  mother’sproperty—Beset  by  Madame  le  Vasseur’s  family—Their  conducttowards  Thérése—Comedy  of  Narcisse  accepted  at  the  Italiantheatre,  but  not  performed—Rehearsal  of the  Muses  Galantes  at  theopera—Rousseau  withdraws  it—Disappointment—Becomes  secre-tary  to  Madame  Dupin and  M.  de  Francueil—Writes  the  comedyL’Engagement  Téméraire,  and  the  poem  “L’Allée  de Sylvie” —Thefrequenters  of  the  house  of  Madame  la  Selle—Their  amusementsand  conversation  respecting  the  Foundling  Hospital—Birth  ofRousseau’s  first  child—Left  at  the  Foundling  Hospital—His  secondchild  similarly  disposed  of—Becomes  acquainted  with  Madamed’Epinay—Her  family—The  Comtesse  d’Houdetot—Diderot—Roguin—The  Abbé  de  Condillac—D’Alembert—Diderot  andD’Alembert  undertake  the  “Dictionnaire  Encyclopédique”’—Im-prisonment  of Diderot—Its  cause—Rousseau  writes  to  Madame  depp-  283-358Pompadour  to  obtain  his  release«...xiiCONTENTSBOOK  VIIIBecomes  acquainted  with  Grimm—Visits  Diderot—His  emotion—Determines  to  write  an  essay  on  the  subject  proposed  by the Acad-emy  of Dijon:  “Has  the progress  of the arts  and  sciences  contributedmore  to  the  corruption  or  purification  ef  morals?”—Manner  ofworking  on  his  essay—Its  completion—Sets  up  his  own  establish-ment  with  Thérése  and  her  parents—Their  tranquil  life—Affair  ofKliipfel,  Grimm,  and  Rousseau  with  a  girl—The  essay  gains  theprize  at  Dijon—Effects—The  author  defends  his  conduct  towardshis children—Third  child  left  at  the  Foundling  Hospital—The  nexttwo  disposed  of  in  the  same  manner—Treachery  of  Madame  leVasseur—Becomes  cashier  to  the  Receiver-General  of  Finance—Unfitness  for  the  position—Serious  illness—The  cause  of  his  con-tinued  ill-health—His  life  despaired  of—Reflections—Becomes  acopyist  of music  and  abandons  his  former  mode  of life—Robbed  ofhis linen  by the  brother  of Thérése—The  essay  severely  criticised  bythe  defenders  of  literature—King  Stanislaus  and  Rousseau—Bitterenmity  of M.  Bordes  of Lyons—Becomes  the  fashion,  and  is visitedby numbers  of people—Refuses  all  presents—Domestic  annoyances—Paris  becomes  distasteful—Causes  of his  outward  unsociability—Introduces  Grimm  to  his  friends—The  Abbé  Raynal—Grimm  andMademoiselle  Fel—Her  disdain—Grimm  feigns  illness—Iis  result—The  Baron  d’Holbach—M.  Duclos—Madame  la  Marquise  deCréqui—M.  Saurin—M.  Mussard:  his  strange  mania  and  painfulend—Composes  the Devin  du  Village—Success  of the opera—Quar-rel  between  MM.  de  Cury  and  Duclos  concerning  it—Journeys  toFontainebleau  in  a  royal  carriage  to  witness  its  performance—Inci-dent  in  the  café—Performance  of  the  Devin  du  Village  before  theKing—Its  overwhelming  success—Summoned  to  the  Chateau  to  bepresented  to  the  King—Declines  the  honour—Reasons  for  hisstrange  conduct—Diderot  endeavours  to  persuade  him  to  accept  apension  from  the  King,  but  without  sucess—Diderot  and  Grimm‘CONTENTSxiiicommence  their  conspiracy—The  incident  of the unpublished  music—Treachery  of the  Baron*d’Holbach—Accused  of  plagiarism—Ri-valry between  the partisans  of the  French  and  Italian  styles of music—The  “King’s  corner”  and  “Queen’s  corner”—Plot  to  assassinateRousseau  owing  to  his  “Lettre  sur  la  Musique”—Shameful’  conductof  the  Opera  management—Demands  the  return  of  his  opera,  butwithout  success—The  Baron  d’Holbach  treats  him  with  great  bru-tality—Narcisse  is  anonymously  performed  at  the  Comédie  Fran-¢aise—Failure—Confesses  himself  the  author  of  it—The  “Originof  Inequality  amongst  Mankind”  proposed  for  discussion  by  theAcademy  of  Dijon—Writes  an  essay  on  the  subject—Discards  phy-sicians  and  determines  to  live  as  he  pleases—Travels  with  Théréseand  Gauffecourt  to  Geneva—Disgraceful  conduct  of Gauffecourt—Again  sees  Madame  de  Warens—Her  fallen  position  and  distress—Abjures  the  Catholic  faith  and  returns  to  Protestantism  at  Geneva—Reasons—Returns  to  Paris—Coolness  of the Genevese  at  the  “Dis-course  on  Inequality  —Madame  d’Epinay  offers  him  the  Hermitage—Voltaire  settles  at  Geneva—Effect  upon  Rousseau—Death  ofMadame  d’Holbach  and  of Madame  Francueil—Visited  by Venturede  Villeneuve-—Changed  condition—Palissot  endeavours  to  curryfavour  with  the  King  of Poland  at  the  expense  of  Rousseau—Pun-pp.  359-413ishment—Rousseau  pleads  for  him...BOOK  IxTakes  up  his  residence  at  the  Hermitage—The  “Holbachianclique”;  their  ridicule—Reflections—Delight  with  the  Hermitage—Plans  for  future  work:  the  “Institutions  Politiques”;  “Selections”from  the  works  of the  Abbé  de  Saint-Pierre;  “La  Morale  Sensitive”;“Dictionary  of Music”—Obliged  to  pay  court  to  Madame  d’Epinay—Its  inconvenience—Pleasant  life  at  the  Hermitage—Reflectionsupon  Thérése—Craving  for  sympathetic  and  intellectual  friendship—Determines  that  his  manner  of life  shall  harmonise  with  his  prin-ciples—The  effect  upon  himself—Diderot  and  Grimm  conspireXIVCONTENTSwith  Madame  le Vasseur—Her  conduct—Strange  reticence  on  thepart  of  Thérése—Disappointed  with  the  writings  of the  Comte  deSaint-Pierre—Plan  of  the  “Selections’—Abandons  the  work—Reasons—Memories  of Les  Charmettes—Reflects  on  his condition—Result—Madame  le  Vasseur  pledges  his  credit—Plots  of  the  Hol-bachian  clique—Doctrine  of  Voltaire—Rousseau  writes  to  him—Reply—Reveries—Visited  by  Madame  d’Houdetot—Her  accident—Robbery  of  M.  d’Epinay’s  fruit—Rousseau  and  the  gardener—Abandons  himself  to  romantic  ideas—Endeavours  to  quell the  stormaroused  by  the  “Encyclopédie’—The  opposing  parties  combineagainst  him—‘Julie,  or  La  Nouvelle  Héloïse,”  the  outcome  of  hisromantic  ideas—Strange  present  from  Madame  d’Epinay—Diderotand  the  “Fils  Naturel”—Again  visited  by  Madame  d’Houdetot—Her  appearance  and  accomplishments—Her  husband—Her  loverSaint-Lambert—Conceives  a  most  extravagant  passion  for  her—Declaration  and  disappointment—Jealousy  of  Madame  d’Epinay—Visit  of the  Baron  d’Holbach—Saint-Lambert  is informed  of  Rous-seau’s  conduct  towards  his  mistress—Becomes  suspicious  of  Mad-ame  d’Epinay—Her  endeavour  to  subvert  Thérése—Peculiar  Letterfrom  Madame  d’Epinay—Reply—Second  letter  from  Madamed’Epinay—Reply—Third  letter  from  Madame  d’Epinay—Embar-rassment  of  Rousseau—Visits  Madame  d’Epinay—Her  effusive  re-ception—The  “Fils  Naturel”;  “Only  the  wicked  are  alone’—Re-proaches  Diderot  with  want  of  consideration—Letter—Reply—Ex-planations—Letter  to  Madame  d’Epinay  referring  sarcastically  toGrimm—Explanations  of phrases  in Diderot’s  letter—Visits  Diderot—Cordial  reception—Diderot’s  opinion  of  “Julie’—Visits  Barond’Holbach—Return  of  Saint-Lambert—His  manner  towards  Rous-seau—Coldness  of  Madame  d’Houdetot—Returns  her  correspond-ence—Doubts  regarding  his  musical  ability—Vindicates  himself—Grimm  arrives  at  La  Chevrette—His  intrigue  with  Madamed’Epinay—Grimm’s  arrogance  and  studied  contempt—Hypocriticalbehaviour  of  Grimm—Grimm  and  Diderot  endeavour  to  subvertDuclos—Determines  to  renounce  Grimm—Overruled  by MadameCONTENTSXVd’Epinayd’Epinay—Visits  Grimm—Reception—Madamean-nounces  her  departure  for” Geneva—Secret  reason—Strange  letterduty  towards  Madamefrom  Diderot  concerning  Rousseau’sd’Epinay—Reply—Resolves  to  leavethe  Hermitage—Madamed’Houdetot’s  advice—Takes  leave  of Madame  d’Houdetot  and  Mad-ame  d’Epinay—Writes  to  Grimm  in  vindication  of  his  action—Grimm’s  vague  conduct—Grimm  renounces  Rousseau’s  friendship—Letters  in  Reply—Treacherous  conduct  of  Grimm—Letter  teMadame  d’Epinay  asking  leave  to  remain  at  the  Hermitage—Re-ceives  a  visit  from  Diderot—Reply  from  Madame  d’Epinay  dis-missing  him  from  the  Hermitage—Embarrassment—Leaves  the’Hermitage  for  Mont-Louis—Dismisses  Madame  le  Vasseur—Let-ure.  | 9  bot Pp:  4142505ten  to  Madame  jd Epinay.  1) son..2%j6BOOK  X[il  health—Letter  from  Madame  d’Epinay—Madame  d’Epinay,Grimm,  and  Dr.  Tronchin  conspire  against  Rousseau  in  Genevaand  Paris—Reflections—Stormy  carrespondence  with  Madamed’Houdetot—Writes  to  D’Alembert  upon  “Theatres”—Madamed'Houdetot  renounces  Rousseau—Generous  conduct  of  Saint-Lambert—Attacks  Diderot—Harsh  letter  from  Saint-Lambert—In-dignant  reply—Polite  letter  from  M.  d’Epinay  inviting  him  todine—Accepts  invitation—Cordial  reception—Effect  of the  dinner-party  on  the schemes  of the Holbachian  clique—Makes  the acquaint-ance  of M.  Marmontel—Enmity—Again  demands  the  return  of theDevin  du Village—Settles  down  to  a  peaceful  life  at  Mont-Louis—Acquaintances  and  descriptions—M.  de Lamoignon  de Malesherbes—His  kindness—Madame  de  Pompadour’s  copy  of  “Julie”  muti-lated  for  fear  of giving  offence—Offered  a  position  on  the  Journaldes  Savants—Reasons  for  declining—Complains  of  the  petty  ex-penses  incidental  to  visiting—Prospective  profits on  his literary  work—Apbandons  the  “Institutions  Politiques”  and  the  “Morale  Sensi-tive’—Determines  to  write  his  Confessions—The  Duke  de Luxem-xviCONTENTS‘bourg and  family  settle  at Montmorency—Madame  de Luxembourgwishes  him  to  enter  the  Académie  Française—Visited  by the  Dukede Luxembourg—Invited  to  stay  at  the  château  during  the  renova-tion  of his  own  house—Takes  up  his residence  at  the château—Con-tentment—Reads  “Julie”  to  Madame  de  Luxembourg—Strange  let-ter  from  Madame  de  Luxembourg—Reply—Alters  Madame  deLuxembourg’s  copy  of “Julie”—Returns  to  his  house  at  Mont-Louis—The  Marquise  de Verdelin—Her  family  and  character—Madamede Verdelin  and  Coindet—M.  de  Silhouette—Letter  from  Rousseauto  him  concerning  the  financiers—Result—Letter  to  Madame  deLuxembourg—Declines  to  allow  “Emile”  to  be published  in France—Confounded  by a child  whilst  reading  “Emile”—Defends  Diderot—Letter—Diderot’s  annoyance—The  Abbé  Morellet  writes  “La  Vi-sion”  and  is imprisoned  in the  Bastille—D’  Alembert  begs  Rousseauto  procure  the  Abbé’s  release—Letter  in reply—Release  of the  Abbé—Letters—Learns  that  Voltaire  has  published  his  letter  concerningthe  disaster  at  Lisbon—The  Abbé  Trublet—Letter  to  Voltaire—Visited  by the  Prince  de  Conti—Madame  de  Boufflers—Rousseau=  peoosubdues  his:passion  for  her  +.93PEBOOK  XIPublication  of  “Julie’—Its  sensational  success—Comparison  be-tween  the  styles  of  Richardson  and  Rousseau—Anecdote—The“Paix  Perpetuelle”—Dishonest  action  of the  publisher—Family  af-flictions  of  the  Duke  de  Luxembourg—Becomes  suspicious  of  theAbbé  de  Boufflers—M.  de  Choiseul—Kind  offer—Reflections—Un-wise  reference  to  M.  de Choiseul  in  the  “Contrat  Social’”—Literarywork  of Madame  de  Boufflers—M.  le Président  Henault—Madamedu Deffand—Mademoiselle  de Lespinasse—Spite  of the  Marquis  deVilleroy—Makes  a confidante  of Madame  de Luxembourg—Fails  totrace  his children  at  the Foundling  Hospital—Arrangements  for  thepublication  of “Emile”—The  “Contrat  Social”  completed—Strangeincident—“Essai  sur  l’Origine  des Langues”—Scheme  of retirementCONTENTSxvii—Kindness  of the  publisher  Rey—Unaccountable  delay  in the  pub-lication  of  “Emile”—Serious  illness—Strange  letters—Suspicions—Reflections  on  the  condition  of  France—The  Seven  Years’  War—Printing  of “Emile”  suspended—Reasons—Printing  of “Emile”  fin-ished—His  papers  privately  examined—Attempt  to  confiscate  hisworks  at  Rouen—Surgical  operation  for  his  peculiar  malady—Re-sult—Determines  to  retire  after  the  publication  of  “Emile”’—“Emile”  published—Its  reception—Strange  conduct  of  his  friendswith  reference  to  their  correspondence  concerning  “Emile”—Guarded  opinions  of  his  friends  concerning  the  work—Plagiarismsof  M.  Balexsert,  a  Genevese—Beginning  of  the  storm—Alarmingrumours—Calmness  of  Rousseau—Questioned  as  to  his  remarksconcerning  M.  de  Choiseul—Advised  to  retire  to  England—Hume—Warrant  for  the  arrest  of  the  author  of  “Emile”—Doubts—Thestorm  breaks—Midnight  news  from  Paris—Hurried  preparationsfor  flight—Dislike  of  England  and  the  English—Takes  leave  ofThérése—Sets  out  for  Switzerland—Reflections  and  incidents  onthe  journey—Emotion  on  entering  Berne—Arrives  at  Yverdunpp.  564-610BOOK  XIIReflections—“Emile”  publicly  burnt  at  Geneva,  and  a  warrant  issued  against  its author—Execrated  throughout  Europe—Compelledto  leave  Berne—Removes  to  Motiers  and  is  joined  by  Thérése—Coldness  of  Thérése—Reasons—Writes  to  Lord  Keith  asking  hisprotection:  his  family  and  character—Kindness  of  the  King  ofPrussia—Writes  to  the  King  of  Prussia—Assumes  the  Armenian’costume—Abandons  literature—Occupations—M.  du Peyrou—Rea-sons  for not  visiting  Neufchatel—Desires  to  be admitted  to  the Com-munion—Conditions—M.  de  Montmollin  the  minister—Rebukedby Madame  de  Boufflers  for  having  communicated—Decree  of cen-‘sure  issued  by  the  Sorbonne—The  Archbishop  of  Paris  writesagainst  Rousseau—Arranges  his  papers  and  finds  they  have  beenXVillCONTENTStampered  with—Renounces  Geneva—‘“Lettres  écrites  de  la  Cam-pagne’—“Lettres  .écrites  de  la  Montagne”’—Mysterious  visitors:MM.  de  Montauban  and  Dastier—Denies  the  authorship  of  “DeHomme  de  la  Montagne”—Séguier  de  Saint-Brisson—The  self-styled  Baron  de  Sauttern—Death  of  the  Duke  de  Luxembourg—The  Duke  de  Luxembourg’s  will—Death  of Madame  de Warens—Loss  of  Marshal  Keith—Ill-will  of  the  Abbé  de  Mably—Considersthe writing  of his Confessions  the cause  of his  expulsion  from  Switz-erland—Complete  edition  of his  works—“Lettres  écrites  de la Mon-tagne”  published—Excitement  caused  by the  work—The  work  pub-licly burnt  at  Paris—Advised  not  to  present  himself  at  Communion—Attempts  at  excommunication—Montmollin  the  minister  stirs  upthe  people  against  him—Persecution—Visited  by Madame  de  Ver-delin  and  her  daughter—Hume—‘The  Vision  of  Peter  of  theMountain,  named  the  Seer’—Scurrilous  libel  by  M.  Vernes—Ex-citement  of  the  populace;  his  house  wrecked  by stones—Persuadedto  leave  Motiers—Walpole—The  island  of  Saint-Pierre—Descrip-tion—Peaceful  life  on  the  island—Occupations—Expelled  from  theisland—Ordered  to  leave  within  twenty-four  hours—Contemplatesgoing  to  Corsica—France  and  Corsica—Decides  to  go  to  Berlin—Persuaded  to  stay  at  Bienne—Harsh  treatment  by  the  people  ofBienne—Leaves  Bienne—Concluding  declarationpp.  611-683THE  CONFESSIONS  OFJEAN  JACQUES  ROUSSEAUPART  THE  FIRSTBOOK  I[1712-1719]I am  commencing  an  undertaking,  hitherto  without  precedent,  andwhich  will  never  find  an  imitator.  I desire  to  set  before  my  fellowsthe  likeness  of a  man  in  all  the  truth  of nature,  and  that  man  my-self.Myself  alone!  I know  the  feelings  of my  heart,  and  I know  men.I am  not  made  like  any  of  those  I have  seen;  I venture  to  believethat  I am  not  made  like  any  of those  who  are  in  existence.  If I amnot  better,  at  least  I am  different.  Whether  Nature  has  acted  rightlyor  wrongly  in  destroying  the  mould  in  which  she  cast  me,  can  onlybe  decided  after  I have  been  read.Let  the  trumpet  of  the  Day  of  Judgment  sound  when  it  will,I will  present  myself  before  the  Sovereign  Judge  with  this  book  inmy  hand.  I will  say  boldly:  “This  is what  I have  done,  what  I havethought,  what  I was.  I have  told  the  good  and  the  bad  with  equalfrankness.  I have  neither  omitted  anything  bad,  nor  interpolatedanything  good.  If I have  occasionally  made  use  of some  immaterialembellishments,  this  has  only  been  in  order  to  fill  a  gap  caused  bylack  of  memory.  I may  have  assumed  the  truth  of  that  which  Iknew  might  have  been  true,  never  of that  which  I knew  to  be false.I have  shown  myself  as  I was:  mean  and  contemptible,  good,  high-minded  and  sublime,  according  as  I was  one  or  the  other.  I haveunveiled  my  inmost  self  even  as  Thou  hast  seen  it, O  Eternal  Be-ing.  Gather  round  me  the  countless  host  of  my  fellow-men;  letthem  hear  my  confessions,  lament  for  my  unworthiness,  and  blushfor  my  imperfections.  Then  let  each  of  them  in  turn  reveal,  withthe  same  frankness,  the  secrets  of  his  heart  at  the  foot  of  theThrone,  and  say,  if he  dare,  ‘I was  better  than  that  man?  ”34THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUI was  born  at  Geneva,  in  the  year  1712,  and  was  the  son  of IsaacRousseau  and  Susanne  Bernard,  citizens.  The  distribution  of a  verymoderate  inheritance  amongst  fifteen  children  had  reduced  myfather’s  portion  almost  to  nothing;  and  his  only  means  of  liveli-hood  was  his  trade  of  watchmaker,  in  which  he  was  really  veryclever.  My  mother,  a  daughter  of  the  Protestant  minister  Bernard,was  better  off.  She  was  clever  and  beautiful,  and  my  father  hadfound  difficulty  in  obtaining  her  hand.  Their  affection  for  eachother  had  commenced  almost  as  soon  as  they  were  born.  Whenonly  eight  years  old,  they  walked  every  evening  upon  the  Treille;tat  ten,  they  were  inseparable.  Sympathy  and  union  of soul  strength-ened  in them  the  feeling  produced  by intimacy.  Both,  naturally  fullof tender  sensibility,  only  waited  for  the  moment  when  they  shouldtind  the  same  disposition  in  another—or,  rather,  this  momentwaited  for  them,  and  each  abandoned  his  heart  to  the  first  whichopened  to  receive  it.  Destiny,  which  appeared  to  oppose  their  pas-sion,  only  encouraged  it.  The  young  lover,  unable  to  obtain  pos-session  of his  mistress,  was  consumed  by grief.  She  advised  him  totravel,  and  endeavour  to  forget  her.  He  travelled,  but  without  re-sult,  and  returned  more  in  love  than  ever.  He  found  her  whom  heloved  still  faithful  and  true.  After  this  trial  of  affection,  nothingwas  left  for  them  but  to  love  each  other  all  their  lives.  This  theyswore  to  do,  and  Heaven  blessed  their  oath.Gabriel  Bernard,  my  mother’s  brother,  fell  in  love  with  one  ofmy  father’s  sisters,  who  only  consented  to  accept  the  hand  of  thebrother,  on  condition  that  her  own  brother  married  the  sister.  Lovearranged  everything,  and  the  two  marriages  took  place  on  the  sameday.  Thus  my  uncle  became  the  husband  of  my  aunt,  and  theirchildren  were  doubly  my  first  cousins.  At  the  end  of a  year,  a  childwas  born  to  both,  after  which  they  were  again  obliged  to  separate.My  uncle  Bernard  was  an  engineer.  He  took  service  in  the  Em-pire  and  in  Hungary,  under  Prince  Eugéne.  He  distinguishedhimself  at  the  siege  and  battle  of  Belgrade.  My  father,  after  thebirth  of  my  only  brother,  set  out  for  Constantinople,  whither  hewas  summoned  to  undertake  the  post  of watchmaker  to  the  Sultan.During  his  absence,  my  mother’s  beauty,  intellect  and  talents  gained1A  fashionable  promenade  in  Geneva.DEATH  OF  HIS  MOTHER5)for  her  the  devotion  of  numerous  admirers.?  M.  de  la Closure,  theFrench  Resident,  was  one  øf the  most  eager  to  offer  his.  His  passionmust  have  been  great,  for,  thirty  years  later,  I saw  him  greatly  af-fected  when  speaking  to  me  of  her.  To  enable  her  to  resist  suchadvances,  my  mother  had  more  than  her  virtue:  she  loved  her hus-band  tenderly.  She  pressed  him  to  return;  he  left  all, and  returned.I was  the  unhappy  fruit  of  this  return.  Ten  months  later  I wasborn,  a  weak  and  ailing  child;  I cost  my  mother  her  life,  and  mybirth  was  the  first  of my  misfortunes.I have  never  heard  how  my  father  bore  this  loss,  but  I knowthat  he  was  inconsolable.  He  believed  that  he  saw  his  wife  againin  me,  without  being  able  to  forget  that  it was  I who  had  robbedhim  of  her;  he  never  embraced  me  without  my  perceiving,  by hissighs  and  the  convulsive  manner  in  which  he  clasped  me  to  hisbreast,  that  a  bitter  regret  was  mingled  with  his  caresses,  whichwere  on  that  account  only  the  more  tender.  When  he  said  to  me,“Jean  Jacques,  let  us  talk  of your  mother,”  I used  to  answer,  “Well,then,  my  father,  we  will  weep!’—and  this  word  alone  was  suff-cient  to  meve  him  to  tears.  “Ah!”  said  he,  with  a  sigh,  “give  herback  to  me,  console  me  for  her  loss,  fill  the  void  which  she  hasleft in my  soul.  Should  I love  you  as  I do, if you  were  only my  son?”Forty  years  after  he  had  lost  her,  he  died  in  the  arms  of  a  secondwife,  but  the  name  of  the  first  was  on  his  lips  and  her  image  atthe  bottom  of his  heart.Such  were  the  authors  of  my  existence.  Of  all  the  gifts  whichHeaven  had  bestowed  upon  them, a sensitive  heart  is the  only  one2 Her  talents  were  too  brilliant  for  her  position,  since  her  father,  the  min-ister,  who  worshipped  her,  had  educated  her  with  great  care.  She  drew,  sang,accompanied  herself  on  the  téorbe;*  she  read  much,  and  wrote  tolerableverses.  During  the  absence  of  her  husband  and  her  brother,  while  walkingwith  her  sister-in-law  and  their  two  children,  she  delivered  the  followingimpromptu,  when  someone  happened  to  mention  them:Ces  deux  messieurs,  qui  sont  absents,Nous  sont  chers  de  bien  des  manières:Ce  sont  nos  amis,  nos  amants:Ce  sont  nos  maris  et  nos  fréres,Et  les  péres  de  ces  enfants.A  stringed  instrument,  resembling  a lute.6THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthey  bequeathed  to  me;  it had  been  the  source  of  their  happiness,but  for  me  it  proved  the  source  of  all  the  misfortunes  of  my  life.I was  brought  into  the  world  in  an  almost  dying  condition;  littlehope  was  entertained  of  saving  my  life.  I carried  within  me  thegerms  of  a  complaint  which  the  course  of  time  has  strengthened,and  which  at  times  allows  me  a  respite  only  to  make  me  suffermore  cruelly  in  another  manner.  One  of  my  father’s  sisters,  anamiable  and  virtuous  young  woman,  took  such  care  of  me  thatshe  saved  my  life.  At  this  moment,  while  I am  writing,  she  is  stillalive,  at  the  age  of eighty,  nursing  a  husband  younger  than  herself,but  exhausted  by excessive  drinking.  Dear  aunt,  I forgive  you  forhaving  preserved  my  life;  and  I deeply  regret  that,  at  the  end  ofyour  days,  I am  unable  to  repay  the  tender  care  which  you  lavishedupon  me  at  the  beginning  of  my  own.?  My  dear  old  nurse  Jac-queline  is  also  still  alive,  healthy  and  robust.  The  hands  whichopened  my  eyes  at  my  birth  will  be  able  to  close  them  for  me  atmy  death.I felt  before  I thought:  this  is the  common  lot  of humanity.  I ex-perienced  it more  than  others.  I do not  know  what I did  until  I wasfive  or  six  years  old.  I do  not  know  how I learned  to  read;  I onlyremember  my  earliest  reading,  and  the  effect  it had  upon  me;  fromthat time  I date  my  uninterrupted  self-consciousness.  My mother  hadleft  some  romances  behind  her,  which  my  father  and  I began  toread  after  supper.  At  first  it was  only  a  question  of practising  me  inreading  by the  aid  of amusing  books;  but  soon  the  interest  becameso  lively,  that  we  used  to  read  in  turns  without  stopping,  and  spentwhole  nights  in  this  occupation.  We  were  unable  to  leave  off  untilthe  volume  was  finished.  Sometimes,  my  father,  hearing  the  swal-lows  begin  to  twitter  in  the  early  morning,  would  say,  quiteashamed,  “Let  us  go  to  bed;  I am  more  of a  child  than  yourself.”In  a  short  time  I acquired,  by this  dangerous  method,  not  onlyextreme  facility  in  reading  and  understanding  what  I read,  but  aknowledge  of the  passions  that  was  unique  in  a  child  of my  age.  Ihad  no  idea  of  things  in  themselves,  although  all  the  feelings  of? The  name  of  this  aunt  was  Madame  Gonceru.  In  March,  1767,  Rousseausettled  upon  her  an  income  of  one  hundred  livres,  and,  even  in  the  time  ofhis  greatest  distress,  always  paid  it  with  scrupulous  exactitude.HIS  LOVE  OF  READINGJactual  life  were  already  known  to  me.  I had  conceived  nothing,  butfelt  everything.  These  confused  emotions  which  I felt  one  after  theother,  certainly  did  not  warp  the  reasoning  powers  which  I did  notas  yet possess;  but  they  shaped  them  in me  of a  peculiar  stamp,  andgave  me  odd  and  romantic  notions  of human  life,  of which  experience  and  reflection  have  never  been  able  wholly  to  cure  me.[1719—-1723.]—The  romances  came  to  an  end  in  the  summer  of1719.  The  following  winter  brought  us  something  different.  Mymother’s  library  being  exhausted,  we  had  recourse  to  the  share  ofher  father’s  which  had  fallen  to  us.  Luckily,  there  were  some  goodbooks  in  it;  in  fact,  it  could  hardly  have  been  otherwise,  for  thelibrary  had  been  collected  by a  minister,  who  was  even  a  learnedman  according  to  the  fashion  of the  day, and  was  at  the  same  time  aman  of  taste  and  intellect.  The  “History  of  the  Empire  and  theChurch,”  by Le  Sueur;  Bossuet’s  “Treatise  upon  Universal  History”;Plutarch’s  “Lives  of  Famous  Men”;  Nani’s  “History  of  Venice”;Ovid’s  “Metamorphoses”;  La  Bruyére;  Fontenelle’s  “Worlds”;his  “Dialogues  of  the  Dead”;  and  some  volumes  of  Moliére—allthese  were  brought  over  into  my  father’s  room,  and  I read  to him  outof them  while  he worked.  I conceived a taste  for  them  that  was  rareand  perhaps  unique  at  my  age.  Plutarch,  especially,  became  myfavourite  author.  The  pleasure  I took  in reading  him  over  and  overagain  cured  me a little  of my  taste  for romance,  and  I soon  preferredAgesilaus,  Brutus,  and  Aristides  to  Orondates,  Artamenes,  and  Juba,This  interesting  reading,  and  the  conversations  between  my  fatherand  myself  to  which  it gave  rise,  formed  in me  the  free  and  republi»can  spirit,  the  proud  and  indomitable  character  unable  to  endureslavery  or  servitude,  which  has  tormented  me  throughout  my  life  insituations  the  least  fitted  to  afford  it  scope.  Unceasingly  occupiedwith  thoughts  of Rome  and  Athens,  living  as  it were  amongst  theirgreat  men,  myself  by birth  the citizen  of a  republic  and  the  son  of afather  whose  patriotism  was  his  strongest  passion,  I was  fired  by hisexample;  I believed  myself  a  Greek  or  a  Roman;  I lost  my  identityin that  of the  individual  whose  life  I was  reading;  the  recitals  of thequalities  of endurance  and  intrepidity  which  arrested  my  attentionmade  my  eyes  glisten  and  strengthened  my  voice.  One  day,  while  ]was  relating  the  history  of  Scaevola  at  table,  those  present  were8THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROYSSEAUalarmed  to  see  me  come  forward  and  hold  my  hand  over  a  chafing-dish,  to  illustrate  his  action.I had  a  brother  seven  years  older  than  myself,  who  was  learningmy  father’s  trade.  The  excessive  affection  which  was  lavished  uponmyself  caused  him  to  be  somewhat  neglected,  which  treatment  Icannot  approve  of.  His  education  felt  the  consequences  of this  neg-lect.  He  took  to  evil courses  before  he was  old  enough  to be a  regularprofligate.  He  was  put  with  another  master,  from  whom  he  wascontinually  running  away,  as  he had  done  from  home.  I hardly  eversaw  him; I can  scarcely  say  that  I knew  him;  but  I never  ceased  toJove  him  tenderly,  and  he loved  me  as  much  as  a  vagabond  can  loveanything.  I remember  that,  on  one  occasion,  when  my  father  waschastising  him  harshly  and  in  anger,  I threw  myself  impetuouslybetween  them  and  embraced  him  closely.  In  this  manner  I coveredhis  body  with  mine,  and  received  the  blows  which  were  aimed  athim;  I so  obstinately  maintained  my  position  that  at  last  my  fatherwas  obliged  to  leave  off,  being  either  disarmed  by  my  cries  andtears,  or  afraid  of hurting  me  more  than  him.  At  last,  my  brotherturned  out  so  badly  that  he  ran  away  and  disappeared  altogether.Sometime  afterwards  we  heard  that  he  was  in  Germany.  He  neveronce  wrote  to  us.  From  that  time  nothing  more  has  been  heard  ofhim,  and  thus  I have  remained  an  only  son.If this  poor  boy  was  caretessly  brought  up,  this  was  not  the  casewith  his  brother;  the  children  of kings  could  not  be  more  carefullylooked  after  than  I was  during  my  early  years—worshipped  by allaround  me,  and,  which  is  far  less  common,  treated  as  a  beloved,never  as  a  spoiled  child.  Till  I left  my  father’s  house,  I was  neveronce  allowed  to  run  about  the  streets  by  myself  with  the  otherchildren;  in my  case  no  one  ever  had  to  satisfy  or  check  any  of thosefantastic  whims  which  are  attributed  to  Nature,  but  are  all  inreality  the  result  of education.  I had  the  faults  of  my  age:  I was  achatterbox,  a  glutton,  and,  sometimes,  a  liar.  I would  have  stolenfruits,  bonbons,  or  eatables;  but  I have  never  found  pleasure  indoing  harm  or  damage,  in  accusing  others,  or  in  tormenting  poordumb  animals.  I remember,  however,  that  I once  made  water  in  asaucepan  belonging  to  one  of our  neighbours,  Madame  Clot,  whileshe  was  at  church.  I declare  that,  even  now,  the  recollection  of thisHIS  PASSION  FOR  MUSIC9makes  me  laugh,  because  Madame  Clot,  a  good  woman  in  otherrespects,  was  the  most  confirmed  old  grumbler  I have  ever  known.Such  is the  brief  and  true  story  of  all  my  childish  offences.How  could  I become  wicked,  when  I had  nothing  but  examplesof gentleness  before  my  eyes,  and  none  around  me  but the best peoplein  the  world?  My  father,  my  aunt,  my  nurse,  my  relations,  ourfriends,  our  neighbours,  all  who  surrounded  me,  did  not,  it is true,obey  me,  but  they loved  me;  and  I loved  them  in return.  My wisheswere  so  little  excited  and  so  little  opposed,  that  it did  not  occur  tome  to  have  any.  I can  swear  that,  until  I served  under  a  master,  Inever  knew  what  a  fancy  was.  Except  during  the  time I spent  inreading  or  writing  in  my  father’s  company,  or  when  my  nurse  tookme  for a  walk,  I was  always  with  my  aunt,  sitting  or  standing  by herside,  watching  her  at  her  embroidery  or  listening  to  her  singing;and  I was  content.  Her  cheerfulness,  her  gentleness  and  her  pleasantface  have  stamped  so  deep and  lively an  impression  on  my  mind  thatI can  still  see  her  manner,  look,  and  attitude;  I remember  her  affec-tionate  language:  I could  describe  what  clothes  she  wore  and  howher  head  was  dressed,  not  forgetting  the  two  little  curls  of  blackhair  on  her  temples,  which  she  wore  in accordance  with  the  fashionof the  time.I am  convinced  that  it is to  her  I owe  the  taste,  or  rather  passion,for  music,  which  only  became  fully  developed  in  me  a  long  timeafterwards.  She  knew  a  prodigious  number  of  tunes  and  songswhich  she  used  to  sing  in  a  very  thin,  gentle  voice.  This  excellent‘woman’s  cheerfulness  of  soul  banished  dreaminess  and  melancholyfrom  herself  and  all  around  her.  The  attraction  which  her  singingpossessed  for me  was so great,  that  not  only have  several  of her  songsalways  remained  in  my  memory,  but  even  now,  when I have  losther,  and  as  I grew  older,  many  of them,  totally  forgotten  since  thedays of my  childhood,  return  to  my  mind  with  inexpressible  charm,Would  anyone  believe  that  I, an  old  dotard,  eaten  up  by cares  andtroubles,  sometime  find  myself  weeping  like  a child,  when  I mumbleone  of those  little  airs  in a  voice  already  broken  and  trembling?  Oneof them,  especially,  has  come  back  to  me  completely,  as  far  as  thetune  is concerned;  the  second  half  of  the  words,  however,  has  ob-stinately  resisted  all  my  efforts  to  recall  it, although  I have  an  in-luTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUdistinct  recollection  of the  rhymes.  Here  is  the  beginning,  and  allthat  I can  remember  of  the  rest:Tircis,  je n’oseEcouter  ton  chalumeauSous  |’ormeau:Car  on  en  causeDéjà  dans  notre  hameau.un  bergers'engagerpceagesans  dangerEt  toujours  l'épine  est  sous  la  rose.*I ask,  where  is the  affecting  charm  which  my  heart  finds  in  thissong? it is  a  whim,  which  I am  quite  unable  to  understand;  but,be that  as  it may,  it is absolutely  impossible  for me  to  sing it throughwithout  being  interrupted  by my  tears.  I have  intended,  times  with-out  number,  to  write  to  Paris  to  make  inquiries  concerning  the  re-mainder  of the  words,  in case  anyone  should  happen  to  know  them;but  I am  almost  certain  that  the  pleasure  which  I feel  im  recallingthe  air  would  partly  disappear,  if  it  should  be  proved  that  othersbesides  my  poor  aunt  Suson  have  sung  it.Such  were  my  earliest  emotions  on  my  entry  into  life;  thus  beganto  form  or  display  itself  in me  that  heart  at  once  so  proud  and tender,that  character  so  effeminate  but  yet  indomitable,  which,  ever  waver-ing  between  timidity  and  courage,  weakness  and  self-control,  hasthroughout  my  life  made  me  inconsistent,  and  has caused  abstinenceand  enjoyment,  pleasure  and  prudence  equally  to  elude  my  grasp.This  course  of  education  was  interrupted  by  an  accident,  theThis  song,  well-known  in  Paris,  is  still  sung  by  the  working  classes.  Thesixth  and  following  lines  run:“Un  cœur  s’exposeA trop  s’engagerAvec  un  berger,Et  toujours  l'épine  est  sous  la rose.”[Tircis,  I dare  not  listen  to  your  pipe  under  the  elm;  people  are  beginning  totalk  about  it in  the  village.  It  is  dangerous  for  a  heart  to  have  too  much  to  dowith  a  shepherd;  there  is  no  rose  without  its  thorn.]HE  IS  “SENT  TO  sBOSSEYIkconsequences  of  which  have  exercised  an  influence  upon  the  re-mainder  of my  life.  My fasher  had  a  quarrel  with  a  captain  in  theFrench  army,  named  Gautier,  who  was  connected  with  some  ofthe members  of the Common  Council.  This  Gautier,  a cowardly  andinsolent  fellow  (whose  nose  happened  to  bleed  during  the  affray),in order  to  avenge  himself,  accused  my  father  of having  drawn  hissword  within  the  city  walls.  My father,  whom  they  wanted  to  sendto  prison,  persisted  that,  in  accordance  with  the  law,  the  accuserought  to  be imprisoned  as  well  as  himself.  Being  unable  to  have  hisway  in  this,  he  preferred  to  quit  Geneva  and  expatriate  himself  forthe rest  of his  life, than  to  give way  on  a  point  in which  honour  andliberty  appeared  to  him  to  be  compromised.I remained  under  the  care  of my  uncle  Bernard,  who  was  at  thetime  employed  upon  the  fortifications  of Geneva.  His  eldest  daugh-ter  was  dead,  but  he had  a  son  of the  same  age  as  myself.  We  weresent  together  to  Bossey,  to  board  with  the  Protestant  minister  Iam-bercier,  in  order  to  learn,  together  with  Latin,  all  the  sorry  trashwhich  is included  under  the  name  of education.Two  years  spent  in the village  in some  degree  softened  my  Romanroughness  and  made  me a child  again.  -At  Geneva,  where  no  taskswere  imposed  upon  me,  I loved  reading  and  study,  which  were  al-most  my  only  amusements;  at  Bossey,  my  tasks  made  me  love  thegames  which  formed  a  break  in  them.  The  country:  was  so  new  tcme,  that  my  enjoyment  of it never  palled.  I conceived  so  lively  anaffection  for it, that  it has never  since  died  out.  The  remembrance  ofthe  happy  days  I have  spent  there  filled  me  with  regretful  longingfor  its  pleasures,  at  all  periods  of  my  life,  until  the  day  which  hasbrought  me  back  to  it. M.  Lambercier  was  a  very  intelligent  person,who,  without  neglecting  our  education,  never  imposed  excessivetasks  upon  us.  The  fact  that, in spite of my  dislike  of restraint,  I havenever  recalled  my  hours  of  study  with  any  feeling  of disgust—an¢also  that,  even  if I did  not  learn  much  from  him, I learnt  withoutdifficulty  what  I did  learn  and  never  forgot’  it—is  sufficient  proofthat  his  system  of instruction  was  a  good  one.The  simplicity  of  this  country  life  was  of  inestimable  value  tome,  in that  it opened  my  heart  to  friendship.  Up to  that  time  I hadonly  known  lofty  but  imaginary  sentiments.  The  habit  of  living£2THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUpeacefully  together  with  my  cousin  Bernard  drew  us  together  intender  bonds  of  union.  In  a  short  time,  my  feelings  towards  himbecame  more  affectionate  than  those  with  which  I had  regarded  mybrother,  and  they  have  never  been  effaced.  He  was a tall,  lanky,weakly  boy,  as  gentle  in  disposition  as  he  was  feeble  in  body,  whonever  abused  the  preference  which  was  shown  to  him  in  the  houseas  the  son  of  my  guardian.  Our  tasks,  our  amusements,  our  tasteswere  the  same:  we  were  alone,  we  were  of  the  same  age,  each  ofus  needed  a  companion:  separation  was  to  us,  in a  manner,  annihila-tion.  Although  we  had  few  opportunities  of  proving  our  mutualattachment,  it was  very  great;  not  only  were  we  unable  to  live  aninstant  apart,  but  we  did  not  imagine  it possible  that  we  could  everbe  separated.  Being,  both  of  us,  ready  to  yield  to  tenderness,  anddocile,  provided  compulsion  was  not  used,  we  always  agreed  ineverything.  If, in  the  presence  of those  who  looked  after  us,  he  hadsome  advantage  over  me  in  consequence  of  the  favour  with  whichthey  regarded  him,  when  we  were  alone  I had'an  advantage  overhim  which  restored  the  equilibrium.  When  we  were  saying  ourlessons,  I prompted  him  if  he  hesitated;  when  I had  finished  myexercise,  I helped  him  with  his;  and  in  our  amusements,  my  moreactive  mind  always  led  the  way.  In  short,  our  two  characters  har-monised  so  well,  and  the  friendship  which  united  us  was  so  sincere,that,  in  the  five  years  and  more,  during  which,  whether  at  Bosseyor  Geneva,  we  were  almost  inseparable,  although  I confess  that  weoften  fought,  it was  never  necessary  to  separate  us,  none  of our  quar-rels  ever  lasted  longer  than  a  quarter  of an  hour,  and  neither  of usever  made  any  accusation  against  the  other.  These  observations  are,if you  will,  childish,  but  they  furnish  an  example  which,  since  thetime  that  there  have  been  children,  is perhaps  unique.The  life  which  I led  at  Bossey  suited  me  so  well  that,  had  it onlylasted  longer,  it would  have  completely  decided  my  character.  Ten-der, affectionate  and  gentle  feelings  formed  its foundation.  I believethat no  individual  of our  species was  naturally  more  free from  vanitythan  myself.  I raised  myself  by fits  and  starts  to  lofty  flights,  butimmediately  fell  down  again  into  my  natural  languor.  My  liveliestdesire  was  to  be  loved  by all  who  came  near  me.  I was  of  a  gentledisposition;  my  cousin  and  our  guardians  were  the  same.  DuringMADEMOISELLE  LAMBERCIER313two  whole  years  I was  neither  the  witness  nor  the  victim  of  anyviolent  feeling.  Everythingenourished  in  my  heart  those  tendencieswhich  it received  from  Nature.  I knew  no  higher  happiness  than  tosee  all the  world  satisfied  with  me  and  with  everything.  I shall  neverforget  how,  if I happened  to  hesitate  when  saying  my  catechism  inchurch,  nothing  troubled  me  more  than  to  observe  signs  of restless-ness  and  dissatisfaction  on  Mademoiselle  Lambercier’s  face.  Thatalone  troubled  me  more  than  the  disgrace  of  failing  in  public,which,  nevertheless,  affected  me  greatly:  for,  although  little  sus-ceptible  to  praise,  I felt  shame  keenly;  and  I may  say  here  that  thethought  of Mademoiselle’s  reproaches  caused  me  less  uneasiness  thanthe  fear  of offending  her.When  it  was  necessary,  however,  neither  she  nor  her  brotherwere  wanting  in  severity;  but,  since  this  severity  was  nearly  alwaysjust,  and  never  passionate,  it  pained  me  without  making  me  in-subordinate.  Failure  to  please  grieved  me  more  than  punishment,and  signs of dissatisfaction  hurt  me  more  than  corporal  chastisement.It  is  somewhat  embarrassing  to  explain  myself  more  clearly,  but,nevertheless,  I must  do  so.  How  differently  would  one  deal  withyouth,  if one  could  more  clearly  see  the  remote  effects  of  the  usualmethod  of treatment,  which  is employed  always  without  discrimina-tion, frequently  without  discretion!  The  important  lesson  which  maybe drawn  from  an  example  as  common  as  it is fatal  makes  me  decideto  mention  it.As  Mademoiselle  Lambercier  had  the  affection  of  a  mother  forus,  she  also  exercised  the  authority  of one,  and  sometimes  carried  itso  far  as  to  inflict  upon  us  the  punishment  of children  when  we  haddeserved  it.  For  some  time  she  was  content  with  threats,  and  thisthreat  of  a  punishment  that  was  quite  new  to  me  appeared  veryterrible;  but,  after  it had  been  carried  out,  I found  the  reality  less'  terrible  than  the  expectation;  and,  what  was  still  more  strange,  thischastisement  made  me  still  more  devoted  to  her  who  had  inflicted  it.It needed  all  the  strength  of this  devotion  and  all  my  natural  docil-ity  to  keep  myself  from  doing  something  which  would  have  de-servedly  brought  upon  me a repetition  of it; for  I had  found  in  thepain, even  in the  disgrace,  a  mixture  of sensuality  which  had  left meless  afraid  than  desirous  of  experiencing  it  again  from  the  same14THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUhand.  No  doubt  some  precocious  sexual  instinct  was  mingled  withthis  feeling,  for the  same  chastisement  inflicted  by her  brother  wouldnot  have  seemed  to  me  at  all  pleasant.  But,  considering  his  disposi-tion,  there  was  little  cause  to  fear  the  substitution;  and  if  I keptmyself  from  deserving  punishment,  it  was  solely  for  fear  of  dis-pleasing  Mademoiselle  Lambercier;  for,  so  great  is the  power  exer-cised  over  me  by kindness,  even  by that  which  is due  to  the  senses,that  it has  always  controlled  the  latter  in my  heart.The  repetition  of  the  offence,  which  I  avoided  without  beingafraid  of it, occurred  without  any  fault  of mine,  that  is to  say,  of mywill,  and  I may  say  that  I profited  by it without  any  qualm  of con-science.  But  this  second  time  was  also  the  last;  for  MademoiselleLambercier,  who  had  no  doubt  noticed  something  which  convincedher that  the punishment  did  not  have  the desired  effect,  declared  thatit tired  her  too  much,  and that  she  would  abandon  it. Until  then  wehad  slept in her  reom,  sometimes  even  in her  bed  during  the  winter.Two  days  afterwards  we  were  put  to  sleep  in  another  room,  andfrom  that  time  I had  the  honour,  which  I would  gladly  have  dis-pensed  with,  of being  treated  by her  as  a  big boy.Who  would  believe  that  this  childish  punishment,  inflicted  uponme  when  only eight years  old  by a  young  woman  of thirty,  disposedof my  tastes,  my  desires,  my  passions,  and  my  own  self  for  the  re-mainder  of  my  life,  and  that  in  a  manner  exactly  contrary  to  thatwhich  should  have  been  the  natural  result?  When  my  feelings  wereonce  inflamed,  my  desires  so  went  astray  that,  limited  to  what  Ihad  already  felt,  they  did  not  trouble  themselves  to  look  for  any-thing  else.  In  spite  of my  hot  blood,  which  has  been  inflamed  withsensuality  almost  from  my  birth,  I kept myself  free  from  every  taintuntil  the  age  when  the  coldest  and  most  sluggish  temperaments  be-gin to  develop.  In torments  for a long time,  without  knowing  why, Idevoured  with  burning  glances  all  the  pretty  women  I met;  myimagination  unceasingly  recalled  them  to  me,  only  to  make  use  ofthem  in  my  own  fashion,  and  to  make  of  them  so  many  Mlles.Lambercier.Even  after  I had  reached  years  of  maturity,  this  curious  taste,always  abiding  with  me  and  carried  to  depravity  and  even  frenzy,preserved  my  morality,  which  it might naturally  have  been  expectedPRECOCIOUS  SENSUALITYI5to  destroy.  If ever  a  bringing-up  was  chaste  and  modest,  assuredlymine  was.  My  three  aunts  were  not  only  models  of  propriety,  butreserved  to  a  degree  which  has  long  since  been  unknown  amongstwomen.  My  father,  a  man  of  pleasure,  but  a  gallant  of  the  oldschool,  never  said  a  word,  even  in  the  presence  of women  whom  heloved  more  than  others,  which  would  have  brought  a  blush  to  amaiden’s  cheek;  and  the  respect  due  to  children  has  never  been  somuch  insisted  upon  as  in  my  family  and  in  my  presence.  In  thisrespect  I found  M.  Lambercier  equally  careful;  and  an  excellentservant  was  dismissed  for  having  used  a  somewhat  too  free  expres-sion  in  our  presence.  Until  I was  a  young  man,  I not  only  had  nodistinct  idea  of the union  of the  sexes,  but  the confused  notion  whichI had  regarding  it never  presented  itself  to  me  except  in  a  hateful,and  disgusting  form.  For  common  prostitutes  I  felt  a  loathingwhich  has  never  been  effaced:  the  sight  of a  profligate  always  filledme  with  contempt,  even  with  affright.  My horror  of debauchery  be-came  thus  pronounced  ever  since  the  day  when,  walking  to  LittleSacconex  by a  hollow  way,  I saw  on  both  sides  holes  in the  ground,where  I was  told  that  these  creatures  carried  on  their  intercourse.The  thought  of the  one  always  brought  back  to  my  mind  the  copu-lation  of dogs,  and  the  bare  recollection  was  sufficient  to  disgust  me.This  tendency  of  my  bringing-up,  in  itself  adapted  to  delay  thefirst  outbreaks  of  an  inflammable  temperament,  was  assisted,  as  Ihave  already  said,  by the  direction  which  the  first  indications  ofsensuality  took  in my  case.  Only busying  my  imagination  with  whatI had  actually  felt,  in  spite  of  most  uncomfortable  effervescence  ofblood,  I only  knew  how  to  turn  my  desires  in  the  direction  of thatkind  of pleasure  with  which  I was  acquainted,  without  ever  goingas  far as  that  which  had  been  made  hateful  to  me,  and  which,  with-out  my  having  the  least  suspicion  of it, was  so  closely  related  to  theother.  In my  foolish  fancies,  in my  erotic  frenzies,  in the extravagantacts  to  which  they sometimes  led  me,  I had  recourse  in my  imagina-tion  to  the  assistance  of the  other  sex,  without  ever  thinking  that  itwas  serviceable  for  any  purpose  than  that  for  which  I was  burningto  make  use  of it.In  this  manner,  then,  in  spite  of  an  ardent,  lascivious  and  pre-cocious  temperament,  I passed  the  age  of  puberty  without  desir-16THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUing, even  without  knowing  of any  other  sensual  pleasures  than  thoseof  which  Mademoiselle  Lambercier  had  most  innocently  given  methe  idea;  and  when,  in course  of time,  I became  a  man,  that  whichshould  have  destroyed  me  again  preserved  me.  My  old  childishtaste,  instead  of  disappearing,  became  so  associated  with  the  other,that  I could  never  banish  it from  the  desires  kindled  by my  senses;and  this  madness,  joined  to  my  natural  shyness,  has  always  mademe  very  unenterprising  with  women,  for  want  of courage  to  say  allor  power  to  do all.  The  kind  of enjoyment,  of which  the  other  wasonly  for  me  the  final  consummation  could  neither  be  appropriatedby him  who  longed  for it, nor  guessed  by her  who  was  able  to bestowit. Thus  I have  spent  my  life in idle  longing,  without  saying  a  word,in the  presence  of those  whom  I loved  most.  Too  bashful  to  declaremy  taste,  I at  least  satisfied  it in  situations  which  had  reference  to  itand  kept up  the idea  of it. To lie at  the  feet  of an  imperious  mistress,to  obey  her  commands,  to  ask  her  forgiveness—this  was  for  me  asweet  enjoyment;  and,  the  more  my  lively  imagination  heated  myblood,  the  more  I presented  the  appearance  of  a  bashful  lover.  Itmay  be  easily  imagined  that  this  manner  of making  love  does  notlead  to  very  speedy  results,  and  is not  very  dangerous  to  the  virtueof those  who  are  its  object.  For  this  reason  I have  rarely  possessed,but  have  none  the  less  enjoyed  myself  in  my  own  way—that  is tosay,  in  imagination.  Thus  it has  happened  that  my  senses,  in  har-mony  with  my  timid  disposition  and  my  romantic  spirit,  have  keptmy  sentiments  pure  and  my  morals  blameless,  owing  to  the  verytastes  which,  combined  with  a  little  more  impudence,  might  haveplunged  me  into  the  most  brutal  sensuality.I have  taken  the  first  and  most  difficult  step  in the  dark  and  dirtylabyrinth  of my  confessions.  It is easier  to  admit  that  which  is crimi-nal  than  that  which  is  ridiculous  and  makes  a  man  feel  ashamed.Henceforth  I am  sure  of  myself;  after  having  ventured  to  say  somuch,  I can  shrink  from  nothing.  One  may  judge  what  such  con-fessions  have  cost  me,  from  the  fact  that,  during  the  whole  courseof my  life,  I have  never  dared  to  declare  my  folly  to  those  whom  Iloved  with  the  frenzy  of a  passion  which  deprived  me  of sight  andhearing,  which  robbed  me  of my  senses  and  caused  me  to  trembleall over  with  a  convulsive  movement.  I have  never  brought  myself,iTHE  INCIDENT  OF  THE  COMBS17even  when  on  most  intimate terms,  to  ask  women  to  grant  me  theonly favour  of all  which  was  wanting.  This  never  happened  to  mebut once—in  my  childhood,  with  a  girl of my  own  age;  even  then, itwas  she who  first  proposed  it.While  thus  going  back  to  the  first  traces  of my  inner  life,  I findelements  which  sometimes  appear  incompatible,  and  yet have  unitedin  order  to  produce  with  vigour  a  simple  and  uniform,  effect;  and  |find  others  which,  although  apparently  the  same,  have  formed  com-binations  so  different,  owing  to  the  co-operation  of certain  circum-stances,  that  one  would  never  imagine  that  these  elements  were  inany  way  connected.  Who,  for  instance,  would  believe  that  one  ofthe  most  powerful  movements  of my  soul  was  tempered  in the  samespring  from  which  a  stream  of  sensuality  and  effeminacy  has  en-tered  my  blood?  Without  leaving  the  subject  of  which  I have  justspoken,  I shall  produce  by means  of it a  very  different  impression.One  day I was  learning  my  lesson  by myself  in  the  room  next  tothe  kitchen.  The  servant  had  put  Mademoiselle  Lambercier’s  combsin front  of the  fire-place  to  dry. When  she  came  back  to  fetch  them,she found  one  with  a  whole  row  of teeth  broken.  Who  was  to  blamefor  the  damage?  No  one  except  myself  had  entered  the  room.  Onbeing  questioned,  I denied  that  I had  touched  the  comb.  M.  andMademoiselle  Lambercier  both  began  to  admonish,  to  press,  and  tothreaten  me;  I obstinately  persisted  in  my  denial;  but  the  evidencewas  too  strong,  and  outweighed  all  my  protestations,  although  itwas  the  first  time  that  I had  been  found  to  lie  so  boldly.  The  matterwas  regarded  as  serious,  as  in fact  it deserved  to  be. The  mischievous-ness,  the  falsehood,  the  obstinacy  appeared  equally  deserving  ofpunishment;  but  this  time  it was  not  by Mademoiselle  Lambercierthat  chastisement  was  inflicted.  My  uncle  Bernard  was  written  to,and  he came.  My poor  cousin  was  accused  of another  equally  graveoffence;  we  were  involved  in  the  same  punishment.  It was  terrible.Had  they  wished  to  look  for  the  remedy  in  the  evil  itself  and  todeaden  for ever  my  depraved  senses,  they could  not  have  set  to  workbetter,  and  for  a  long  time  my  senses  left  me  undisturbed.sThey  could  not  draw  from  me  the  desired  confession.  AlthoughI was  several  times  brought  up before  them  and  reduced  to  a  pitiablecondition,  I remained  unshaken.  I would  have  endured  death,  and18THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUmade  up  my  mind  to  do  so.  Force  was  obliged  to  yield  to  the  dia-bolical  obstinacy  of  a  child—as  they  called  my  firmness.  At  last  Iemerged  from  this  cruel  trial,  utterly  broken,  but  triumphant.It is  now  nearly  fifty  years  since  this  incident  took  place,  and  Ihave  no  fear  of being punished  again  for  the  same  thing.  Well,  then,I declare  in  the  sight  of heaven  that  I was  innocent  of the  offence,that  I neither  broke  nor  touched  the  comb,  that  I never  went  nearthe  fire-place,  and  had  never  even  thought  of doing  so.  It would  beuseless  to  ask  me  how  the  damage  was  done:  I do  not  know,  and  Icannot  understand;  all that  I know  for  certain  is, that  I had  nothingto do with  it.Imagine  a  child,  shy  and  obedient  in  ordinary  life,  but  fiery,proud,  and  unruly  in his  passions:  a  child  who  had  always  been  ledby the  voice  of  reason  and  always  treated  with  gentleness,  justice,and  consideration,  who  had  not  even  a  notion  of injustice,  and  whofor the  first  time  becomes  acquainted  with  so  terrible  an  example  ofit on  the  part  of the  very  people  whom  he  most  loves  and  respects!What  an  upset  of ideas!  what  a  disturbance  of feelings!  what  revo-lution  in his  heart,  in his  brain,  in  the  whole  of his  little  intellectualand  moral  being!  Imagine  all this,  I say,  if possible.  As  for  myself,  Ifeel  incapable  of  disentangling  and  following  up  the  least  trace  ofwhat  then  took  place  within  me.I had  not  yet  sense  enough  to  feel  how  much  appearances  wereagainst  me,  and  to  put  myself  in  the  place  of  the  others.  I kept  tomy  own  place,  and  all  that  I felt  was  the  harshness  of  a  frightfulpunishment  for  an  offence  which  I had  not  committed.  The  bodilypain,  although  severe,  I felt  but  little:  all  I felt  was  indignation,rage,  despair.  My cousin,  whose  case  was  almost  the  same,  and  whohad  been  punished  for  an  involuntary  mistake  as  if it had  been  apremeditated  act,  following  my  example,  flew  into  a  rage,  andworked  himself  up  to  the  same  pitch  of excitement  as  myself.  Bothin the  same  bed, we  embraced  each  other  with  convulsive  transports:we  felt  suffocated;  and  when  at  length  our  young  hearts,  somewhatrelieved,  were  able  to  vent  their  wrath,  we  sat  upright  in  bed  andbegan  to  shout,  times  without  number,  with  all our  might:  Carnifex!carnifex!  carnifex!  ®5  Executioner,  torturer.glEFFECTS  OF  UNJUST  PUNISHMENTIgWhile  I write  these  words,  I feel  that  my  pulse  beats  faster;  thosemoments  will  always  be  pfésent  to  me  though  I should  live  a  hun-dred  thousand  years.  That  first  feeling  of violence  and  injustice  hasremained  so  deeply  graven  on  my  soul,  that  all  the  ideas  connectedwith  it bring  back  to  me  my  first  emotion;  and  this  feeling;  which,in its  origin,  had  reference  only  to  myself,  has  become  so  strong  initself  and  so  completely  detached  from  all  personal  interest,  that,when I see  or  hear  of any  act  of injustice—whoever  is the  victim  ofit, and  wherever  it is committed—my  heart  kindles  with  rage,  as  ifthe  effect  of it recoiled  upon  myself.  When  I read  of the  cruelties  ofa  ferocious  tyrant,  the  crafty  atrocities  of  a  rascally  priest,  I wouldgladly  set  out  to  plunge  a  dagger  into  the  heart  of  such  wretches,although I had  to  die  for  it  a hundred  times.  I have  often  put myselfin  a  perspiration,  pursuing  or  stoning  a  cock,  a  cow,  a  dog,  or  anyanimal  which  I saw  tormenting  another  merely  because  it felt itselfthe  stronger.  This  impulse  may  be natural  to  me,  and I believe  thatit is; but  the  profound  impression  left  upon  me  by the  first  injusticeI suffered  was  too  long  and  too  strongly  connected  with  it, not  tohave  greatly  strengthened  it.With  the  above  incident  the  tranquillity  of  my  childish  life  wasover.  From  that  moment  I ceased  to  enjoy  a  pure  happiness,  andeven  at  the  present  day I feel  that  the  recollection  of the  charms  ofmy  childhood  ceases  there.  We  remained  a  few  months  longer  atBossey.  We  were  there,  as  the  first  man  is represented  to  us—still  inthe  earthly  paradise,  but  we  no  longer  enjoyed  it; in appearance  ourcondition  was  the  same,  in reality  it was  quite  a  different  manner  ofexistence.  Attachment,  respect,  intimacy,  and  confidence  no  longerunited  pupils  and  guides:  we  no  longer  regarded  them  as  gods,  whowere  able  to  read  in  our  hearts;  we  became  less  ashamed  of  doingwrong  and  more  afraid  of being  accused;  we  began  to  dissemble,  tobe insubordinate,  to  lie.  All  the  vices  of our  age  corrupted  our  inno-cence  and  threw a veil  of ugliness  over  our  amusements.  Even  thecountry  lost  in  our  eyes  that  charm  of  gentleness  and  simplicitywhich  goes  to  the  heart.  It  appeared  to  us  lonely  and  sombre:  itseemed  as  it were  covered  with  a  veil  which  concealed  its  beautiesfrom  our  eyes.  We  ceased  to  cultivate  our  little  gardens,  our  plants,our  flowers.  We  no  longer  scratched  up  the  ground  gently,  or  cried20THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU+with  joy when  we  saw  the  seed  which  we  had  sown  beginning  tosprout.  We  were  disgusted  with  the  life,  and  others  were  disgustedwith  us;  my  uncle  took  us  away,  and  we  separated  from  M.  andMademoiselle  Lambercier,  having  had  enough  of  each  other,  andfeeling  but  little  regret  at  the  separation.iNearly  thirty  years  have  passed  since  I left  Bossey,  without  myrecalling  to  mind  my  stay  there  with  any  connected  and  pleasurablerecollections;  but,  now  that  I have  passed  the  prime  of life  and  amapproaching  old  age,  I feel  these  same  recollections  springing  upagain  while  others  disappear;  they stamp  themselves  upon  my  mem-ory  with  features,  the  charm  and  strength  of  which  increase  daily,as  if,  feeling  life  already  slipping  away,  I were  endeavouring  tograsp  it again  by its  commencement.  The  most  trifling  incidents  ofthat  time  please  me,  simply  because  they  belong  to  that  period.  Iremember  all  the  details  of place,  persons,  and  time.  I see  the  maidor  the  manservant  busy  in the  room;  a  swallow  darting  through  thewindow,  a  fly settling  on  my  hand  while  I was  saying  my  lesson:I see  the  whole  arrangement  of the  room  in  which  we  used  to  live;M.  Lambercier’s  study  on  the  right,  a  copperplate  engraving  of allthe  Popes,  a  barometer,  a  large  almanack  hanging  on  the  wall,  theraspberry  bushes  which,  growing  in a  garden  situated  on  very  highground  facing  the  back  of the  house,  shaded  the  window  and  some-times  forced  their  way  through  it.  I am  quite  aware  that  the  readerdoes  not  want  to  know  all  this;  but  I am  bound  to  tell  him.  Whyhave  I not  the courage  to  relate  to  him  in like  manner  all the triflinganecdotes  of that  happy  time,  which  still  make  me  tremble  with  joywhen I recall  them?  Five  or  six in particular—but  let us  make  a bar-gain.  I will  let you  off five,  but  I wish  to  tell  you  one,  only one,  pro-vided  that  you  will  permit  me  to  tell  it in as  much  detail  as  possible,in  order  to  prolong  my  enjoyment.If I only  had  your  pleasure  in  view,  I might  choose  the  story  ofMademoiselle  Lambercier’s  backside,  which,  owing  to  an  unfor-tunate  somersault  at  the  bottom  of  the  meadow,  was  exhibited  infull  view  to  the  King  of Sardinia,  who  happened  to  be passing  by;but  that  of the  walnut-tree  on  the  terrace  is more  amusing  for  mewho  took  an  active  part  in  it, whereas  I was  merely  a  spectator  ofthe somersault;  besides,  I declare  that  I found  absolutely  nothing  toTHE  -WALNUT-TREE2Ilaugh  at  in an  accident  which, although  comic  in itself,  alarmed  mefor  the  safety  of a  person  whom  I loved  as  a  mother  and,  perhaps,even  more.Now,  O  curious  readers  of the  important  history  of the  walnut-tree  on  the  terrace,  listen  to  the  horrible  tragedy,  and  keep  fromshuddering  if you  can!Outside  the gate  of the court,  on  the left  of the entrance,  there  wasa  terrace,  where  we  often  went  to  sit in the  afternoon.  As  it was  en-tirely  unprotected  from  the  sun,  M.  Lambercier  had  a  walnut-treeplanted  there.  The  process  of  planting  was  carried  out  with  thegreatest  solemnity.  The  two  boarders  were  its godfathers;  and, whilethe  hole  was  being  filled  up,  we  each  of us  held  the  tree  with  onehand  and  sang  songs  of  triumph.  In  order  to  water  it, a  kind  ofbasin  was  made  round  the  foot.  Every  day,  eager  spectators  of this.watering,  my  cousin  and  I became  more  strongly  convinced,  as  wasnatural,  that  it was  a  finer  thing  to  plant  a  tree  on  a  terrace  than  aflag upon a breach,  and  we  resolved  to  win  this  glory  for  ourselveswithout  sharing  it with  anyone.With  this  object,  we  proceeded  to  cut  a  slip from  a  young  willow,and  planted  it on  the  terrace,  at  a  distance  of about  eight  or  ten  feetfrom  the  august  walnut-tree.  We  did  not  forget  to  dig  a  similartrench  round  our  tree;  the  difficulty  was  how  to  fill  it, for  the  watercame  from  some  distance,  and  we  were  not  allowed  to  run  and  fetchit.  However,  it was  absolutely  necessary  to  have  some  for  our  wil-low.  For  a  few  days,  we  had  recourse  to  all  kinds  of  devices  to  getsome,  and  we  succeeded  so  well  that  we  saw  it bud  and  put  forthlittle  leaves,  the  growth  of  which  we  measured  every  hour,  con-vinced  that,  although  not  yet  a  foot  high,  it would  soon  afford  us  ashade.As  our  tree  so  completely  claimed  our  attention  that  we  werequite  incapable  of attending  to  or  learning  anything  else,  and  werein  a  sort  of delirium:  as  our  guardians,  not  knowing  what  was  thematter  with  us,  kept  a  tighter  hand  upon  us,  we  saw  the  fatal  mo-ment  approaching  when  we  should  be without  water,  and  were  in-consolable  at  the thought  of seeing  our  tree  perish  from  drought.  Atlength  necessity,  the  mother  of  invention,  suggested  to  us  how  tosave  ourselves  from  grief  and  the  tree  from  certain  death;  this  was,22THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUto  make  a channel  underground,  which  should  secretly  conduct  partof the  water  intended  for the  walnut-tree  to  our  willow.  This  under-taking  was  at  first  unsuccessful,  in spite of the  eagerness  with  whichit was  carried  out.  We  had  made  the  incline  so  clumsily  that  thewater  did  not  run‘at  all.  The  earth  fell  in and  stopped  up  the  chan-nel;  the  entrance  was  filled  with  mud;  everything  went  wrong.  Butnothing  disheartened  us:  Labor  omnia  vincit  improbus.  We  dugour  basin  deeper,  in  order  to  allow  the  water  to  run;  we  cut  somebottoms  of boxes  into  smal!  narrow  planks,  some  of which  were  laidflat,  one  after  the  other,  and  others  set  up  on  both  sides  of these  atan  angle,  thus  forming  a  triangular  canal  for  our  conduit.  At  theentrance  we  stuck  small  pieces  of  wood,  some  little  distance  apart,which,  forming  a  kind  of grating  or  lattice-work,  kept back  the  mudand  stones,  without  stopping  the  passage  of the  water.  We  carefullycovered  our  work  with  well-trodden  earth;  and  when  all was  ready,we  awaited,  in the  greatest  excitement  of hope  and  fear,  the  time  ofwatering.  After  centuries  of waiting,  the  hour  at  length  arrived;  M.Lambercier  came  as  usual  to  assist  at  the  operation,  during  whichwe  both  kept behind  him,  in order  to  conceal  our  tree,  to  which  veryluckily  he  turned  his  back.+No sooner  had  the first pail of water  been  poured  out,  than  we  sawsome  of  it running  into  our  basin.  At  this  sight,  our  prudence  de-serted  us:  we  began  to  utter  cries  of joy which  made  M.  Lambercierturn  round;  this  was  a  pity,  for  he took  great  delight  in seeing  howgood  the  soil  of  the  walnut-tree  was,  and  how  greedily  it absorbedthe water.  Astonished  at  seeing  it distribute  itself  into  two  basins,  hecried  out  in  his  turn,  looked,  perceived  the  trick,  ordered  a  pickaxeto be brought,  and, with  one  blow, broke  off two  or  three  pieces  fromour  planks;  then,  crying  loudly,  “An  aqueduct,  an  aqueduct!”  hedealt  merciless  blows  in every  direction,  each  of which  went straightto  our  hearts.  In  a moment  planks, conduit,  basin,  willow,  everythingwas  destroyed  and  uprooted,  without  his  having  uttered  a  singleword,  during  this  terrible  work  of destruction,  except  the  exclama-tion  which  he  incessantly  repeated.  “An  aqueduct!”  he cried,  whiledemolishing  everything,  “an  aqueduct,  an  aqueduct!”It will  naturally  be imagined  that  the  adventure  turned  out  badly€ Persistent  effort  overcomes  all  difficulties.HIS  PROFESSION  DEBATED23for  the  little  architects:  that  would  be  a  mistake:  it was  all  over.M.  Lambercier  never  uttered  a  single  word  of reproach,  or  lookedupon  us  with  displeasure,  and  said  nothing  more  about  it;  shortlyafterwards,  we  even  heard  him  laughing  loudly  with  his  sister,  forhis laughter  could  be heard  a  long  way  off; and  what  was  still  moreastonishing,  when  the  first  fright  was  over,  we  ourselves  were  notmuch  troubled  about  the  matter.  We  planted  another  tree  some-where  else,  and  often  reminded  ourselves  of  the  disaster  that  over-took  the  first,  by repeating  with  emphasis,  “An  aqueduct,  an  aque-duct!”  Hitherto  I had  had  intermittent  attacks  of pride,  when  I wasAristides  or  Brutus;  then  it  was  that  I  felt  the  first  well-definedpromptings  of vanity.  To  have  been  able  to  construct  an  aqueductwith  our  own  hands,  to  have  put  a  cutting  in  competition  with  alarge  tree,  appeared  to  me  the  height  of glory.  At  ten  years  of age  Iwas  a  better  judge  on  this  point  than  Cæsar  at  thirty.The  thought  of  this  walnut-tree  and  the  little  history  connectedwith  it has  remained  so  vivid  in  my  memory,  or  returned  to  it, thatone  of the  plans  which  gave  me  the greatest  pleasure,  on  my  journeyto  Geneva,  in  1754,  was  to  go  to  Bossey  and  revisit  the  memorials  ofmy  boyish  amusements,  above  all,  the  dear  walnut-tree,  which  bythat  time  must  have  been  a  third  of a  century  old;  but  I was  so  con-tinually  occupied,  so  little  my  own  master,  that  I could  never  find  themoment  to  afford  myself  this  satisfaction.  There  is little  prospect  ofthe  opportunity  ever  occurring  again;  yet  the  wish  has  not  disap-peared  with  the  hope;  and  I am  almost  certain  that,  if ever  I shouldreturn  to  those  beloved  spots  and  find  my  dear  walnut-+tree  stillalive,  I should  water  it with  my  tears.After  my  return  to  Geneva,  I lived  for two  or  three  years  with  myuncle,  waiting  until  my  friends  had  decided  what  was  to  be  donewith  me.  As  he  intended  his  own  son  to  be  an  engineer,  he  madehim  learn  a  little  drawing  and  taught  him  the  elements  of  Euclid.I learned  these  subjects  together  with  him,  and  acquired a taste  forthem,  especially  for  drawing.  In  the  meantime,  it  was  debatedwhether  I should  be a  watchmaker,  an  attorney,  or  a  minister.  Myown  preference  was  for  the  last,  for  preaching  seemed  to  me  to  be avery  fine  thing;  but  the  small  income  from  my  mother’s  property,which  had  to  be  divided  between  my  brother  and  myself,  was  not24THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsufficient  to  allow  me  to  prosecute  my  studies.  As,  considering  myage  at  that  time,  there was  no  immediate  need  to  decide,  I remainedfor  the  present  with  my  uncle,  making  little  use  of my  time  and,  inaddition,  as  was  only fair, paying  a tolerably  large sum  for my  board.My uncle,  a  man  of pleasure  like  my  father,  was  unable,  like  him,  totie  himself  down  to  his  duties,  and  troubled  himself  little  enoughabout  us.  My aunt  was  somewhat  of a pietist,  and  preferred  to  singpsalms  rather  than  attend  to  our  education.  We  were  allowed  almostabsolute  freedom,  which  we  never  abused.  Always  inseparable,  wewere  quite  contented  with  our  own  society;  and,  having  no  tempta-tion  to  make  companions  of  the  street  boys  of  our  own  age,  welearned  none  of the  dissolute  habits  into  which  idleness  might  haveled  us.  I am  even  wrong  in  saying  that  we  were  idle,  for  we  werenever  less  so  in our  lives;  and  the  most  fortunate  thing  was,  that  allthe  ways  of amusing  ourselves,  with  which  we  successively  becameinfatuated,  kept  us  together  busy  in  the  house,  without  our  beingeven  tempted  to  go out  into  the  street.  We  made  cages,  flutes,  shuttle-cocks,  drums,  houses,  squirts,’  and  cross-bows.  We  spoilt  my  goodold grandfather’s  tools  in trying  to  make  watches  as  he did.  We  hada  special  taste  for wasting  paper,  drawing,  painting  in water-colours,illuminating,  and  spoiling  colours.  An  Italian  showman,  namedGamba-Corta,  came  to  Geneva;  we  went  to  see  him  once  and  neverwanted  to  go  again.  But  he  had  a  marionette-show,  and  we  pro-ceeded  to  make  marionettes;  his marionettes  played  comedies  and wecomposed  comedies  for  ours.  For  want  of  a  squeaker,  we  imitatedPunch’s  voice  in our  throat,  in order  to  play the charming  comedies,which  our  poor  and  kind  relations  had  the  patience  to  sit and  listento.  But,  my  uncle  Bernard  having  one  day read  aloud  in the  familycircle  a  very  fine  sermon  which  he  had  composed  himself,  we  aban-doned  comedy  and  began  to  write  sermons.  These  details  are  notvery  interesting,  I confess,  but  they  show  how  exceedingly  well-conducted  our  early  education  must  have  been,  seeing  that  we,  al-most  masters  of our  time  and  ourselves  at  so  tender  an  age,  were  solittle  tempted  to  abuse  our  opportunities.  We  had  so  little  need  of7  Equiffles.  According  to  a  note  in  the  Firmin-Didot  edition,  this  word  is theGenevese  equivalent  of  canonnière,  “a  pop-gun,”  but  Littré  explains  it  as  a“squirt.”FIRST  LOVE|25making  companions,  that  we  even  neglected  the chances  of doing so.When  we  went  for  a  walk,we  looked  at  their  amusements  as  wepassed  by without  the slightest  desire,  or  even  the idea  of taking partin them.  Our  friendship  so  completely  filled  our  hearts,  that  it wasenough  for  us  to  be  together  to  make  the  simplest  amusements  adelight.Being  thus  inseparable,  we  began  to  attract  attention:  the  more  soas,  my  cousin  being  very  tall  while  I was  very  short,  we  made  anoddly-assorted  couple.  His  long,  slim  figure,  his  little  face  like  aboiled  apple,  his  gentle  manner,  and  his  slovenly  walk  excited  thechildren’s  ridicule.  In  the  patois  of  the  district  he  was  nicknamedBarna  Bredanna,  and,  directly  we  went  out,  we  heard  nothing  but“Barna  Bredanna!”  all  round  us.  He  endured  it more  quietly  than  .I did:  I lost  my  temper  and  wanted  to  fight.  This  was  just what  thelittle  rascals  desired.  I fought  and  was  beaten.  My poor  cousin  helpedme  as  well  as  he  could;  but  he  was  weak,  and a single  blow  of thefist knocked  him  down.  Then  I became  furious.  However,  althoughI received  blows  in  abundance,  I was  not  the  real  object  of  attack,but  Barna  Bredanna;  but my  obstinate  anger  made  matters  so  muchworse,  that,  in  future,  we  only  ventured  to  go  out  during  school-hours,  for  fear  of being  hooted  and  followed.Behold  me  already  a  redresser  of wrongs!  In  order  to  be a  regularPaladin  I only  wanted a lady;  I had  two.  From  time  to  time  I wentto  see  my  father  at  Nyon, a little  town  in  the  Vaud  country,  wherehe had  settled.  He  was  very  much  liked,  and  his  son  felt  the  effectsof his  popularity.  During  the  short  time  I stayed  with  him,  friendsvied  with  each  other  in making  me  welcome.  A certain  Madame  deVulson,  especially,  bestowed  a  thousand  caresses  upon  me,  and,  tocrown  all,  her  daughter  took  me  for  her  lover.  It is easy to under-stand  the  meaning  of a  lover  eleven  years  old  for  a  girl  of twenty-two.  But  all  these  roguish  young  women  are  so  ready  to  put  littlepuppets  in front  in order  to  hide  larger  ones,  or  to  tempt  them  withthe  idea  of an  amusement  which  they  know  how  to  render  attrac-tive!  As  for  myself,  I saw  no  incongruity  between  us  and  took  thematter  seriously;  I abandoned  myself  with  all  my  heart,  or  ratherwith  all  my  head—for  it was  only  in  that  part  of me  that  I was  inlove,  although  madly—and  my  transports,  excitement  and  frenzy26THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUproduced  scenes  enough  to  make  anyone  split  his  sides  with  laugh-ing.I am  acquainted  with  two  very  distinct  and  very  real  kinds  oflove,  which  have  scarcely  anything  in  common,  although  both  arevery  fervent,  and  which  both  differ  from  tender  friendship.  Thewhole  course  of my  life  has  been  divided  between  these  two  kindsof love, essentially  so  different,  and  I have  even  felt  them  both  at  thesame  time;  for  instance,  at  the time  of which  I am  speaking,  while  Itook  possession  of  Mademoiselle  de  Vulson  so  openly  and  so  tyran-nically  that  I could  not  endure  that  any  man  should  approach  her,I had  several  meetings,  brief  but  lively,  with  a  certain  little  Made-moiselle  Goton,  in which  she deigned  to  play the  schoolmistress,  andthat  was  all; but  this  all, which  was  really  all  for  me,  seemed  to  methe  height  of happiness;  and,  already  feeling  the  value  of the  mys-tery,  although  I only  knew  how  to  make  use  of it as  a  child,  I paidMademoiselle  de  Vulson,  who  had  scarcely  any  suspicion  of  it, inthe  same  coin,  for  the  assiduity  with  which  she  made  use  of me  toconceal  other  amours.  But,  to  my  great  regret,  my  secret  was  dis-covered,  or  not  so  well  kept on  the  part  of my  little  schoolmistress  ason  my  own;  we  were  soon  separated;  and,  some  time  afterwards,  onmy  return  to  Geneva,  while  passing  through  Coutance,  I heard  somelittle  girls cry,  in an  undertone,  “Goton  tic-tac  Rousseau!”This  little  Mademoiselle  Goton  was  really  a  singular  person.Without  being  pretty,  she  had  a  face  which  was  not  easy  to  forget,and  which I still  recall  to  mind,  often  too  tenderly  for  an  old  fool.Neither  her  form,  nor  her  manner,  nor,  above  all, her  eyes  were  inkeeping  with  her  age.  She  had  a  proud  and  commanding  air, whichsuited  her  part  admirably,  and  which  in fact  had  suggested  the  firstidea  of it to  us.  But  the  oddest  thing  about  her  was  a  mixture  of im-pudence  and  reserve  which  it was  difficult  to  comprehend.  She  tookthe greatest  liberties  with  me,  but never  allowed  me  to  take  any  withher.  She  treated  me  just like  a  child,  which  makes  me  believe,  eitherthat  she  was  no  longer  one  herself,  or  that,  on  the  contrary,  she  wasstill  childish  enough  to  see  nothing  but  an  amusement  in the  danger’to  which  she  exposed  herself.I belonged  entirely,  so  to  say,  to  each  of these  two  persons,  and  socompletely,  that, when  I was  with  one,  I never  thought  of the  other.f27MADEMOISELLE  GOTON|lIn  other  respects,  there  was  not  the  slightest  similarity  between  thefeelings  with  which  they  inspired  me.  I could  have  spent  all  my  lifewith  Mademoiselle  de Vulson,  without  ever  thinking  of leaving  her;but,  when  I approached  her,  my  joy  was  tranquil  and  free  faaemotion.  I loved  her above  all in  fashionable  society;  the witty sallies,~railleries,  and  even  the  petty  jealousies  attracted  and  interested  me;I felt a pride and  glory in  the marks  of preference  she bestowed  uponme  in  the  presence  of grown-up  rivals  whom  she  appeared  to  treatwith  disdain.  I was  tormented,  but  I loved  the  torment.  The  ap-plause,  encouragement,  and  laughter  warmed  and  inspirited  me.  Ihad  fits*of  passion  and  broke  out  into  audacious  sallies.  In  society,  Iwas  transported  with  love;  in  a  téte-a-téte  I should  have  been  con-strained,  cold,  perhaps  wearied.  However,  I felt  a  real  tenderness  forher; I suffered  when  she  was  ill;  I would  have  given  my  own  health  .to  restore  her  own,  and,  observe!  I knew  very  well  from  experiencethe meaning  of illness  and  health.  When  absent  from  her, I thoughtof her  and  missed  her;  when  I was  by her  side,  her  caresses  reachedmy  heart—not  my  senses.  I was  intimate  with  her  with  impunity;my  imagination  demanded  no  more  than  she  granted;  yet  I couldnot  have  endured  to  see  her  do even  as  much  for  others.  I loved  heras  a  brother,  but  I was  as  jealous  of her  as  a  lover.I should  have  been  as  jealous  of  Mademoiselle  Goton  as  a  Turk,a  madman,  or a tiger,  if I had  once  imagined  that  she  could  accordthe  same  treatment  to  another  as  to  myself;  for  even  that  was  afavour  which  I had  to  ask  on  my  knees.  I approached  Mademoisellede  Vulson  with  lively  pleasure,  but  without  emotion;  whereas,  if Ionly  saw  Mademoiselle  Goton,  I saw  nothing  else,  all  my  senseswere  bewildered.  With  the  former  I was  familiar  without  familiar-ity; while  on  the contrary,  in the  presence  of the  latter,  I was  as  bash-ful as  I was  excited,  even  in  the  midst  of our  greatest  familiarities.  Ibelieve  that,  if  I had  remained  with  her  long,  I should  have  died;the throbbings  of my  heart  would  have  suffocated  me.  I was  equallyafraid  of displeasing  either;  but  I was  more  attentive  to  the  one  andmore  obedient  to  the  other.  Nothing  in the  world  would  have  mademe  annoy  Mademoiselle  de Vulson;  but  if Mademoiselle  Goton  hadordered  me  to  throw  myself  into  the  flames,  I believe  I should  haveobeyed  her  immediately.28THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUMy  amour,  or  rather  my  meetings,  with  the  latter,  continuedonly  for  a  short  time—happily  for  both  of  us.  Although  my  rela-tions  with  Mademoiselle  de  Vulson  had  not  the  same  danger,  theywere  not  without  their  catastrophe,  after  they  had  lasted a littlelonger.  The  end  of all  such  connections  should  always  be somewhatromantic,  and  furnish  occasion  for exclamations  of sorrow.  Althoughmy  connection  with  Mademoiselle  de  Vulson  was  less  lively,  it wasperhaps  closer.  We  never  separated  without  tears,  and  it  is  re-markable  into  what  an  overwhelming  void  I felt  myself  plunged  assoon  as  I had  left  her.  I could  speak  and  think  of nothing  but  her;my  regret  was  genuine  and  lively;  but  I believe  that,  at  bottom,  thisheroic  regret  was  not  felt  altogether  for  her,  and  that,  without  myperceiving  it, the  amusements,  of which  she  was  the  centre,  playedtheir  part  in  it.  To  moderate  the  pangs  of absence,  we  wrote  lettersto  each  other,  pathetic  enough  to  melt  the  heart  of a  stone.  At  last  Itriumphed;  she  could  endure  it  no‘ longer,  and  came  to  Geneva  tosee  me.  This  time  my  head  was  completely  turned;  I was  drunk  andmad  during  the  two  days  she  remained.  When  she  left  I wanted  tothrow  myself  in the  water  after  her,  and  the  air  resounded  with  myscreams.  Eight  days  afterwards  she  sent  me  some  bonbons  andgloves,  which  I should  have  considered  a  great  compliment,  if I hadnot  learnt  at  the  same  time  that  she  was  married,  and  that  the  visitwith  which  she  had  been  pleased  to  honour  me  was  really  made  inorder  to  buy  her  wedding-dress.  I will  not  attempt  to  describe  myfury;  it may  be  imagined.  In  my  noble  rage  I swore  that  I wouldnever  see  the  faithless  one  again,  being unable  to imagine  a  more  ter-rible  punishment  for  her.  She  did  not,  however,  die  of  it;  for,twenty  years  afterwards,  when  on a visit  to  my  father,  while  row-ing with  him  on  the  lake,  I asked  who  the  ladies  were  whom  I sawin  a  boat  not  far  from  ours.  “What!”  said  my  father  with  a  smile,“does  not  your  heart  tell  you?  it is your  old  love,  Mademoiselle  deVulson  that  was,  now  Madame  Cristin.”  I started  at  the  almost  for-gotten  name,  but  I told  the  boatmen  to  change  their  course.  Al-though  I had a fine  opportunity  of avenging  myself  at  that  moment,I did  not  think  it worth  while  to  perjure  myself  and  to  renew  a quar-rel, twenty  years  old,  with  a  woman  of forty.[1723~1728].—Thus  the  most  valuable  time  of my  boyhood  wasAPPRENTICED  TO  AN  ENGRAVER29wasted  in  follies,  before  my  future  career  had  been  decided  upon.After  long  deliberation  as  tø the  bent  of  my  natural  inclination,  aprofession  was  determined  upon  for  which  I had  the  least  taste;  1was  put  with  M.  Masseron,  the  town  clerk,  in order  to  learn,  underhis  tuition,  the  useful  trade  of a  fee-grabber.8  This  nickname  wasextremely  distasteful  to  me;  the hope of gaining  a  number  of crownsin a  somewhat  sordid  business  by no  means  flattered  my  pride;  theoccupation  itself  appeared  to  me  wearisome  and  unendurable;  theconstant  application,  the  feeling  of  servitude  completed  my  dislike,and  I never  entered  the  office  without  a  feeling  of  horror,  whichdaily increased  in intensity.  M. Masseron,  on  his part,  was  ill-satisfiedwith  me,  and  treated  me  with  contempt;  he continually  reproachedme  with  my  dulness  and  stupidity,  dinning  into  my  ears  every  daythat  my  uncle  had  told  him  that  I knew  something,  whereas,  inreality,  I knew  nothing;  that  he had  promised  him a sharp  lad, andhad  given  him  a  jackass.  At  last  I was  dismissed  from  the  office  indisgrace  as  being  utterly  incapable,  and  M.  Masseron’s  clerks  declared  that  I was  good  for  nothing  except  to  handle a file.My calling  being  thus  settled,  I was  apprenticed,  not,  however,  toa  watchmaker,  but  to  an  engraver.  The  contempt  with  which  I hadbeen  treated  by  M.  Masseron  had  made  me  very  humble,  and  Iobeyed  without  a  murmur.  My  new  master,  M.  Ducommun,  was  arough  and  violent  young  man,  who  in  a  short  ume  succeeded  intarnishing.all  the  brightness  of my  childhood,  stupefying  my  lovingand  lively  nature,  and  reducing  me,  in  mind  as  well  as  in  position,to  a  real  state  of  apprenticeship.  My  Latin,  my  antiquities,  my  his-tory,  were  all  for  a  long  time  forgotten;  I did  not  even  rememberthat  there  had  ever  been  any  Romans  in the  world.  My father,  whenI went  to  see  him,  no  longer  found  in  me  his  idol;  for  the  ladies  Iwas  no  longer  the  gallant  Jean  Jacques;  and  I felt  so  certain  myselfthat  the  Lamberciers  would  not  have  recognised  their  pupil  in  me,that  I was  ashamed  to pay  them a visit,  and  have  never  seen  themsince.  The  vilest  tastes,  the  lowest  street-blackguardism  took  theplace  of my  simple  amusements  and  effaced  even  the  remembranceof them.  I must,  in spite of a  most  upright  training,  have  had a greatpropensity  to  degenerate;  for the change  took  place  with  great  rapid-8  Grapignan:  a  slang  term  for  a  lawyer.30THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUity, without  the least  trouble,  and  never  did  so  precocious a Cæsar  sorapidly  become  a.Laridon.?The  trade in  itself  was  not  disagreeable  to  me;  I had  a  decidedtaste  for  drawing;  the  handling  of  a  graving-tool  amused  me;  andas  the  claims  upon  the  skill  of  a  watchmaker’s  engraver  were  lim-ited,  I hoped  to  attain  perfection.  I should,  perhaps,  have  done  so,had  not  my  master’s  brutality  and  excessive  restraint  disgusted  mewith  my  work.  I stole  some  of my  working  hours  to  devote  to  simi-lar  occupations,  but  which  had  for  me  the  charm  of freedom.  I en-graved  medals  for  an  order  of knighthood  for  myself  and  my  com-panions.  My master  surprised  me  at  this contraband  occupation,  andgave  me  a  sound  thrashing,  declaring  that  I  was  training  for  acoiner,  because  our  medals  bore  the  arms  of  the  Republic.  I canswear  that  I had  no  idea  at  all  of bad,  and  only  a  very  faint  one  ofgood,  money.  I knew  better  how  the  Roman  4s  was  made  than  ourthree-sou  pieces.My master’s  tyranny  at  length  made  the  work,  of which  I shouldhave  been  very  fond,  altogether  unbearable,  and  filled  me  with  viceswhich  I should  otherwise  have  hated,  such  as  lying,  idleness  andthieving.  The  recollection  of  the  alteration  produced  in  me  by thatperiod  of my  life  has  taught  me,  better  than  anything  else,  the  dif-ference  between  filial  dependence  and  abject  servitude.  Naturallyshy  and  timid,  no  fault  was  more  foreign  to  my  disposition  thanimpudence;  but  I had  enjoyed  an  honourable  liberty,  which  hithertohad  only  been  gradually  restrained,  and  at  length  disappeared  alto-gether.  I was  bold  with  my  father,  unrestrained  with  M. Lambercier,and  modest  with  my  uncle;  I became  timid  with  my  master,  andfrom  that  moment  I was  a  lost child.  Accustomed  to  perfect  equalityin  my  intercourse  with  my  superiors,  knowing  no  pleasure  whichwas  not  within  my  reach,  seeing  no  dish  of which  I could  not  havea  share,  having  no  desire  which  I could  not  have  openly  expressed,and  carrying  my  heart  upon  my  lips—it  is easy  to  judge  what  I wasbound  to  become,  in a  house  in which  I did  not venture  to  open  mymouth,  where  I was  obliged  to  leave  the  table  before  the  meal  was? The  name  given  by La  Fontaine,  in  the  fable,  called  “l'Éducation,”  to  degen-erate  dogs:  “Oh!  combien  de  Césars  deviendront  Laridons.”HIS  MASTER’S  BRUTALITY31half  over,  and  the  room  as  soon  as  I had  nothing  more  to do there;where,  incessantly  fettered  to  my  work,  I saw  only  objects  of enjoy-ment  for  others  and  of privation  for  myself;  where  the  sight  of theliberty  enjoyed  by my  master  and  companions  increased  the weightof my  servitude;  where,  in disputes  about  matters  as  to  which  I wasbest  informed,  I did  not  venture  to  open  my  mouth;  where,  in short,everything  that  I saw  became  for  my  heart  an  object  of  longing,simply  because  I was  deprived  of  all.  From  that  time  my  ease  ofmanner,  my  gaiety,  the  happy  expressions  which,  in  former  times,when I had  done  something  wrong,  had  gained  me  immunity  frompunishment—all  were  gone.  I cannot  help laughing  when  I remem-ber  hew,  one  evening,  at  my  father’s  house,  having  been  sent  to  bedwithout  any  supper  for  some  piece  of roguery,  I passed  through  thekitchen  with  my  melancholy  piece  of  bread,  and,  seeing  the  jointturning  on  the  spit,  sniffed  at  it.  All  the  household  was  standinground  the  hearth,  and,  in passing,  I was  obliged  to  say  good-night  toeverybody.  When  I had  gone  the  round,  I winked  at  the joint,  whichlooked  so  nice  and  smelt  so  good,  and  could  not  help  bowing  to  itas  well,  and  saying  in  a  mournful  voice,  “Good-night,  roast  beef!”This  naive  sally  amused  them  so  much  that  they  made  me  stop  tosupper.  Perhaps  it might  have  had  the  same  effect  with  my  master,but  I am  sure  that  it would  never  have  occurred  to  me,  and  that  Ishould  not  have  had  the  courage,  to  say  it in  his  presence.In this  manner  I learnt  to covet  in silence,  to  dissemble,  to  lie, and,lastly,  to  steal—an  idea  which,  up  to  that  time,  had  never  even  en-tered  my  mind,  and  of  which  since  then  I have  never  been  able  tocure  myself  completely.  Covetousness  and  weakness  always  lead  inthat  direction.  This  explains  why  all  servants  are  rogues,  and  whyall  apprentices  ought  to  be;  but  the  latter,  in  a  peaceful  state  ofequality,  where  all  that  they  see  is within  their  reach,  lose,  as  theygrow  up,  this  disgraceful  propensity.  Not  having  had  the  same  ad-vantages,  I have  not  been  able  to  reap  the  same  benefits.It is nearly  always  good,  but  badly-directed  principles,  that  makea  child  take  the  first  step  towards  evil.  In  spite  of continual  priva-tions  and  temptations,  I had  been  more  than  a  year  with  my  masterwithout  being  able  to  make  up  my  mind  to  take  anything,  even32THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUeatables.  My first  theft  was  a  matter  of obliging  some  one  else,  butit opened  the  door  to  others,  the  motive  of which  was  not  so  praise-worthy.My  master  had  a  journeyman,  named  M.  Verrat,  whose  housewas  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  had  a  garden  some  way  off  whichproduced  very  fine  asparagus.  M.  Verrat,  who  was  not  too  well  sup-plied with  money,  conceived  the idea  of stealing  some  of his mother’syoung  asparagus  and  selling  it in  order  to  provide  himself  with  twoor  three  good  breakfasts.  As  he  was  unwilling  to  run  the  risk  him-self, and  was  not  very  active,  he selected  me  for  the  expedition.  Aftersome  preliminary  cajoleries,  which  the  more  easily  succeeded  withme  as  I did  not  see  their  aim,  he  proposed  it to  me  as  an  idea  thathad  struck  him  on  the  spur  of the  moment.  I strongly  opposed  it; hepersisted.  I have  never  been  able  to  resist  flattery:  I gave  in.  I wentevery  morning  to  gather  a crop  of the finest  asparagus,  and  carried  itto  the  Molard,  where  some  good  woman,  who  saw  that  I had  juststolen  it, told  me  so  to  my  face  in  order  to  get  it  cheaper.  In  myfright  I took  whatever  she  chose  to  offer  me,  and  took  it to  Verrat.The  amount  was  immediately  converted  into  a  breakfast,  of whichI was  the  purveyor,  and  which  he  shared  with  another  companion;I  myself  was  quite  satisfied  with  a  few  scraps,  and  never  eventouched  their  wine.This  little  arrangement  continued  several  days,  without  its  evenoccurring  to  me  to  rob  the  robber,  and  to  levy  my  tithe  of the  pro-ceeds  of M.  Verrat’s  asparagus.  I performed  my  part  in the  transac-tion  with  the greatest  loyalty;  my  only motive  was  to  please  him  whoprompted  me  to  carry  it out.  And  yet,  if I had  been  caught,  whatblows,  abuse,  and  cruel  treatment  should  I have  had  to  endure,  whilethe  wretch,  who  would  have  been  sure  to  give  me  the  lie,  wouldhave  been  believed  on  his  word,  and  I should  have  suffered  doublepunishment  for  having  had  the  impudence  to  accuse  him,  seeingthat  he  was  a  journeyman,  while  I was  only  an  apprentice!  So  trueit is that,  in  every  condition  of  life,  the  strong  man  who  is  guiltysaves  himself  at  the  expense  of the  innocent  who  is weak.In this  manner  I learned  that  stealing  was  not  so  terrible  a  thingas  I had  imagined,  and  I soon  knew  how  to  make  such  good  use  ofmy  discovery,  that  nothing  I desired,  if it was  within  my  reach,  wasTHE  APPLE-HUNT33safe  from  me.  I was  not  absolutely  ill-fed,  and  abstinence  was  onlyrendered  difficult  to  me  frém  seeing  that  my  master  observed  it soill  himself.  The  custom  of  sending  young  people  from  the  tablewhen  the  most  appetising  dishes  are  brought  on  appears  to  me  ad-mirably  adapted  to  make  them  gluttons  as  well  as  thieves.  In a  shorttime  I became  both  the  one  and  the  other;  and,  as  a rule,  I came  offvery  well;  occasionally,  when  I was  caught,  very  badly.I shudder,  and  at  the same  time  laugh,  when  I remember  an  apple-hunt  which  cost  me  dear.  These  apples  were  at  the  bottom  of  astore-room,  which  was  lighted  from  the  kitchen  by means  of a  highgrating.  One  day,  when  I was  alone  in  the  house,  I climbed  uponthe  kneading-trough,  in  order  to  look  at  the  precious  fruit  in  thegarden  of  the  Hesperides,  which  was  out  of  my  reach.  I went  tofetch  the  spit to  see  if  I could  touch  the  apples;  it was  too  short.  Tomake  it longer,  I tied  on  to  it another  little  spit which  was  used  forsmall  game,  for  my  master  was  very  fond  of  sport.  I thrust  severaltimes  without  success;  at  last,  to  my  great  delight,  I felt  that  I hadsecured  an  apple.  I pulled  very  gently;  the  apple  was  close  to  thegrating;  I was  ready  to  catch  hold  of  it.  But  who  can  describe  mygrief,  when  I found  that  it was  too  large  to  pass  through  the  bars?How  many  expedients  I tried,  to  get  it through!  I had  to  find  sup-ports  to  keep  the  spit in its place,  a  knife  long enough  to  divide  theapple,  a  lath  to  hold  it up.  At  last  I managed  to  divide  it, and  hopedto  be  able  to  pull the  pieces  towards  me  one  after  the  other;  but  nosooner  were  they  separated  than  they  both  fell  into  the  store-roomCompassionate  reader,  share  my  affliction!I by no  means  lost  courage;  but  I had  lost  considerable  time.  I wasafraid  of  being  surprised.  I put  off  a  more  lucky  attempt  till  thefollowing  day, yore. returned  to  my  work  as  quietly  as  if I had  donenothing,  without  thinking  of the  two  tell-tale  witnesses  in the  store-room.The  next  day, finding  the  opportunity  favourable,  I made  a  freshattempt.  I climbed  upon  my  stool,  lengthened  the  spit,  adjusted  it,and  was  ready  to  make  a  lunge.  ..  but, unfortunately,  the  dragon.was  not  asleep;  all  at  once  the  door  of  the  store-room  opened,  mymaster  came  out,  folded  his  arms,  looked  at  me,  and  said,  “Courage!”  ...  .  the  pen  falls  from  my  hand:34THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUIn  consequence  of  continuous  ill-treatment  I soon  became  lesssensitive  to  it, and regarded  it as  a  kind  of compensation  for  theft,which  gave  me  the  right  to  continue  the  latter.  Instead  of lookingback  and considering  the punishment,  I looked  forward  and thoughtof revenge.  I considered  that,  if  I were  beaten  as  a  rogue,  I was  en-titled  to  behave  like  one.  I found  that  stealing  and  a  flogging  wenttogether,  and  constituted  a  sort  of bargain,  and  that,  if I performedmy  part,  I could  safely  leave  my  master  to  carry  out  his  own.  Withthis  idea,  I began  to  steal  more  quietly  than  before.  I said  to  myself:“What  will  be the result?  I shall  be fogged.  Never  mind;  I am  madeto  be flogged.”I am  fond  of eating,  but  am  not  greedy;  I am  sensual,  but  not  agourmand;  too  many  other  tastes  prevent  that.  I have  never  troubledmyself  about  my  food  except  when  my  heart  has  been  unoccupied:and  that  has  so  seldom  been  the  case  during  my  life  that  I havescarcely  had  time  to  think  about  dainties.  For  this  reason  I did  notlong confine  my  thievish  propensities  to  eatables,  but  soon  extendedthem  to  everything  which  tempted  me;  and,  if I did  not  become  aregular  thief,  it  was  because  I have  never  been  much  tempted  bymoney.  Leading  out  of the  common  workshop  was  a  private  roombelonging  to  my  master,  the  door  of  which  I found  means  to  openand  shut  without  being  noticed.  There  I laid  under  contribution  hisbest  tools,  drawings,  proofs—in  fact,  everything  which  attractedme  and  which  he purposely  kept  out  of my  reach.  At  bottom,  thesethefts  were  quite  innocent,  being  only  committed  to  serve  him;  butI was  transported  with  joy  at  having  these  trifles  in  my  power;  Ithought  that  I was  robbing  him  of  his  talent  together  with  its  pro-ductions.  Besides,  I found  boxes  containing  gold  and  silver  filings,little  trinkets,  valuables  and  coins.  When  I had  four  or  five  sous  inmy  pocket,  I thought  I was  rich;  and  yet,  far  from  touching  any-thing  of  what  I found  there,  I do  not  even  remember  that  I evercast  longing  eyes  upon  it.  I looked  upon  it with  more  affright  thanpleasure.  I believe  that  this  horror  of  stealing  money  and  valuableswas  in  great  part  the  result  of  my  bringing-up.  With  it were  com-bined  secret  thoughts  of  disgrace,  prison,  punishment  and  the  gal-lows,  which  would  have  made  me  shudder  if I had  been  tempted;whereas  my  tricks  only  appeared  to  me  in the light of pieces  of mis-CONTEMPT  FOR  MONEY35chief,  and  in fact  were  nothjng  else.  They could  lead  to  nothing  buta  sound  flogging  from  my  master,  and  I prepared  myself  for  thatbeforehand.But,  I repeat,  I never  felt  sufficient  longing  to  need  to  control  my-self;  I had  nothing  to  contend  with.  A single  sheet  of fine  drawing-paper  tempted  me  more  than  money  enough  to  buy  a  ream  of it.This  singularity  is  connected  with  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  mycharacter;  it  has  exercised  such  great  influence  upon  my  conductthat  it is worth  while  to  explain  it.I am  a  man  of  very  strong  passions,  and,  while  I am  stirred  bythem,  nothing  can  equal  my  impetuosity;  I forget  all  discretion,  allfeelings  of respect,  fear  and  decency;  I am  cynical,  impudent,  violentand  fearless;  no  feeling  of shame  keeps me  back, no  danger  frightensme;  with  the  exception  of  the  single  object  which  occupies  mythoughts,  the  universe  is nothing  to  me.  But  all  this  lasts  only  for  amoment,  and  the  following  moment  plunges  me  into  complete  an-nihilation.  In  my  calmer  moments  I am  indolence  and  timidityitself;  everything  frightens  and  discourages  me;  a  fly, buzzing  past,alarms  me;  a  word  which  I have  to  say,  a  gesture  which  I have  tomake,  terrifies  my  idleness;  fear  and  shame  overpower  me  to  suchan  extent  that  I would  gladly  hide  myself  from  the  sight  of  myfellow-creatures.  If  I have  to  act,  I do  not  know  what  to  do;  if Ihave  to  speak,  I do not  know  what  to  say;  if anyone  looks  at  me,  Iam  put  out  of  countenance.  When  I am  strongly  moved  I some-times  know  how  to  find  the  right  words,  but  in  ordinary  conversa-tion  I can  find  absolutely  nothing,  and  my  condition  is unbearablefor  the  simple  reason  that  I am  obliged  to  speak.Add  to  this,  that  none  of  my  prevailing  tastes  centre  in  thingsthat  can  be bought.  I want  nothing  but  unadulterated  pleasures,  andmoney  poisons  all.  For  instance,  I am  fond  of  the  pleasures  of  thetable;  but, as  I cannot  endure  either  the constraint  of good  society  orthe  drunkenness  of the  tavern,  I can  only enjoy  them  with  a  friend;alone,  I cannot  do  so,  for  my  imagination  then  occupies  itself  withother  things,  and  eating  affords  me  no  pleasure.  If my  heated  bloodlongs  for  women,  my  excited  heart  longs  still  more  for  affection.Women  who  could  be bought  for money  would  lose  for me  all theircharms;  I even  doubt  whether  it would  be  in  me  to  make  use  of36THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthem.  I find  it the  same  with  all  pleasures  within  my  reach;  unlessthey  cost  me  nothing,  I find  them  insipid.  I only  love  those  enjoy-ments  which  belong  to  no  one  but  the  first  man  who  knows  how  toenjoy  them.Money  has  never  appeared  to  me  as  valuable  as  it  is  generallyconsidered,  More  than  that,  it has  never  even  appeared  to  me  par-ticularly  convenient.  It  is  good  for  nothing  in  itself;  it has  to  bechanged  before  it can  be enjoyed;  one  is obliged  to  buy,  to  bargain,to  be  often  cheated,  to  pay  dearly,  to  be  badly  served.  I should  like`  something  which  is good  in  quality;  with  my  money  I am  sure  toget  it bad.  If I pay  a  high  price  for  a  fresh  egg,  it is stale;  for  a  nicepiece  of fruit,  it is unripe;  for  a  girl, she  is spoilt.  I am  fond  of goodwine,  but  where  am I to  get  it?  At  a  wine  merchants?  Whatever  Ido, he is sure  to  poison  me.  If I really  wish  to  be  well  served,  whattrouble  and  embarrassment  it  entails!  I must  have  friends,  corre-spondents,  give  commissions,  write,  go  backwards  and  forwards,wait,  and  in  the  end  be  often  deceived!  What  trouble  with  mymoney!  my  fear  of it is greater  than  my  fondness  for  good  wine.Times  without  number,  during  my  apprenticeship  and  after-wards,  I have  gone  out  with  the  intention  of buying  some  delicacy.Coming  to  a  pastrycook’s  shop, I notice  some  women  at  the counter;I think  I can  already  see  them  laughing  amongst  themselves  at  thelittle  glutton.  I go on  to  a  fruiterer’s;  I eye  the  fine  pears;  their  smelltempts  me.  Two  or  three  young  people  close  by me  look  at  me;  aman  who  knows  me  is  standing  in  front  of  his  shop;  I see  a  girlapproaching  in the  distance:  is it the housemaid?  My short-sighted-ness  causes  all  kinds  of  illusions.  I take  all  the  passers-by  for  ac-quaintances;  everywhere  I am  intimidated,  restrained  by some  ob-stacle;  my  desire  increases  with  my  shame,  and  at  last  I return  homelike  a  fool,  consumed  with  longing,  having  in my  pocket  the  meansof satisfying  it, and  yet not  having  had  the courage  to  buy anything.I should  enter  into  the  most  insipid  details  if, in relating  how  mymoney  was  spent  by myself  or  others,  I were  to  describe  the  embar-rassment,  the  shame,  the  repugnance,  the  inconvenience,  the  annoy-ances  of all kinds  which  I have  always  experienced.  In proportion  asthe reader,  following  the course  of my  life, becomes  acquainted  withCONTEMPT  FOR  MONEY37my real  temperament,  he  will understand  all this,  without  my  tak-ing the  trouble  to  tell  him.”This  being  understood,  it will  be  easy  to  comprehend  one  of myapparent  inconsistencies—the  union  of  an  almost  sordid  avaricewith  the  greatest  contempt  for  money.  It is  a  piece  of furniture  inwhich I find  so  little  convenience,  that  it never  enters  my  mind  tolong for it when  I have  not  got it, and  that, when I have  got it, I keepit for a  long  time  without  spending  it, for  want  of knowing  how  tomake  use  of  it in  a  way  to  please  myself;  but  if a  convenient  andagreeable  opportunity  presents  itself,  I make  such  good  use  of  itthat  my  purse  is empty  before  I know  it.  Besides  this,  one  need  notexpect  to  find  in  me  that  curious  characteristic  of  misers—that  ofspending  for  the  sake  of  ostentation;  on  the  contrary,  I spend  insecret  for  the  sake  of enjoyment;  far  from  glorying  in  my  expendi-ture,  I conceal  it.  I feel  so  strongly  that  money  is  of  no  use  to  me,that  I am  almost  ashamed  to  have  any,  still  more  to  make  use  of it.If I had  ever  had  an  income  sufficient  to  live  comfortably  upon,  Iam  certain  that  I should  never  have  been  tempted  to  be  a  miser.  Ishould  have  spent  it all, without  attempting  to  increase  it; but  myprecarious  circumstances  make  me  careful.  I worship  freedom;  Iabhor  restraint,  trouble,  dependence.  As  long  as  the  money  in  mypurse  lasts,  it assures  my  independence;  it relieves  me  of the  troubleof  finding  expedients  to  replenish  it,  a  necessity  which  always  in-spired  me  with  dread;  but  the  fear  of seeing  it exhausted  makes  mehoard  it carefully.  The  money  which  a  man  possesses  is the  instru-ment  of freedom;  that  which  we  eagerly  pursue  is the  instrument  ofslavery.  Therefore  I  hold  fast  to  that  which  I  have,  and  desirenothing.My disinterestedness  is, therefore,  nothing  but  idleness;  the  pleas-ure  of possession  is not  worth  the trouble  of acquisition.  In like  man:ner,  my  extravagance  is nothing  but  idleness;  when  the  opportunityof  spending  agreeably  presents  itself,  it  cannot  be  too  profitablyemployed.  Money  tempts  me  less  than  things,  because  betweenmoney  and  the  possession  of  the  desired  object  there is always  anintermediary,  whereas  between  the  thing  itself  and  the  enjoymentof it there  is none.  If I see  the  thing,  it tempts  me;  if I only  see  the38THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUmeans  of gaining  possession  of it, it does  not.  For  this  reason  I havetommitted  thefts,  and  even  now  I sometimes  pilfer  trifles  whichtempt  me,  and  which I prefer  to  take  rather  than  to  ask  for;  butneither  when  a  child  nor  a  grown-up  man  do  I ever  remember  tohave  robbed  anyone  of  a  farthing,  except  on  one  occasion,  fifteenyears  ago,  when  Í stole  seven  livres  ten  sous.  The  incident  is worthrecording,  for  it contains  a  most  extraordinary  mixture  of folly  andimpudence,  which  I should  have  found  difficulty  in  believing  if itconcerned  anyone  but  myself.It took  place  at  Paris.  I was  walking  with  M.  de Franceuil  in thePalais-Royal  about  five  o'clock.  He  pulled  out  his  watch,  looked  atjt, and  said:  “Let  us  go  to  the  Opera.”  I agreed;  we  went.  He  tooktwo  tickets  for  the  amphitheatre,  gave  me  one,  and  went  on  in frontwith  the  cther.  I followed  him;  he  went  in.  Entering  after  him,  Ifound  the  door  blocked.  I looked,  and  seeing  everybody  standingap,  thought  it would  be easy  to  lose  myself  in the  crowd,  or  at  anygate  to  make  M.  de  Franceuil  believe  that  I had  lost  myself.  I wentput,  took  back  my  check,  then  my  money,  and  went  off,  withoutJhinking  that  as  soon  as  I had  reached  the  door  everybody  had  takentheir  seats,  and  that  M.  de Franceuil  clearly  saw  that  I was  no  longerthere?As  nothing  was  ever  more  foreign  to  my  disposition  than  suchvehaviour,  I mention  it in  order  to  show  that  there  are  moments  ofcemi-delirium  during  which  men  must  not  be  judged  by their  ac-dons.  I did  not  exactly  want  to  steal  the  money,  I wanted  to  steal  theemployment  of it; the  less  of a  theft  it was,  the  greater  its  disgrace-fulness,I should  never  finish  these  details  if I were  to  follow  all the  pathsalong  which,  during  my  apprenticeship,  I descended  from  the  sub-limity  of heroism  to  the  depths  of worthlessness.  And  yet,  althoughI adopted  the  vices  of my  position,  I could  not  altogether  acquire  ataste  for them.  I wearied  of the amusements  of my  companions;  and‘when  excessive  restraint  had  rendered  work  unendurable  to  me,  Igrew  tired  of everything.  This  renewed  my  taste  for  reading,  whichAccording  to  George  Sand,  in  her  “Histoire  de  ma  Vie,”  M.  de  Franceuil,who  was  her  grandfather,  has  always  absolutely  denied  the  truth  of this  story.PASSION  FOR  READING39I had  for  some  time  lost.  This  reading,  for  which  I stole  time  frommy  work,  became  a  new  “offence  which  brought  new  punishmentupon  me.  The  taste  for  it, provoked  by constraint,  became a passion.and  soon  a  regular  madness.  La  Tribu,  a  well-known  lender  otbooks,  provided  me  with  all  kinds  of  literature.  Good  or  bad,  allwere  alike  to  me;  I had  no  choice,  and  read  everything  with  equalavidity.  I read  at  the  work-table,  I read  on  my  errands,  I read  in thewardrobe,  and  forgot  myself  for  hours  together;  my  head  becamegiddy  with  reading;  I could  do  nothing  else.  My  master  watchedme,  surprised  me,  beat  me,  took  away  my  books.  How  many  vol-umes  were  torn,  burnt,  and  thrown  out  of the  window!  how  manyworks  were  left  in  odd  volumes  in  La  Tribu’s  stock!  When  I hadno  more  money  to pay  her, I gave  her my  shirts,  neckties  and  clothes;my  three  sous  of  pocket-money  were  regularly  taken  to  her  everySunday.Well,  then,  I shall  be  told,  money  had  become  necessary  to  me-That  is  true;  but  it  was  not  until  my  passion  for  reading  had  de-prived  me  of  all  activity.  Completely  devoted  to  my  new  hobby,  Idid  nothing  but  read,  and  no  longer  stole.  Here  again  is one  of mycharacteristic  peculiarities.  In  the  midst  of  a  certain  attachment  toany  manner  of  life,  a  mere  trifle  distracts  me,  alters  me,  rivets  myattention,  and  finally  becomes  a  passion.  Then  everything  is forgot-ten;  I no  longer  think  of anything  except  the  new  object  which  engrosses  my  attention.  My  heart  beat  with  impatience  to  turn  overthe leaves  of the  new  book  which  I had  in my  pocket;  I pulled  it outas  soon  as  I was  alone,  and  thought  no  more  of  rummaging  mymaster’s  work-room.  I can  hardly  believe  that  I should  have  stoleneven  if I had  had  more  expensive  tastes.  Limited  to  the  present,  itwas  not  in  my  way  to  make  preparations  in  this  manner  for  thefuture.  La  Tribu  gave  me  credit,  the  payments  on  account  weresmall,  and,  as  soon  as  I had  my  book  in  my  pocket,  I forgot  every-thing  else.  The  money  which  came  to  me  honestly  passed  in  thesame  manner  into  the  hands  of this  woman;  and,  when  she  pressedme,  nothing  was  easier  to  dispose  of  than  my  own  property.  It re-quired  too  much  foresight  to  steal  in  advance,  and  I was  not  eventempted  to  steal  in order  to  pay.40THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUIn  consequence  of quarrels,  blows,  and  secret  and  ill-chosen  read-ing,  my  disposition,  became  savage  and  taciturn;  my  mind  becamealtogether  perverted,  and  I lived  like  a  misanthrope.  However,  ifmy  good taste  did  not  keep me  from  silly and  insipid  books,  my  goodfortune  preserved  me  from  such  as  were  filthy  and  licentious;  notthat  La Tribu,  a  woman  in all respects  most  accommodating,  wouldhave  made  any  scruple  about  lending  them  to  me;  but,  in  order  toincrease  their  importance,  she always  mentioned  them  to  me  with  anair  of mystery  which  had  just the  effect  of making  me  refuse  them,as  much  from  disgust  as  from  shame;  and  chance  aided  my  modestdisposition  so  well,  that  I was  more  than  thirty  years  old  before  I seteyes  upon  any  of those  dangerous  books  which a fine  lady  finds  in-convenient  because  they  can  only  be  read  with  one  hand.In  less  than  a  year  I exhausted  La  Tribu’s  little  stock,  and  wantof occupation,  during  my  spare  time,  became  painful  to  me.  I hadbeen  cured  of my  childish  and  knavish  propensities  by my  passionfor  reading,  and  even  by  the  books  I  read,  which,  although  ill-chosen  and  frequently  bad,  filled  my  heart  with  nobler  sentimentsthan  those  with  which  my  sphere  of life  had  inspired  me.  Disgustedwith  everything  that  was  within  my  reach,  and  feeling  that  every-thing  which  might  have  tempted  me  was  too  far removed  from  me,I saw  nothing  possible  which  might  have  flattered  my  heart.  Myexcited  senses  had  long  clamoured  for  an  enjoyment,  the  object  ofwhich  I could  not  even  imagine.  I was  as  far  removed  from  actualenjoyment  as  if I had  been  sexless;  and,  already  fully  developed  andsensitive,  I sometimes  thought  of  my  crazes,  but  saw  nothing  be-yond  them.  In  this  strange  situation,  my  restless  imagination  en-tered  upon  an  occupation  which  saved  me  from  myself  and  calmedmy  growing  sensuality.  This  consisted  in  feeding  myself  upon  thesituations  which  had  interested  me  in  the  course  of my  reading,  inrecalling  them,  in  varying  them,  in  combining  them,  in  makingthem  so  truly  my  own  that  I became  one  of the  persons  who  filledmy  imagination,  and  always  saw  myself  in the situations  most  agree-able  to  my  taste;  and  that,  finally,  the  fictitious  state  in  which  Isucceeded  in  putting  myself  made  me  forget  my  actual  state  withwhich  I was  so  dissatisfied.  This  love  of imaginary  objects,  and  theSUNDAY  OUTINGS4Ireadiness  with  which  I occupied  myself  with  them,  ended  by dis-gusting  me  with  everything  around  me,  and  decided  that  liking  forsolitude  which  has  never  left  me.  In  the  sequel  we  shall  see  morethan  once  the  curious  effects  of  this  disposition,  apparently  sogloomy  and  misanthropic,  but which  is really  due  to  a  too  affection-ate,  too  loving  and  too  tender  heart,  which,  being  unable  to  findany  in  existence  resembling  it,  is  obliged  to  nourish  itself  withfancies.  For  the  present,  it  is  sufficient  for  me  to  have  defined  theorigin  and  first  cause  of  a  propensity  which  has  modified  all  mypassions,  and  which,  restraining  them  by means  of  themselves,  hasalways  made  me  slow  to  act,  owing  to  my  excessive  impetuosity  indesire.In  this  manner  I reached  my  sixteenth  year,  restless,  dissatisfiedwith  myself  and  everything,  without  any  of the  tastes  of my  condi-tion  of  life,  without  any  of  the  pleasures  of  my  age,  consumed  bydesires  of the  object  of which  I was  ignorant,  weeping  without  anycause  for  tears,  sighing  without  knowing  why—in  short,  tenderlycaressing  my  chimeras,  since  I saw  nothing  around  me  which  coun-terbalanced  them.  On  Sundays,  my  fellow-apprentices  came  to  fetchme  after  service  to  go  and  amuse  myself  with  them.  I would  gladlyhave  escaped from  them  if I had  been  able;  but,  once  engaged intheir  amusements,  I became  more  excited  and went  further  thanany  of them;  it was  as  difficult  to  set  me  going  as  to  stop  me.  Suchwas  always  my  disposition.  During  our  walks  outside  the  city  Ialways  went  further  than  any  of them  without  thinking  about  myreturn,  unless  others  thought  of it for  me.  Twice  I was  caught:  thegates  were  shut  before  I could  get  back.  The  next  day I was  treatedas  may  be  imagined;  the  second  time  I was  promised  such  a  recep-"tion  if it ever  happened  again,  that  I resolved  not  to  run  the  risk  ofit;  yet  this  third  time,  so  dreaded,  came  to  pass.  My  watchfulnesswas  rendered  useless  by a confounded  Captain  Minutoli,  who  alwaysshut  the  gate  at  which  he  was  on  guard  half-an-hour  before  theothers.  I was  returning  with  two  companions.  About  half  a  leaguefrom  the  city  I heard  the  retreat  sounded:  I doubled  my  pace:  Iheard  the  tattoo  beat,  and  ran  with  all  my  might.  I arrived  out  ofbreath  and  bathed  in  perspiration;  my  heart  beat;  from  a  distance42THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUI saw  the  soldiers  at  their  posts;  I rushed  up  and  cried  out  with  avoice  half-choked.  It was  too  late!  Twenty  paces  from  the  outposts,I saw  the  first  bridge  raised.  I shuddered  when  I saw  those  terriblehorns  rising  in  the  air—a  sinister  and  fatal  omen  of the  destinywhich  that  moment  was  opening  for  me.In  the  first  violence  of my  grief  I threw  myself  on  the  glacis  andbit  the  ground.  My  companions,  laughing  at  their  misfortune,  im-mediately  made  up  their  minds  what  to  do.  I did  the  same,  but  myresolution  was  different  from  theirs.  On  the  spot  I swore  never  to:return  to  my  master;  and  the  next  morning,  when  they  entered  the:city  after  the  gates  were  opened,  I said  good-bye  to  them  for  ever,only begging them  secretly  to  inform  my  cousin  Bernard  of the reso-lution  I had  taken,  and  of the place where  he might be able  to  see  meonce  more.After  I had  entered  upon  my  apprenticeship  I saw  less  of  him.For  some  time  we  used  to  meet  on  Sunday,  but  gradually  each  ofus  adopted  other  habits,  and  we  saw  one  another  less  frequently.  Iam  convinced  that  his  mother  had  much  to  do with  this  change.  Hewas  a  child  of the upper  city;!1  I, a poor  apprentice,  was  only a childof  Saint-Gervais.  In  spite  of  our  relationship,  there  was  no  longerany  equality  between  us;  it was  derogatory  to  him  to  associate  withme.  However,  relations  were  not  entirely  broken  off  between  us,and,  as  he  was  a  good-natured  lad,  he  sometimes  followed  the  dic-tates  of his  heart  instead  of his  mother’s  instructions.  When  he wasinformed  of  my  resolution,  he  hastened  to  me,  not  to  try  and  dis-suade  me  from  it or  to  share  it, but  to  lessen  the  inconveniences  ofmy  flight  by some  small  presents,  since  my  own  resources  could  not‘take  me  very  far.  Amongst  other  things  he gave  me  a  small  sword,which  had  taken  my  fancy  exceedingly,  and  which  I carried  as  faras  Turin,  where  necessity  obliged  me  to  dispose  of it, and  where,  asthe  saying  is, I passed  it through  my  body.  The  more  I have  sincereflected  upon  the  manner  in which  he behaved  towards  me  at  thiscritical  moment,  the more  I have  felt convinced  that  he followed  the“  Enfant  du  haut—i.e.,  of  the  upper,  more  fashionable  part  of  the  city;  while:Saint-Gervais,  on  the  right  bank  of the  Rhône,  was  the  quarter  inhabited  by the:poorer  population.xREFLECTFONS  ON  DESTINY43instructions  of his  mother, and perhaps  of his  father;  for it is incon-ceivable  that,  left  to  himself,  he would  not  have  made  some  effort  tokeep  me  back,  or  would  not  have  been  tempted  to  follow;  but,  no!he rather  encouraged  me  in my  plan than  tried  to  dissuade  me;  and,when  he  saw  me  quite  determined,  he  left  me  without  sheddingmany  tears.  We  have  never  corresponded  or  seen  each  other  since.It is a  pity:  his character  was  essentially  good;  we  were  made  to  loveeach  other.Before  I abandon  myself  to  the fatality  of my  lot, allow  me  te  turnmy  eyes  for  a  moment  upon  the  destiny  which,  in  the  mature  ofthings,  would  have  awaited  me  if I had  fallen  into  the  hands  of abetter  master.  Nothing  was  more  suitable  to  my  disposition  or  betteradapted  to  make  me  happy  than  the  quiet  and  obscure  lot  of a  re-spectable  artisan,  especially  of .a  certain  class  such  as  that  of  theengravers  of Geneva.  Such a position,  sufficiently  lucrative  to  afforda  comfortable  livelihood,  but  not  sufficiently  so  to  lead  to  fortune,would  have  limited  my  ambition  for the rest  of my  days, and, leavingme  an  honourable  leisure  to  cultivate  modest  tastes,  would  have  con-fined  me  within  my  own  sphere,  without  offering  me  the  means  ofgetting  out  of  it.  My  imaginative  powers  were  rich  enough  tobeautify  all callings  with  their  chimeras,  and  strong  enough  to  trans-port  me,  so  to  speak,  at  will  from  one  to  another;  so  it would  havebeen  immaterial  to  me  in  what  position  I actually  found  myself.  Itcould  not  have  been  so  far  from  the  place  where  I was  to  my  firstcastle  in the air, that  I could  not  have  taken  up my  abode  there  with-out  any  difficulty.  From  this  alone  it  followed  that  the  simplestvocation,  that  which  involved  the  least  trouble  and  anxiety,  thatwhich  allowed  the  greatest  mental  freedom,  was  the  one  whichsuited  me  best:  and  that  was  exactly  my  own.  I should  have  passeda  peaceful  and  quiet  life,  such  as  my  disposition  required,  in  thebosom  of my  religion,  my  country,  my  family  and  my  friends,  in themonotony  of a  profession  that  suited  my  taste,  and  in a society  aftermy  own  heart.  I should  have  been  a good Christian,  a good citizen,  agood father  of a  family,  a good friend,  a good  workman,  a good manin every  relation  of life.  I should  have  loved  my  position  in life, per-haps  honoured  it;  and,  having  spent  a  life—simple,  indeed,  and44THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUobscure,  but  calm  and  serene-—I  should  have  died  peacefully  in thebosom  of my  family.  Though,  doubtless,  soon  forgotten,  I should  atleast  have  been  regretted  as  long as  anyone  remembered  me.Instead  of  that—what  picture  am  I going  to  draw?  Let  us  notanticipate  the  sorrows  of  my  life;  I shall  occupy  my  readers  morethan  enough  with  this  melancholy  subject.BOOK  II[1728-173 ]However  mournful  the  moment,  when  terror  suggested  to  me  theidea  of  flight,  had  appeared—the  moment  when I carried  it intoexecution  appeared  equally  delightful.  While  still  a  child,  to  leavemy  country,  my  parents,  my  means  of support,  my  resources;  to  giveup  an  apprenticeship  half-served,  without  a  sufficient  knowledge  ofmy  trade  to  earn  my  livelihood;  to  abandon  myself  to  the  horrorsof want,  without  any  means  of saving  myself  from  it; to  expose  my-self,  at  the  age  of innocence  and  weakness,  to  all  the  temptations  ofvice  and  despair;  to  seek,  in  the  distance,  suffering,  error,  snares,servitude,  and  death,  beneath  a  yoke  far  more  unbending  than  thatwhich  I had  been  unable  to  endure—this  was  what  I was  going  todo,  this  was  the  prospect  which  I ought  to  have  considered.  Howdifferent  was  that  which  my  fancy painted!  The  independence  whichI believed  I had  gained  was  the  only  feeling  which  moved  me.  Free,and my  own  master,  I believed  I could  do everything,  attain  to  every-thing;  I had  only  to  launch  myself  forth,  to  mount  and  fly throughthe  air.  I entered  the  vast  world  with a feeling  of security;  it was  tobe  filled  with  the  fame  of  my  achievements;  at  every  step  I was  tofind  festivities,  treasures,  adventures,  friends  ready  to  serve  me,mistresses  eager  to  please  me;  I had  only  to  show  myself,  to  engagethe  attention  of the  whole  world—and  yet not  the  whole  world;  to  acertain  extent  I could  dispense  with  it, and  did  not  want  so  much.Charming  society  was  enough  for  me,  without  troubling  myselfabout  the  rest.  In  my  modesty  I limited  myself  to  a  narrow,  butdelightfully  select  circle,  in  which  my  sovereignty  was  assured.  Asingle  castle  was  the  limit  of my  ambition.  As  the  favourite  of thelord  and  the  lady,  as  the  lover  of the  daughter,  as  the  friend  of theson  and  protector  of  the  neighbours,  I was  content—I  wanted  nomore.4546THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUIn the expectation  of this  modest  future,  I wandered  for  some  daysround  the  city,  lodging  with  some  peasants  whom  I knew,  who  allreceived  me  with  greater  kindness  than  any  of the  inhabitants  of thecity would  have  done.  They took  me  in, lodged  me,  and  fed me  withtoo  much  kindness  to  make  a  merit  of  it.  It  could  not  be  calledcharity;  they  did  not  bestow  it with  a  sufficient  air  of superiority.Travelling  and  roaming  about  in  this  manner,  I reached  Config-non,  in the  district  of Savoy,  two  leagues  from  Geneva.  The  name  ofthe  curé  was  M.  de Pontverre.  This  name,  famous  in the  history  ofthe  Republic,  arrested  my  atention.  I was  curious  to  see  what  thedescendants  of the  Knights  of the  Spoon?  looked  like.I called  upon  M.  de  Pontverre.  He  received  me  kindly,  talkedabout  the  heresy  of  Geneva,  the  authority  of  the  Holy  MotherChurch,  and  invited  me  to  dinner.  I found  little  to  reply  to  argu-ments  which  ended  in  this  manner,  and  I formed  the  opinion  thatcurés  who  dined  so  well  were  at  least  as  good  as  our  ministers.  I wascertainly  more  learned  than  M.  de  Pontverre,  in  spite  of  his  birth;but  I was  too  good a  guest  to  be as  good a  theologian,  and  his Frangiwine,  which  appeared  to  me  excellent,  argued  so  triumphantly  in hisfavour  that  I should  have  been  ashamed  to  stop  the  mouth  of  soadmirable  a  host.  I therefore  gave  in,  or  at  least  offered  no  openresistance.  To  see  the  carefulness  I exhibited,  one  would  have  be-lieved  me  false;  but  that  would  have  been  a  mistake.  I only behavedwith  common  courtesy,  that  is certain.  Flattery,  or  rather  condescen-sion,  is not  always  a  vice;  it is more  often  a  virtue,  especially  in youngpeople.  The  kindness  with  which  a  person  treats  us  endears  him  tous;  we  give in to  him,  not  in order  to  abuse  his kindness,  but to  avoidannoying  him, or  returning  him  evil  for good.  What  interest  had  M.de Pontverre  in  receiving  me,  treating  me  kindly,  or  trying  to  con-vince  me?  No  other  than  my  own;  my  young  heart  told  me  that.  Iwas  moved  with  gratitude  and  respect  for  the  good  priest.  I felt  mysuperiority;  I did  not  wish  to  overwhelm  him  with  it as  the  rewardof  his  hospitality.  In  this  attitude  there  was  nothing  hypocritical;  IThese  Catholic  knights,  subjects  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  formed  a  leagueagainst  the  Genevese  in  the  time  of  the  Reformation,  and  were  so  called  becausethey  boasted  of  having  “eaten  their  enemies  with  a  spoon,”  and  carried  a  spoonhung  round  their  necks.  They  were  headed  by  a  De  Pontverre.M.  DE  PONTVERRE47_  never  thought  of changing  my  religion;  and,  far  from  familiarisingmyself  so  rapidly  with  this  igea, I only  regarded  it with a feeling  ofhorror  which  was  destined  to  keep it away  from  me  for  a  long time;my  only  wish  was  to  avoid  annoying  those  who  treated  me  kindlywith  the  object  of converting  me;  I wished  to  cultivate  their  good-will,  and  to  leave  them  the  hope  of success,  by appearing  less  com-pletely  armed  than  I really  was.  My fault in  that  respect  resembled_  the  coquetry  of respectable  women,  who  sometimes,  in  order  to  at-tain  their  object,  without  allowing  or  promising  anything,  knowhow  to  excite  greater  hopes  than  they mean  to  fulfil.Reason,  pity,  and  regard  for  discipline  required  that,  far  fromassisting  my  folly,  people  should  have  saved  me  from  the  ruinwhich  I ran  to meet  and  sent  me  back  to  my  family.  That is  whatevery  truly  virtuous  man  would  have  done  or  attempted  to  do.  But,although  M.  de  Pontverre  was  a  good  man,  he  was  certainly  not  avirtuous  man;  on  the  contrary,  he  was  an  enthusiast  who  knew  noother  virtue  except  worshipping  images  and  telling  his  beads—akind  of missionary  who  could  think  of nothing  better  for  the  goodof the  faith  than  writing  libels  against  the  ministers  of Geneva.  Farfrom  thinking  of sending  me  back  to  my  home,  he  took  advantageof the  desire  I felt  to  get  away  from  it, to  make  it impossible  for  meto  return  even  though  I should  wish  to  do  so.  It was  any  odds  thathe  was  sending  me  to  perish  in  misery  or  to  become  a  worthlessscamp.  But  that  was  not  what  he looked  at;  he only  saw  a  soul  savedfrom  heresy  and  restored  to  the  Church.  Honest  man  or  scamp—what  did  it matter,  provided  I went  to  mass?  One  must  not,  how-ever,  believe  that  this  way  of thinking  is peculiar  to  Catholics;  it iscommon  to  all  dogmatic  religions  in  which  faith,  not  works,  is con-sidered  the  principal  thing.“God  calls  you,”  said  M.  de  Pontverre;  “go to  Annecy;  there  youwill  find  a  good  and  charitable  lady,  whom  the  King’s  kindness  hasplaced  in a  position  to  rescue  other  souls  from  the  error  from  whichshe  herself  has  been  delivered.”  The  lady  in  question  was  Madamede  Warens,  a  new  convert,  who  in  reality  had  been  forced  by thepriests  to  share,  with  the  rabble  which  came  to  sell  its faith,  a  pensionof  two  thousand  francs  which  she  received  from  the  King  of  Sar-dinia.  I felt very  humiliated  at requiring  the assistance  of a good and48THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUcharitable  lady.  I was  very  desirous  of  having  my  wants  supplied,but not  of receiving  alms, and  a devotee  did not  sound  very  attractiveto  me.  However,  urged  by M.  de  Pontverre,  and  hard  pressed  byhunger  and  pleased  at  the  idea  of making  a  journey  with  a  definiteobject,  I made  up  my  mind,  although  with  some  difficulty,  and  setout  for Annecy.  I could  easily have  reached  the place in one  day; but,as  I did  not  hurry,  it took  three.  I never  saw  a  chdteau  on  the  rightor  left  without  going  in  search  of  the  adventure  which I felt  sureawaited  me  there.  I did  not  dare  to  enter  the château  or  knock  at thedoor,  being  naturally  very  shy;  but  I sang  under  the  window  whichlooked  most  promising  from  outside,  and,  after  having  tired  out  mylungs  by continued  efforts,  was  surprised  that  I beheld  neither  ladiesnor  maidens  attracted  by the  beauty  of my  voice  or  the  spirit  of mysongs,  seeing  that  I knew  some  admirable  compositions  which  mycompanions  had  taught  me  and  which  I sang  in  a  manner  equallyadmirable.At  last  I arrived:  I saw  Madame  de  Warens.  That  epoch  of mylife  decided  my  character;  I cannot  bring  myself  to  pass  lightly  overit. I was  in the  middle  of my  sixteenth  year.  Without  being  what  iscalled  a  handsome  lad,  I was  well  set  up,  I had a pretty  foot,  a  fineleg, an  easy  manner,  lively  features,  a  pretty  little  mouth,  black  hairand  eyebrows,  small  and  even  sunken  eyes,  which,  however,  vigor-ously  darted  forth  the  fire  with  which  my  blood  was  kindled.  Un-happily,  I knew  nothing  of  that,  and  it has  never  occurred  to  meduring  my  life  to  think  about  my  personal  appearance  except  whenit was  too  late  to  profit by it. With  the timidity  of my  age  was  unitedthat  of a  very  loving  disposition,  always  troubled  by the  fear  of dis-pleasing.  Besides,  although  my  mind  was  tolerably  well  formed,  Ihad  never  seen  the  world,  and  was  entirely  wanting  in manners,  andmy  knowledge,  far  from  supplementing  this  defect,  only  served  tointimidate  me  still  more  by making  me  feel  how  sadly  I neededthem.Fearing,  therefore,  that  my  first  appearance  would  not  prejudiceMadame  de  Warens  in  my  favour,  I had  recourse  to  other  expedi-ents.  I composed a beautiful  letter  in oratorical  style,  in which,  inter-mingling  phrases  out  of books  with  the language  of an  apprentice,  Idisplayed  all my  eloquence  in order  to  gain her  goodwill.  I enclosedMEETS  MADAME  DE  WARENS49M.  de  Pontverre’s  letter  in  my  own,  and  set  out  for  the  dreadedinterview.  Madame  de War€ns  was  not  at  home.  I was  told  that  shehad just gone  to  church.  It was  Palm-Sunday  in  1728. I ran  after  her.I saw  her;  I overtook  her;  I addressed  her.  I ought  to  remember  thespot.  Since  then  I have often  wetted  it with  my  tears  and  covered  itwith  my  kisses.  I should  like  to  surround  this  happy  spot  with  arailing  of  gold.  I should  like  to  draw  upon  it the  homage  of  theworld,  Whoever  loves  to  honour  the  monuments  of the  salvation  ofmen  should  only approach  them  on  his  knees.It was  in a  passage  behind  her  house,  leading  between  a brook  onthe right,  which  separated  the house  from  the garden,  and  the court-wall  on  the  left, through  a  back-gate  to  the  Franciscan?  church.  Justas  she  was  going  to  enter,  Madame  de  Warens,  hearing  my  voice,turned  round.  How  did  the  sight of her  strike  me!  I had  pictured  tomyself  an  old,  grim,  religious  enthusiast;  in  my  opinion,  M.  dePontverre’s  pious  lady could  be nothing  else.  Instead,  I beheld  a  facefull  of  charm,  beautiful  blue  eyes—full  of  gentleness—a  dazzlingcomplexion,  the  outlines  of an  enchanting  throat.  Nothing  escapedthe  rapid  glance  of the  young  proselyte—for  at  that  moment  I be-came  hers,  feeling  convinced  that  a  religion  preached  by  suchapostles  must  inevitably  lead  to  paradise.  With  a  smile,  she  took  theletter  which  I presented  to  her  with  a  trembling  hand,  opened  it,glanced  at  that  of M. de Pontverre,  returned  to mine,  read  it through,and  would  have  read  it again,  had  not  her  servant  reminded  her  thatit was  time  to  go in. “Well,  my  child,”  she said  to  me  in a tone  whichmade  me  tremble,  “so  you  are  wandering  about  the  country  at  yourage;  that  is indeed  a  pity.”  Then,  without  waiting  for  me  to  answer,she added,  “Go  and  wait  for  me;  tell  them  to  give  you  some  break-fast.  After  mass  I will  come  and  talk  to  you.”Louise  Eléonore  de  Warens  was  a  young  lady  who  belonged  tothe  house  of La  Tour  de  Pil, an  ancient  and  noble  family  of Vévai,a  town  in  the  canton  of Vaud.  When  very  young  she  had  marriedM. de Warens,  of the house  of Loys, the eldest  son  of M. de Villardin,2 Les  Cordeliers:  a  religious  order,  founded  by  St.  Francis  of  Assisi  in  1223.The  name  was  afterwards  also  given  to  a  club  founded  in  1790:  by  Danton,Marat,  and  Desmoulins,  which  held  its  meetings  in  the  old  Franciscan  conventat  Paris.50THE  CONFESSiONS  OF  ROUSSEAUof  Lausanne.  This  marriage,  which  proved  childless,  was  not  ahappy  one,  and  Madame  de Warens,  driven  by some  domestic  grief,seized  the  opportunity  of the  presence  of  King  Victor  Amadeus  atEvian  to  cross  the  lake  and  throw  herself  at  the  feet  of this  prince,thus  abandoning  her  husband,  her  family  and  her  country  througha  piece  of  folly  which  much  resembled  mine,  and  which  she,  likemyself,  has  had  ample  time  to  lament.  The  King,  who  was  fond  ofposing  as  a  zealous  Catholic,  took  her  under  his  protection,  andsettled  on  her  an  annuity  of  1,500  Piedmontese  livres,  a  tolerablylarge  sum  for  a  prince  who,  as  a  rule,  was  little  inclined  to  be gener-ous.  Afterwards,  finding  that  he was  reported  to  be in love  with  herin consequence  of the  manner  in which  he had  received  her,  he senther to  Annecy  under  the escort  of a detachment  of his guards,  where,under  the  spiritual  guidance  of  Michel-Gabriel  de  Bernex,  titularBishop  of Geneva,  she renounced  the Protestant  faith  in the Conventof  the  Visitation.She  had  been  six  years  in  Annecy  when J arrived  there,  and  wastwenty-eight  years  of  age,  having  been  born.  with  the  century.  Herbeauty  was  of the  kind  which  lasts,  consisting  rather  in  the  expres-sion  than  the features;  besides,  hers  was  still  in its first brilliancy.  Shehad  a  caressing  and  tender  air,  a  gentle  look,  an  angelic  smile,  amouth  like  my  own,  ashen-grey  hair  of rare  beauty,  which  she  worein a  careless  fashion,  which  gave  her  a  very  piquant  appearance.  Shewas  small  of  stature,  even  short—somewhat  dumpy,  although  notdisagreeably  so;  but  a  more  beautiful  head  and  bosom,  more  beauti-ful  hands  and  arms,  could  not  have  been  seen.Her  education  had  been  very  peculiar.  Like  myself,  she  had  losther  mother  at  her  birth,  and,  receiving  instruction  indiscriminately,just  as  it happened  to  offer  itself,  she  had  learnt  a  little  from  hergoverness,  a  little  from  her  father,  a  little  from  her  masters,  and  agreat  deal  from  her  lovers,  especially  from  one  M.  de  Tavel,  who,being a man  of taste  and  learning,  adorned  the object of his affectionswith  his  own  excellences.  But  so  many  different  kinds  of instructionimpeded  each  other,  and,  as  she  pursued  her  studies  without  anyregular  system,  her  naturally  sound  understanding  was  by no  meansimproved.  Thus,  although  she  knew  something  about  the  principlesof  philosophy  and  physics,  she  still  preserved  her  father’s  taste  forCHARACTER  OF  MADAME251empirical  medicine  and  alchemy;  she  prepared  elixirs,  tinctures,balsams,  and  magisteries.?  She  claimed  to  possess  secret  remedies.Quacks,  profiting  by her  weakness,  got  hold  of  her,  pestered  her,ruined  her, and, in the midst  of crucibles  and  drugs,  squandered  herintellect,  her  talents,  and her  charms,  with  which  she  might havegraced  the  highest  sotiety.But,  although  vile  rascals  abused  her  ill-directed  education,  inorder  to  obscure  the  light  of  her  reason,  her  excellent  heart  stoodthe  test  and  always  remained  the  same;  her  loving  and  gentle  char-acter,  her  sympathy  with  the  unfortunate,  her  inexhaustible  good-ness,  her  cheerful,  frank,  and  open  disposition  never  changed;  and,even  when  old  age  came  upon  her,  surrounded  by want,  suffering,and  calamities  of  all  kinds,  the  calmness  of  her  beautiful  soul  pre-served  for her  to  the end  of her  life all the gaiety  of her happiest  days.Her  errors  were  due  to  an  inexhaustible  fund  of  activity  whichneeded  ineessant  occupation.  She  wanted  no  intrigues  like  otherwomen,  but  enterprises  to  direct  and  carry  out.  She  was  born  to  takepart  m  important  affairs.  In  her  place,  Madame  de  Longuevillewould  have  been  a  mere  intriguer;  in  the  place  of  Madame  deLongueville,  she  would  have  governed  the  State.  Her  talents  weremisplaced,  and  that  which  would  have  brought  fame  to  her  in  amore  exalted  position  proved  her  ruin  in that  in which  she  lived.  Ineverything  which  was  within  the  reach  of her  mental  capacity,  shealways  enlarged  her  plan  in  her  head  and  saw  its  object  magnified,the result  of this  being that  she  employed  means  better  proportionedto  her  views  than  her  strength;  she  failed  through  the  fault  ofothers;  and,  when  her  project  failed  to  succeed,  she  was  ruined,where  others  would  scarcely  have  lost  anything.  This  eagerness  forbusiness,  which  did  her  so  much  harm,  was  at  least  of great  serviceto  her, in her  monastic  retreat,  in that  it prevented  her  from  settlingthere  for  the  rest  of her  life  as  she  had  intended.  The  regular  andsimple  life  of  the  nuns,  the  idle  gossip  of  the  parlour,  could  notpossibly  be agreeable  to  a  mind  which  was  continually  in movement,and  which,  inventing  new  systems  every  day,  required  freedom  inorder  to  devote  itself  to  them.  The  good  Bishop  of Bernex,  though3  A powder  to  which  sovereign  virtues  were  formerly  attributed.52THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUnot  so  clever  as  Francois  de  Sales,  resembled  him  in  many  pointsand  Madame  de  Warens,  whom  he  called  his  daughter,  and  whoresembled  Madame  de  Chantal®  in  many  other  points,  might  haveresembled  her  even  in  her  retirement,  had  not  the  idle  life  of a  con-vent  been  distasteful  to  her.  It was  not  from  want  of zeal  that  thisamiable  woman  did  not  devote  herself  to  the  trifling  exercises  ofdevotion,  which  appeared  suitable  to  a  new  convert  living  under  theguidance  of a  prelate.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  motive  that  in-duced  her  to  change  her  religion,  she  was  certainly  sincere  in  thatwhich  she  had  embraced.  She  may  have  repented  of having  takenthe  step;  certainly  she  never  wished  to  retrace  it.  She  not  only  dieda  good  Catholic;  she  proved  herself  one  during  her  lifetime;  and  I,who  believe  that  I have  read  her  inmost  soul,  dare  to  affirm  that  itwas  solely  owing  to  a  horror  of affectation  that  she  never  played  thedevotee  in public;  her  piety  was  too  genuine  for  her  to  make  a  showof devotion.  But  this  is not  the  place to  discuss  her  principles;  I shallhave  other  opportunities  of  speaking  of  them.Those  who  deny  the  sympathy  of souls  may  explain,  if they can,how,  from  the  first  interview,  from  the  first  word,  from  the  firstlook,  Madame  de  Warens  inspired  me,  not  only  with  the  liveliestfeelings  of  attachment,  but  with  a  perfect  confidence  which  hasnever  belied  itself.  Granted  that  my  sentiments  for  her  were  reallylove,  which  will  at  least  appear  doubtful  to  those  who  follow  thehistory  of our  relations,  how  came  it that  this  passion  was  from  theoutset  accompanied  by the  feelings  which  it least  inspires—peace  ofheart,  calm,  cheerfulness,  confidence,  trust?  How  was  it that,  whenfor  the  first  time  I approached  an  amiable,  refined,  and  dazzlinglybeautiful  woman,  a lady of higher  position  than  my  own,  the  like  ofwhom  I had  never  addressed,  upon  whom  my  destiny  in  a mannerdepended,  according  as  she  interested  herself  more  or  less  on  my  be-half—how  came  it, I repeat,  that,  in  spite of all  this,  I immediatelyfelt  as  free  and  completely  at  my  ease  as  if  I had  been  perfectly  cer-tain  of pleasing  her?  How  was  it that  I did  not  for  a  single  moment“Bishop  of  Geneva  (1567-1622).5  A  lady,  distinguished  for  her  great  piety,  the  foundress  of  the  Order  of  the?Visitation;  she  was  canonized  by  Clement  XIII.HIS  FEELINGS  FOR  HER53experience  a  feeling  of embarrassment,  timidity,  or  awkwardness?Naturally  bashful  and  easily  put  out  of  countenance,  knowingnothing  of the  world,  how  was  it that  from  the  first  day,  from  thefirst  moment,  I was  able  to  assume  with  her  the  easy  manners,  thetender  language,  the  familiar  tone  which  prevailed  between  us  tenyears  later,  when  oñr  close  intimacy  had  made  it  natural?  Is  itpossible  to  love,  I do  not  say  without  desires,  for  those  I had,  butwithout  jealousy?  Does  not  one  at  least  wish  to  learn  from  theobject  of  one’s  affection  whether  one  is loved  in  return?  It has  nomore  occurred  to  me  in  the  course  of  my  life  ever  to  ask  her  thisquestion  than  to  ask  myself  whether  I loved  her;  and  she  has  nevershown  greater  curiosity  in  regard  to  myself.  There  was  certainlysomething  singular  in  my  feelings  for this  charming  woman,  and,in  the  course  of  the  narrative,  the  reader  will  find  unexpectedsingularities.It  was  a  question  what  was  to  become  of  me;  and,  in  order  todiscuss  my  future  more  at  leisure,  she  kept me  to  dinner.  It was  thefirst  meal  in my  life  at  which  my  appetite  failed  me;  and  her  maid,who  waited  upon  us,  said  that  I was  the  first  traveller  of  my  ageand  class  that  she  had  ever  seen  in  such  a  condition.  This  remark,which  did  me  no  harm  in the  eyes  of her  mistress,  struck  home  to  agreat  lout  who  was  dining  with  us,  and  who  devoured  by himselfquite  a  respectable  dinner  for  six.  As  for  myself,  I was  in  a  state  ofrapture  which  did  not  allow  me  to eat.  My heart  fed  upon  an  entirelynew  feeling,  with  which  my  whole  being  was  filled,  and  which  leftme  no  inclination  for  doing  anything  else.Madame  de  Warens  wanted  to  know  the  details  of  my  little  his-tory;  and  in relating  them  I recovered  all the  fire  and  vivacity  whichI had  lost  during  my  apprenticeship.  The  more  I interested  thisexcellent  soul  in my  favour,  the  more  she  lamented  the  lot to  whichI intended  to  expose  myself.  She  did  not  venture  to  advise  me  toreturn  to  Geneva;  in  her  position  that  would  have  been  an  act  oftreason  to  the  Catholic  faith;  and  she  knew  only  too  well  how  shewas  watched  and,  how  her  words  were  weighed.  But  she  spoke  tome  so  touchingly  of  my  father’s  affliction,  that  it  was  easy  to  seethat  she  would  have  approved  of my.going  to  console  him.  She  didnot  know  how.  strongly,  without.  knowing  it, she  was  pleading54THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUagainst  herself.  I think  I have  already  said  that  my  mind  was  madeup;  the  more  eloquent  and  persuasive  her  words,  the  more  theywent  to my  heart,the  less  I was  able to make  up my  mind  to  separatefrom  her.  I felt  that  to  return  to  Geneva  would  be to  put  an  almostinsurmountable  barrier  between  herself  and  me,  unless  I again  tookthe  step  which  I shad  already  taken,  and  by which  it was  better  toabide  once  and  for  all.  I accordingly  remained  firm.  Madame  deWarens,  seeing  that  her  efforts  were  unavailing,  did  not  persist  inthem,  to  avoid  compromising  herself,  but  she  said  to  me,  with  a lookof compassion,  “Poor  little  one,  you  must  go  where  God  calls  you;but  when  you  are  grown  up,  you  will  think  of  me.”  I believe  sheherself  had  no  idea  how  cruelly  this  prediction  was  to  be fulfilled.The  difficulty  was  great.  How  was  I, young  as  I was,  to  find  alivelihood  so  far  from  home?  Having  served  scarcely  half  my  ap-prenticeship,  I was  very  far  from  knowing  my  trade.  Even  if I hadknown  it, I should  have  been  unable  to  earn  a living  by it in  Savoy,for  the  country  was  too  poor  to  support  the  arts.  The  lout  who  waseating  our  dinners  for  us,  being  obliged  to  stop  to  give  his  jaws  arest,  made  a  proposal  which  he  declared  was  inspired  by heaven,but  which,  to  judge  from  its  results,  was  rather  inspired  by  theopposite  place.  This  proposal  was  that  I should  go to  Turin,  where  Ishould  find  spiritual  and  bodily  support  in a  hospice  established  forthe  instruction  of catechumens,  until,  after  I had  been  received  intothe  bosom  of the  Church,  I should  find  suitable  employment  by thekindness  of the  charitable.  “As  to  the  expenses  of his  journey,”  con-tinued  my  friend,  “his  lordship  the  bishop  will  no  doubt  be  kindenough  to  provide  for  them,  if Madame  suggests  this  holy  work  tohim,  and,  doubtless,  Madame  la Baronne,”  he  added,  bending  overhis  plate,  “who  is  so  charitable,  will  also  be  eager  to  contributetowards  them.”  I found  the  idea  of so  much  charity  very  distasteful;I was  sick  at  heart,  and  said  nothing.  Madame  de  Warens,  withoutembracing  the  suggestion  as  eagerly  as  it was  offered,  contented  her-self  with  replying  that  everyone  ought  to  do  good  to  the  best  of hispower,  and  that  she would  speak to  the bishop  about  it; but  my  con-founded  friend,  who  had a little  interest  of  his  own  in  the  matter,and  was  afraid  that  she  might  not  speak  of it exactly  as  he  wished,hastened  to  warn  the  almoners,  and  worked  upon  the  good  priestsSETS  OUT  FOR  TURIN55so  cleverly  that, when  Madame  de Warens,  who  feared  the journeyfor me,  wished  to  speak about it to  the bishop,  she found  that  every-thing  had  been  arranged,  and he immediately  handed  her  over  themoney  destined  for  my  humble  travelling  expenses.  She  did  notventure  to  insist  upon  my  remaining,  for  I was  approaching  an  agewhen  a  woman  of  her  own  years  could  not  with  propriety  expressa  desire  to  keep  a  young  man  with  her.My journey  being  thus  arranged  by those  who  took  charge  of me,I was  obliged  to  submit,  and  I even  did  so  without  much  reluctance.Although  Turin  was  further  than  Geneva,  I judged  that,  being  thecapital,  it was  more  closely  connected  with  Annecy  than  a  town  ofdifferent  faith  and  in  a  foreign  land;  and,  besides,  as  I was  settingout  in  obedience  to  Madame  de  Warens,  I considered  myself  asremaining  under  her  guidance  and  that  was  more  than  living  in herneighbourhood.  Lastly,  the  idea  of a  long journey  flattered  my  fond-ness  for  roaming,  which  was  already  beginning  to  declare  itself.  Itappeared  to  me a fine  thing  to  cross  mountains  at  my  age,  and  toelevate  myself  above  my  comrades  by the  whole  height  of the  Alps.There  is a  charm  in seeing  different  countries  which  a  Genevese  canscarcely  ever  resist;  I, therefore,  gave  my  consent.  My  lout  intendedto  set  out  in two  days with  his wife, and  I was  intrusted  to  their  care.My funds,  which  Madame  de Warens  had  augmented,  were  handedover  to  them.  She  also  gave  me  privately a little  pocket-money,  andmuch  good  advice;  and,  on  the  Wednesday  in  Passion  week,  we  setout  on  our  journey.On  the  day after  I left  Annecy  my  father  arrived,  having  followedon  my  track  with  his  friend,  M.  Rival,  a  watchmaker  like  himself,a  talented  and  even  a  witty  man,  who  wrote  better  verses  than  LaMotte,  and  was  almost  as  good  a  speaker;  in  addition,  he  was  athoroughly  good  fellow;  but  his  misplaced  taste  for  literature  ledto  no  other  result  than  sending  one  of his  sons  on  the  stage.These  gentlemen  saw  Madame  de  Warens,  and  contented  them-selves  with  lamenting  my  lot,  instead  of  following  and  overtakingme,  as  they  could  easily  have  done,  since  they  were  on  horsebackwhile  I was  on  foot.  My uncle  Bernard  had  done  the  same;  he  hadgone  as  far  as  Confignon,  whence  he  returned  to  Geneva,  after  heheard  that  I was  at  Annecy.  It  seemed  as  if my  relations  were  in56THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUleague  with  my  unlucky  star  to  hand  me  over  to  the  destiny  whichawaited  me.  My  brother  had  been  lost  through  similar  negligence,and  so  completely,  that  it has  never  been  known  what  became  ofhim.;My father  was  not  only a  man  of honour,  he was  a  man  of proveduprightness,  and  he had  one  of those  strong  souls  which  are  capableof great  virtues;  in  addition  to  which,  he  was  a  good  father,  espe-cially  towards  myself.  He  loved  me  very  tenderly,  but  he also  lovedhis  pleasures,  and,  since  I had  lived  apart  from  him,  other  tasteshad  rendered  his  paternal  affection  somewhat  lukewarm.  He  hadmarried  again  at  Nyon;  and  although  his  wife  was  no  longer  of anage  to  present  me  with  brothers,  she  had  relations.  This  createdanother  family,  other  aims,  a  new  establishment,  which  no  longerso  frequently  recalled  the memory  of myself.  My father  was  growingold,  and  had  nothing  to  live  upon;  but  my  brother  and  myself  hada  small  property  from  our  mother,  the  interest  of  which  could  beclaimed  by my  father  during  our  absence.  This  idea  did  not  presentitself  to  him  directly,  and  by no  means  prevented  him  from  doinghis  duty;  but  it exercised  a  secret  influence  without  his  being  awareof  it,  and  sometimes  moderated  his  zeal,  which  he  would  havepushed  further  had  it  not  been  for  that.  That,  I believe,  was  thereason  why,  having  originally  gone  to  Annecy  to  find  me  out,  hedid  not  follow  me  as  far  as  Chambéri,  where  he  would  have  beenmorally  certain  to  find  me.  That  again  was  the  reason  why,  when  Iwent  to  pay  him a visit,  as  I frequently  did  after  my  flight,  he alwaysreceived  me  with  the  caresses  of a  father,  but  without  making  anyserious  efforts  to  keep  me  with  him.This  behaviour  on  the  part  of a  father,  whose  tenderness  and  up-rightness  I knew  so  well,  led  me  to  reflections  upon  myself,  whichhave  in  no  small  degree  contributed  to  keep  my  heart  in  a  healthycondition.  From  these  I have  drawn  the great  moral  lesson,  perhapsthe  only  one  of any  practical  value,  to  avoid  those  situations  of lifewhich  bring  our  duties  into  conflict  with  our  interests,  and  whichshow  us  our  own  advantage  in  the  misfortunes  of  others;  for  it iscertain  that,  in  such  situations,  however  sincere  our  love  of  virtue,we  must,  sooner  or  later, inevitably  grow  weak  without  perceiving  it,REFLECTIONS  ON  PHILOSOPHY57and  become  unjust  and  wicked  in act,  without  having  ceased  to  bejust and  good  in  our  hearts.This  principle,  deeply  imprinted  on  the  bottom  of  my  heart,which,  although  somewhat  late, in  practice  guided  my  whole  con-duct,  is one  of those  which  have  caused  me  to  appear  a  very.  strangeand  foolish  creature  in the eyes  of the world,  and, above  all, amongstmy  acquaintances.  I have  been  reproached  with  wanting  to  pose  asan  original,  and  different  from  others.  In  reality,  I have  nevertroubled  about  acting  like  other  people  or  differently  from  them.  Isincerely  desired  to  do  what  was  right.  I withdrew,  as  far  as  it layin  my  power,  from  situations  which  opposed  my  interests  to  thoseof others,  and  might,  consequently,  inspire  me  with  a  secret,  thoughinvoluntary,  desire  of injuring  them.Two  years  ago  my  Lord  Marshal  ‘wanted  to  put  my  name  in  hiswill;  I strongly  opposed  this.  I told  him  that  I would  not  for  theworld  know  that  my  name  was  down  in anyone’s  will, least  of all inhis.  He  gave  in; but  insisted  upon  bestowing  upon  me a pension  forlife, to  which  I offered  no  opposition.  It will  be  said  that  I gain  bythis alteration;  that may  be so, but I know,  oh! father  and  benefactor,that,  if  I unhappily  survive  you,  in losing  you  I have  everything  tolose  and  nothing  to  gain.That,  in  my  opinion,  is the  true  philosophy,  the  only  philosophywhich  is  really  suited  for  the  human  heart.  I am  more  impressedevery  day  by its  profound  solidity,  and  in  all  my  recent  writings  Ihave  presented  it under  various  aspects;  but  the public  is superficial,and  has  not  known  how  to  recognise  it. If, after  I have  finished  mypresent  task,  I live  long  enough  to  undertake  another,  I propose  tegive, in the sequel  to  “Emile,”  ê so  attractive  and  striking  an  exampleof this  maxim,  that  the  reader  will  be  compelled  to  notice  it.  Butenough  reflections  for  a  traveller;  it is time  to  continue  my  journey!I found  it more  agreeable  than  I had  expected,  and  my  lout  wasnot  so  sulky as  he looked.  He was  a man  of middle  age,  who wore  hisblack  hair, which  was  beginning  to grow  grey,  in a queue;  he lookedlike  a  grenadier,  had  a  strong  voice,  was  pretty  cheerful,  could  walkwell  and  eat  better,  and  practised  all  sorts  of  trades,  for  want  of6 See  the  “New  Héloise,”  Part  III.,  letter  xx.58THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUknowing  any.  I believe  he  had  proposed  to  establish  some  kind  ofmanufactory  at  Annecy,  and  Madame  de  Warens  had  not  failed  toapprove  of the  idea.  It was  in order  to  make  the  attempt  to  gain theminister’s  approval  also,  that,  well  furnished  with  money,  he  wasmaking  the  journey  to  Turin.  Our  friend  possessed  a  talent  forintrigue,  always  making  himself  agreeable  to  the  priests;  and,  whileshowing  great  eagerness  to  serve  them,  he  had  caught  from  theirschool  a  certain  pious  jargon  of  which  he  made  incessant  use,  andboasted  of being  a  great  preacher.  He  even  knew  one  passage  of theBible  in Latin;  and,  as  he repeated  it a  thousand  times a day, it wasas  if he  had  known  a  thousand.  He  was  seldom  short  of  money,when  he  knew  that  others  had  any  in  their  purse.  He  was  ratherclever  than  a  rogue,  and,  when  he  recited  his  capucinades’  in  thetone  of a recruiting  officer,  he fesembled  Peter  the Hermit  preachingthe  Crusade  sword  in hand.As  for his wife,  Madame  Sabran,  she  was  a good woman  enough,who  was  quieter  during  the  day than  at  night.  As  I always  slept intheir  room,  her  noisy  sleeplessness  often  woke  me,  and  would  havekept me  awake  still  more,  if  I had  known  the  reason  of it; but  I hadnot  the  least  suspicion;  and  my  stupidity  on  this  point  left  the  dutyof  instructing  me  to  nature  alone.I proceeded  gaily  on  my  way  with  my  pious  guide  and  his  livelycompanion.  No  mishap  disturbed  my  journey;  I was  happier,  inbody  and  mind,  than  I have  ever  been  in my  life.  Young,  vigorous,in  perfect  health,  without  a  care,  full  of  confidence  in  myself  andothers,  I was  enjoying  that  short  but  precious  moment  of life  whenits  expansive  fulness,  so  to  speak,  enlarges  our  being  in  all  oursensations,  and  beautifies  in  our  eyes  the  whole  aspect  of nature  bythe  charm  of  our  existence.  My  pleasant  restlessness  had  an  objectwhich  restrained  it  and  steadied  my  imagination.  I looked  uponmyself  as  the  work,  the  pupil,  the  friend,  almost  as  the  lover  ofMadame  de Warens.  The  polite  things  she  had  said  to  me,  the  littlecaresses  which  she  had  bestowed  upon  me,  the tender  interest  whichshe had  seemed  to  take  in me,  her friendly  looks,  which  appeared  tome  full  of  love,  since  they  inspired  me  with  that  feeling—all  thisoccupied  my  thoughts  during  the  journey,  and  plunged  me  in7 Insipid  discourses  upon  religious  matters,  like  those  of the  Capucin  friars.atHIS  LOVE  OF  LEISURELY  TRAVEL59delicious  reveries  undisturbed  by any  fear  or  doubt  concerning  myfuture.  I considered  that,  in  sending  me  to  Turin,  they  had  under-taken  to  support  me  there,  fnd  to  find  me a suitable  situation.  I feltthat  I need  not  trouble  further  about  myself;  others  had  undertakenthe  charge.  So  I went  én  my  way  with  light  step,  freed  from  thisburden;  youthful  desires,  enchanting  hopes,  brilliant  plans  filledmy  soul.  Everything  that  I saw  appeared  to  assure  my  early  happi-ness.  In  the  houses  I pictured  to  myself  rustic  festivities;  in  themeadows,  playful  romps;  on  the  banks  of  the  rivers,  baths,  walks,fishing;  on  the  trees,  delicious  fruit;  under  their  shade,  loving  séte-a-tétes;  on  the  mountains,  pails  full  of  milk  and  cream,  a  charmingidleness,  peace,  simplicity,  and  the  pleasure  of  going  I knew  notwhere.  In  short,  nothing  met  my  eyes  without  conveying  to  myheart  some  attraction  of enjoyment.  The  grandeur,  the  variety,  thereal  beauty  of the  sight  around  me  rendered  this  attraction  worthyof  reason;  even  vanity  claimed  its  share.  It  appeared  to  me  anhonour  beyond  my  years  to  visit  Italy  while  still  so  young,  to  havealready  seen  so  much  of  the  world,  to  follow  Hannibal  across  themountains.  Besides  this,  we  frequently  halted  at  good  inns;  I had  agood  appetite  and  plenty  to  satisfy  it;  for  it  was  really  not  wothwhile  to  deny myself anything,  since  my  own  meals  were  nothing  incomparison  with  those  of M.  Sabran.During  the  whole  course  of  my  life,  I never  remember  a  timewhen  I have  been  so  completely  free  from  care  and  trouble  as  duringthe  seven  or  eight  days  of our  journey;  for  Madame  Sabran’s  rateof travelling,  by which  we  were  obliged  to  regulate  our  own,  madeit nothing  but  a  long walk.  This  recollection  has  left  me  the  liveliesttaste  for  everything  connected  with  it, especially  for  mountains  andwalks,  I have  never  journeyed  on  foot  except  in  my  younger  days,and  then  always  with  the  greatest  pleasure.  Duties,  business,  lug-gage,  soon  obliged  me  to  play  the  gentleman  and  take a carriage;gnawing  cares,  perplexities,  and  discomfort  got  in  with  me,  andfrom  that  moment,  instead  of  feeling,  as  before,  nothing  but  thepleasure  of travelling,  my  only  anxiety  was  to  reach  the  end  of myjourney.  For  a  long  time  I endeavoured  to  find  in  Paris  two  com-panions  of the  same  tastes  as  myself  willing  to  spend  fifty  louis  oftheir  money  and a year  of their  time  upon  a  walking  tour  through60THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUItaly  with  me,  with  only  a  single  lad  to  carry  our  travelling-bags.Many  appeared  enchanted  with  the idea,  but  in reality  considered  itas  nothing  but  a  castle  in the  air, only fit to  talk  about  without  anyidea  of  putting  it into  execution.  I  remember  that  Diderot  andGrimm,  with  whom I once  discussed  the  idea  with  enthusiasm,  atlast  became  enamoured  of it. Once  I thought  the  matter  settled,  butit all ended  in their  wanting  to  make  a  journey  on  paper,  in whichGrimm  found  nothing  so  delightful  as  making  Diderot  cammit  anumber  of impieties  and  handing  me  over  to  the  inquisition  in  hisstead.My regret  at  arriving  so  soon  at Turin  was  lessened  by the pleasureof seeing  a  large  city,  and  by the  hope  of soon  playing  a  part  worthyof myself;  for  already  the  fumes  of ambition  were  mounting  to  mybrain;  already  I regarded  myself  as  infinitely  raised  above  my formercondition  of  apprentice,  and  I was  far  from  suspecting  that,  in  ashort  time,  I was  destined  to  fall  far  below  it.Before  I continue,  I must  excuse  or  justify  myself  to  the reader  forthe  trivial  details  into  which  I have  already  entered,  or  into  whichI shall  enter  in the course  of my  narrative,  and  which  in his eyes  canhave  no  interest.  The  task  which  I have  undertaken,  of  showingmyself  completely  without  reserve  to  the  public,  requires  that  noth-ing that  concerns  myself  shall  remain  obscure  or  hidden;  that  I shallkeep  myself  continually  before  its  eyes;  that  it shall  accompany  mein  all  the  errors  of  my  heart,  into  all  the  secret  corners  of  my  life;that  it shall  not  lose  sight  of me  for  a  single  instant,  for  fear  that,  ifit finds  in  my  narrative  the  least  gap,  the  least  blank,  it  may  ask,What  was  he  doing  during  that  time?  and  accuse  me  of unwilling-ness  to  tell all. My writings  expose  me  sufficiently  to the  spite of man-kind,  without  my  exposing  myself  to  it still  more  by my  silence.My little  pocket-money  was  gone.  I had  chattered,  and  my  guideswere  not  slow  to  take  advantage  of my  indiscretion.  Madame  Sabranmanaged  te  get  everything  from  me,  even  a  small  piece  of  ribboncovered  with  silver,  which  Madame  de  Warens  had  given  me  formy  little  sword,  and  which  I regretted  more  than  anything  else.  Thesword  itself  would  have  remained  in their  hands  if I had  resisted  lessfirmly.  They  had  faithfully  defrayed  my  expenses  during  the  jour-ney,  but  they had  left  me  nothing.  I reached  Turin  without  clothes,‘af=ARRIVAL  AT  TURIN61without  money,  without  linen,  and  was  obliged to  leave  entirely  tomy  merits.the  honour  of the fortune  I was  going  to  make.I had  some  letters.  I presented  them,  and  was  immediately  con.ducted  to the hospice  for catechumens,  to  be instructed in  the religionwith  which  I was  to purchase  my  livelihood.  On  my  arrival,  I behelda  large gate  with  iron  bars,  which  was  double-locked  behind  me  assoon  as  I had  passed  through  it.  This  introduction  struck  me  asmore  imposing  than  agreeable,  and  was  beginning  to  afford  me  foodfor  reflection,  when  I was  conducted  into a tolerably  large room.  Allits  furniture  consisted  of  a  wooden  altar,  surmounted  by a largecrucifix,  at  the  end  of the  room,  in front  of which  stood  four  or  fivechairs,  also  made  of wood,  which  looked  as  if they had  been  polished,but  in  reality  had  become  shiny  merely  from  constant  use  and  rub-bing.  In  this  assembly-room  were  four  or  five  frightful  villains—myfellow-students—who  seemed  to  be rather  the devil’s  constables  thanaspirants  to  the  honour  of  sons  of  God.  Two  of these  rascals  wereSlavonians,  who  called  themselves  Jews  or  Moors,  and,  as  they con-fessed  to  me,  spent  their  life  in  wandering  through  Spain  and  Italy,embracing  Christianity  and  submitting  to  be  baptised  where  theyfound  it  worth  their  while.  Another  iron  door  was  then  thrownopen,  which  divided  into  two  a  large  balcony  running  along  thecourtyard.  Through  this  door  our  sisters  entered,  catechumens  who,like  myself,  were  to  be born  again,  not  by means  of baptism,  but  bya  solemn  abjuration  of  their  faith.  They  were  certainly  the  greatestsluts  and  the  most  disgusting  vagabonds  who  ever  contaminated  thesheepfold  of the  Lord.  Only  one  appeared  to  me  pretty  and  attrac-tive;  she  was  about  my  own  age,  perhaps  two  or  three  years  older.She  had  roguish  eyes,  which  sometimes  met  mine.  This  inspired  mewith  a  desire  to  make  her  acquaintance;  but,  during  nearly  twomonths,  which  she  spent  in  the  house  after  my  arrival—she  hadalready  been  there  three  months—I  found  it absolutely  impossible  tospeak to  her, so  strictly  had  she been  recommended  to  the care  of ourold  jaileress,  and  so  carefully  was  she  watched  by the  holy  mission-ary,  who  laboured  with  more  zeal  than  diligence  to  convert  her.  Shemust  have  been  extremely  dull,  although  she  did  not  appear  so,  fornever  did  tuition  require  so  long a time.  The  holy man  always  foundher  unfit  for  the  act  of abjuration;  but  she  grew  weary  of her  con’62THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUfinement,  and  declared  that  she  wanted  to  leave—Christian  or  noChristian.  They  were  obliged  to  take  her  at  her  word,  while  shestill  showed  herself  ready  to  become  one,  for  fear  she  might  becomerefractory  and  refuse.The  little  community  was  assembled  in honour  of the newcomer.A  short  address  was  delivered  to  us,  in  which  I was  exhorted  toconsent  to  respond  to  the  favour  which  God  extended  to  me,  whilethe  others  were  invited  to  pray  for  me  and  edify  me  by  theirexample.  After  this,  our  virgins  returned  to  their  seclusion,  and  Ihad  time  to  meditate  with  astonishment  upon  my  own  situation  tomy  heart’s  content.Next  morning  we  were  again  assembled  to  receive  instruction;and  then,  for  the  first  time,  I began  to  reflect  upon  the  step  I wasgoing  to  take, and  upon  the circumstances  which  had  led me  to  do so.I have  said—I  repeat  it, and  shall,  perhaps,  repeat  it again,  as  I amdaily  more  convinced  of  its  truth—that,  if ever  a  child  received  asensible  and  sound  education,  it was  myself.  I belonged  to  a  familywhich  was  distinguished  by its  manners  from  the  common  people;from  all  my  relations  I had  learnt  nothing  but  lessons  of  wisdom,and  had  had  honourable  examples  before  my  eyes.  My  father,  al-though  fond  of pleasure,  was  not  only  a  man  of  strict  integrity  butof  considerable  religious  feeling.  A man  of  gallantry  in  the  worldand  a  Christian  at  heart,  he  had  early  instilled  into  me  the  senti-ments  which  he  felt.  Of  my  three  aunts,  who  were  all prudent  andvirtuous,  the  two  eldest  were  pious;  the  youngest,  a  girl full  of grace,talent  and  good  sense,  was  perhaps  even  more  pious,  although  shemade  less show  of it. From  the bosom  of this estimable  family  I wentto  M.  Lambercier,  who,  though  a  churchman  and  preacher,  was  atheart  a  believer,  and  nearly  always  practised  what  he preached.  Heand  his sister,  by gentle  and  judicious  training,  cultivated  the princi-ples  of piety  which  they  found  in  my  heart.  These  worthy  people,with  this  object,  employed  means  so  sincere,  so  prudent  and  sosensible  that,  far  from  being  wearied  by their  preaching,  I alwaysfelt  deeply  affected  by it and  formed  the  best  resolutions,  which  Irarely  forgot  to  carry  out  when  I thought  of them.  In the case  of myaunt  Bernard,  her  piety  was  somewhat  more  distasteful  to  me,  be-cause  she  made a trade  of  it.  While  serving  my  apprenticeship  IMEDITATIONS  UPON  RELIGION63=scarcely  thought  of it, without,  however,  changing  my  views.  I nevercame  into  contact  with  any  young  people  who  might have  corruptedme;  I became  vagabond,  buf not  dissipated.I consequently  knew  as  much  about  religion  as  was  possible  fora  child  of my  age.  I even  knew  more,  for  why  should  I conceal  mythoughts?  My childhood  was  not  that  of a  child;  I always  felt  andthought  as  a  man.  It was  only  when  I grew  up  that  I re-entered  theclass  of ordinary  individuals;  as  a  child  I did  not  belong  to  it.  Thereader  will  laugh  to  find  me  modestly  representing  myself  as  aprodigy.  So  be it; but  when  he has  laughed  sufficiently,  let him  finda  child  who,  in  his  sixth  year,  is so  attracted,  interested  and  carriedaway  by romances  as  to  shed  hot  tears  over  them;  then  I shall  feelthat  my  vanity  is ridiculous,  and  will  confess  that  I am  wrong.If I have  said  that  we  ought  not  to  speak  about  religion  to  chil-dren,  if  we  wish  them  to  possess  any,  and,  further,  that  they  areincapable  of  knowing  God,  even  according  to  our  ideas,  I  havedrawn  this  conviction  from  my  observations,  not  from  my  ownexperience,  for  I knew  that  no  conclusion  could  be  drawn  from  itin regard  to  others.  Find  me  Jean  Jacques  Rousseaus  of six  years  old,and  speak  to  them  of  God  when  they  are  seven;  I will  guaranteethat  you  run  no  risk.I think  it will  be  admitted  that,  in  the  case  of  a  child,  and  evenof a  man,  to  have  religion  means  to  follow  that  in which  he is born.This  faith  is  sometimes  lessened,  rarely  enlarged;  dogmatic  beliefis  one  of  the  fruits  of  education.  Besides  this  general  principlewhich  attached  me  to  the  religious  creed  of  my  fathers,  I had  theaversion  for  Catholicism  peculiar  to  our  village,  which  representedit  as  a  frightful  idolatry,  and  painted  its  priests  in  the  blackestcolours.  This  feeling  was  so  strong  in me,  that  at  first  I never  lookedinto  the  inside  of a  church,  never  met  a  priest  in  a  surplice,  neverheard  the  processional  bell,  without  a  shudder  of terror  and  alarm,which  soon  left me  in the  towns,  but has  often  come  upon  me  againin  country  parishes,  more  like  those  where  I had  first  felt  it.  It  istrue  that  this  impression  contrasted  singularly  with  the  recollectionsof the caresses  which  the priests of the environs  of Geneva  were  fondof  bestowing  upon  the  children  of  the  city.  While  the  bell  announcing  supreme  unction  alarmed  me,  the  bell  for  mass  and64THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUvespers  reminded  me  of breakfast,  collation,  fresh  butter,  fruit,  andmilk-food.  M.  de  Pontverre’s  good  dinner  still  produced  a  greateffect.  Thus  I had easily  driven  all  such  thoughts  out  of my  mind.Seeing  papism  only  in  its  connection  with  amusement  and  goodliving,  I had  readily  accustomed  myself  to  the  idea  of living  in  itsmidst;  but  the  idea  of solemnly  going  over  to  the  Church  of Romehad  only presented  itself  to  me  for  a moment,  as  possible  in a  distantfuture.  At  the  present  moment  it was  no  longer  possible  to  deceivemyself;  I saw  with  horror  the  kind  of  consent  which  I had  given,and  its  inevitable  consequences.  The  future  neophytes  around  mewere  not  calculated  to  sustain  my  courage  by their  example,  and  Icould  not  conceal  from  myself  that  the  holy work,  which  I intendedto  carry  out,  was  in  the  main  the  action  of a  bandit;  for, young  as  Iwas,  I felt that, whatever  religion  might be the true  one,  I was  goingto  sell  my  own,  and  that,  even  though  I made  a  good  choice,  in thebottom  of my  heart  I should  lie  to  the  Holy  Spirit  and  deserve  thecontempt  of  men.  The  more  I thought  of  it, the  more  indignant  Ibecame  with  myself;  and  I  sighed  over  the  destiny  which  hadbrought  me  to  this  pass,  as  if  this  destiny  had  not  been  my  ownwork.  There  were  moments  when  these  reflections  became  sostrong,  that,  if  I had  found  the  door  open  for  a  moment,  I shouldcertainly  have  run  away;  but  this  was  impossible,  and  my  resolutionwas  not  strong  enough.  Too  many  secret  desires  combated  it not  toovercome  it.  Besides,  my  fixed  determination  not  to  return  toGeneva,  shame,  the  difficulty  of  crossing  the  mountains  again,  theembarrassment  of  finding  myself  far  from  my  country,  withoutfriends  and  without  resources—all  these  feelings  combined  to  makeme  regard  my  prickings  of conscience  as  a  too  tardy  repentance;  Ipretended  to  reproach  myself  for what  I had  done,  in order  to  excusewhat  I was  going  to  do.  While  aggravating  the  errors  of the  past,  I_  regarded  the  future  as  their  necessary  result.  Instead  of  saying  tomyself,  “Nothing  is done  yet,  and  you  can  be innocent  if you  wish,”I said,  “Sigh  for  the  crime  of which  you  have  made  yourself  guilty,and  which  you  have  made  it necessary  for  yourself  to  carry  out.”In  fact,  what  uncommon  strength  of  mind  would  have  beennecessary,  at  my  age,  in order  to  recall  everything  that  I had hithertopromised  or  given  hopes  of, to  break  the bonds  which  I had  placedARGUMENTS  WITH  THE  PRIESTS65ETupon  myself,  to  declare  boldly  that  I desired  at  all risks  to  continuein  the  religion  of my  fathers!  Such  vigour  was  not  natural  to  oneof my  age,  and  it is not  veryeprobable  that  it would  have  succeeded.Things  had  gone  too  far for them  not  to  feel  ashamed  if they did notsucceed;  and,  the  greater  my  resistance,  the  more  they  would  havefelt  themselves  bound,  by some  means  or  other,  to  overcome  it.The  sophism  which  ruined  me,  is that  common  to  most  men  whocomplain  of want  of strength  when  it is already  too  late  to  make  useof  it.  Virtue  only  becomes  difficult  by our  own  fault;  if we  couldalways  be  prudent,  we  should  rarely  need  to  be  virtuous.  But  in,clinations,  easily  surmountable,  hurry  us  along  without  resistance;we  yield  to  trifling  temptations,  the  danger  of  which  we  despise.Imperceptibly  we  fall  into  perilous  situations,  from  which  we  couldeasily  have  protected  ourselves,  but  from  which  we  can  no  longerextricate  ourselves  without  heroic  efforts  which  appal  us;  and  atlast  we  fall  into  the  abyss,  reproaching  God,  “Why  hast  Thou  mademe  so  weak?”  But,  in  spite  of  ourselves,  He  replies  to  our  con-sciences,  “I have  made  you  too  weak  to  save  yourself  from  the  abyss,because  I made  you  strong  enough  not  to  fall  into  it.”I did  not  exactly  resolve  to  become  a  Catholic;  but,  seeing  thetime  still  far  off,  I  profited  by  the  occasion  to  accustom  myselfgradually  to  the idea,  and  in the  meantime  I hoped  for some  unfore-seen  circumstance  which  would  get me  out  of the  difficulty.  In orderto  gain  time,  I resolved  to  make  the  best  defence  of  which  I wascapable.  But  soon  my  vanity  relieved  me  from  thinking  of  myresolution;  and,  as  soon  as  I observed  that  I sometimes  embarrassedthose  who  desired  to  instruct  me,  that  was  sufficient  to  make  meendeavour  to  floor  them  altogether.  I  even  exhibited  ridiculouseagerness  in  this  undertaking;  for,  while  they  were  working  uponme,  I wanted  to  work  upon  them.  I honestly  believed  that  I had  onlyto  convince  them,  to  make  them  turn  Protestants.Consequently,  they  did  not  find  in me  nearly  as  much  tractabilityas  they  had  expected,  either  in  regard  to  my  knowledge  or  goodwill.  Protestants  are  generally  better  instructed  than  Catholics.This  is  only  natural;  the  doctrine  of  the  one  requires  discussion,that  of the  other  submission.  The  Catholic  is obliged  to  embrace  thedecision  that  is put  before  him;  the  Protestant  must  learn  to  decide66THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUfor  himself.  This  was  well  known;  but  no  great  difficulties  wereexpected  for persons  of experience  from  one  of my  age  and  position,Besides,  I had  not  yet  received  my  first  Communion,  nor  receivedthe  instructions  connected  with  it; that,  too,  was  known.  But  whatthey  did  not  know  was  that,  to  make  up  for  this,  I had  been  welltaught  at  M. Lambercier’s,  and  that,  in addition,  I had  by me a littlestorehouse,  very  inconvenient  for  these  gentlemen,  in  the  history  ofthe  Church  and  the  Empire,  which,  while  living  with  my  father,  Ihad  learnt  almost  by heart,  and  since  then  almost  forgotten,  butwhich  came  back  to  me  in proportion  as  the  dispute  grew  warmer.A little,  old,  but  somewhat  venerable  priest  held  the  first  meetingof all  of us  together.  For  my  companions  this  meeting  was  rathera  catechism  than  a  discussion,  and  he  had  more  to  do  with  in-structing  them  than  with  removing  their  objections.  In  my  owncase  it was  different.  When  my  turn  came,  I stopped  him  at  everypoint,  and  spared  him  no  single  difficulty  which  I  was  able  tothrow  in  his  way.  This  protracted  the  meeting,  and  made  it  verytedious  for  those  who  were  present.  My  old  priest  spoke  much,grew  excited,  wandered  from  his  subject,  and  got  himself  out  ofthe  difficulty  by declaring  that  he  did  not  know  French  well.  Thenext  day,  for  fear  that  my  indiscreet  objections  might  give  offenceto  my  companions,  I was  put  into  another  room  with  another  priest,who  was  younger  and  a good  speaker—that  is to  say,  a coiner  of finephrases—and  satisfied  with  himself,  if ever  a  teacher  was.  I did  not,however,  allow  myself  to  be too  much  cowed  by his  imposing  man-ner;  and  feeling  that,  after  all,  I was  able  to  hold  my  own,  I pro-ceeded  to  answer  him  with  tolerable  confidence,  and  to  press  hitnon  all  sides  to  the  best  of my  ability.  He  thought  to  overwhelm  mewith  St.  Augustine,  St.  Gregory,  and  the  other  fathers,  but  found,to  his  incredible  surprise,  that  I handled  all  the  fathers  nearly  asreadily  as  he did;  not  that  I had  ever  read  them,  as  neither  perhapshad  he, but  I remembered  several  passages  out  of  my  “Le  Sueur”;and, as  soon  as  he  quoted  one,  without  stopping  to  dispute  it, I an-swered  it by another  from  the  same  Father,  which  frequently  causedhim  considerable  embarrassment.  However,  in the end  he gained  thevictory,  for  two  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  he  was  the  stronger,  and,feeling  that  I was,  so  to  speak,  at  his  mercy,  I correctly  judged,CONDUCT  OF  THE  MOOR67young  as  I was,  that  it would not  do to  press  him—to  drive  him  toextremities;  for  I saw  clearly  enough  that  the  little  old  priest  hadconceived  no  great  affection  for myself  or  my  learning.  In the secondplace,  the  young  priest  was  an  educated  man,  while  I was  not.  Thiscaused  him  to  employ  in his  manner  of argument  a  method  whichI was  unable  to  follow,  and, as  soon  as  he felt himself  pushed  by someunforeseen  objection,  he put  it off until  the  next  day, declaring  thatI was  wandering  from  the  point.  Sometimes  he  even  refused  toaccept  my  quotations,  declaring  that  they  were  false;  and,  offeringto  go  and  fetch  the  book  for  me,  defied  me  to  find  them.  He  feltthat  he did  not  risk  much,  and  that,  with  all my  borrowed  learning,I was  not  sufficiently  experienced  in  handling  books,  and  did  notknow  enough  Latin  to  find  a passage  in a  large volume,  even  thoughI might  be certain  that  it was  there.  I even  suspected  him  of makinguse  of the  same  dishonesty  of which  he  accused  our  ministers,  andof sometimes  inventing  passages,  in  order  to  extricate  himself  froma  difficulty  which  embarrassed  him.While  these  petty  disputes  about  trifles  lasted,  and  the  time  wasspent  in  arguing,  mumbling  prayers,  and  doing  nothing,  a  disgust-ing little  adventure  happened  to  me,  which  very  nearly  turned  outvery  badly  for  me.There  is no  soul  so  vile,  no  heart  so  barbarous,  that  it is not  sus-ceptible  of  some  kind  of  attachment.  One  of  the  two  vagabondswho  called  themselves  Moors  conceived  an  affection  for me.  He  wasfond  of accosting  me,  talked  to  me  in his jargon,  rendered  me  slightservices,  sometimes  gave  me  part  of his  food,  and  frequently  kissedme  with  an  ardour  which  was  very  annoying  to  me.  In  spite  of thenatural  alarm  which I felt  at  his  gingerbread  face  decorated  with  along  scar,  and  his  inflamed  countenance  which  appeared  morefurious  than  tender,  I endured  his  kisses,  saying  to  myself:  “Thepoor  fellow  has  conceived a lively  friendship  for  me.  I should  bewrong  to  repulse  him.”  He  gradually  began  to  take  greater  liberties,and  sometimes  made  such  curious  proposals  to  me,  that  I thoughthe  was  mad.  One  night,  he  wanted  to  sleep  with  me.  I refused,saying  that  my  bed  was  to  small.  He  pressed  me  to  go  to  his,  butI again  refused,  for  the  wretch  was  so  dirty  and  stunk  so  stronglyof chewed  tobacco,  that  he  made  me  quite  sick.68THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUEarly  on  the  following  morning,  we  were  both  alone  in  theassembly-room.  He  recommenced  his caresses,  but  with  such  violentmoveinents,  that it became  quite alarming.  At last, he wanted  to takethe most  disgusting  liberties  with  me,  and,  taking  hold  of my  hand,tried  to  make  me  take  the  same  with  him.  I uttered  a  lowd  cry,  and,jumping  back,  freed  myself  from  him;  and,  without  exhibitinganger  or  indignation,  for  I had  not  the  least  idea  what  it was  allabout,  I expressed  my  surprise  and  disgust  so  energetically,  that  heleft  me  where  I was;  but,  while  he  was  finishing  his  efforts,  I sawsomething  white,  like  glue, shoot  towards  the fireplace  and  fall  uponthe  ground,  which  turned  my  stomach.  I rushed  upon  the  balcony,more  moved,  more  troubled,  more  frightened  than  I had  ever  beenin  my  life,  and  prepared  to  find  myself  ill.I could  not  understand  what  had  been  the matter  with  the wretch.I believed  that  he was  attacked  by epilepsy,  or  some  other  madnesseven  more  terrible;  and  in  truth,  I know  nothing  more  hideous  forany  cool-blooded  person  to  see  than  such  filthy  and  dirty  behaviour,and  a  frightful  countenance  inflamed  by brutal  lust.  I have  neverseen  another  man  in  a  similar  condition;  but  if we  are  like  it whenwe  are  with  women,  their  looks  must  certainly  be  bewitched,  forthem  not  to  feel  disgusted  at  us.I was  in a  great  hurry  to  go  and  tell  everyone  what  had  just hap-pened  to  me.  Our  old  intendant  bade  me  hold  my  tongue;  but  I sawthat  my  story  had  greatly  affected  her, and  I heard  her  mutter:  Canmaledet!  brutta  bestia!  §Not  understanding  why  I ought  to  hold  my  tongue,  I went  myown  way  in spite  of her  prohibition,  and  I talked  so  much  that,  thenext  day,  one  of the  governors  came  at  an  early  hour  to  administera  sharp  reproof  to  me,  accusing  me  of  compromising  the  honourof a  holy house,  and  of making a great  fuss  about a trifle.He  spun  out  his lecture  by explaining  to  me  many  things  of whichI was  ignorant,  but which  he did not  believe  he was  teaching  me,  forhe  was  convinced  that  I had  defended  myself  because  I was  un-willing  to  consent,  not  because  I did  not  know  what  the  Moorwanted  from  me.  He told  me  gravely  that  it was  an  action  forbiddenas  highly  immoral,  the  desire  of which,  however,  was  not  an  affront8 Cursed  dog!  brute  beast!LECTURE  ON  THE  MOOR’S  CONDUCT6yto  the person  who  was  the  object  of it, and  that  there  was  no  need  tobe so annoyed  at having been  considered  worthy  of affection.  He  toldme  plainly  that  he  himself,  during  his  youth,  had  had  the  samehonour  paid  to  him,  and  that, having  been  surprised  when  he  wasnot  in a condition  to offer  any resistance,  he had  not  found it particu-larly painful.  He  was  so  shameless  as  to  make  use  of plain  language;and, imagining  that  the  reason  of my  resistance  was  the fear  of pain,he  assured  me  that  I need  have  no  fear,  and  that  I ought  not  to  bealarmed  where  there  was  no  reason  for it.I listened  to  this  wretch  with  an  astonishment  which  was  increasedby the  fact  that  he  did  not  speak  for  himself,  but  only  appeared  tobe  instructing  me  for  my  good.  The  subject  appeared  to  him  sosimple,  that  he  did  not  even  attempt  to  ensure  privacy;  and  ourconversation  was  heard  by  a  third  party  in  the  person  of  an  ec.clesiastic  who  seemed  no  more  frightened  by it than  himself.  Thisair  of  naturalness  so  imposed  upon  me,  that  I was  convinced  thatit was  no  doubt  a  custom  recognised  in the  world,  as  to  which  I hadnot  had  the  opportunity  of  being  instructed  sooner.  This  made  melisten  without  anger,  but  not  without  disgust.  The  image  of  whathad  happened  to  me,  but  above  all  of what  I had  seen,  remained  sodeeply  impressed  upon  my  memory  that,  when  I thought  of  it, Istill  felt  disgusted.  Without  knowing  any  more  about  it, my  aversionfor the  thing  itself  extended  to  its apologist;  and  I could  not  restrainmyself  sufficiently  to  prevent  him  seeing  the  bad  effect  of his lessons,He  cast  a  glance  at  me  that  was  by no  means  affectionate  and  fromthat  time  spared  no  efforts  to  make  my  stay  in  the  hospice  disagree-able.  He  succeeded  so  well  that,  seeing  that  there  was  only  one  wayof getting  away,  I hastened  to  take  it with  as  much  eagerness  as  |had  up  till  then  exhibited  in  order  to  keep  away  from  it.This  adventure  assured  me  for  the  future  against  the  attempts  ofthe  “Knights  of the  Cuff’;  °  and  the  sight  of people  who  were  sup-posed  to  belong  to  their  order,  by recalling  to  my  mind  the  appear-ance  and  gestures  of  my  frightful  Moor,  always  inspired  me  withsuch  horror,  that  I had  difficulty  in  concealing  it.  On  the  otherhand,  women,  to my mind, gained  much  by comparison;  it appearedto  me  that  I owed  them  tender  feelings  and  personal  homage  by9 Chevaliers  de la manchette:  Paederasts.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU70way  of reparation  for the  insults  of my  sex;  and  the  ugliest  strumpetbecame  in  my  eyes  an  object  of adoration,  when  I remembered  theı  false  African.As  for  him,  I do  not  know  what  may  have  been  said  to  him;  itdid  not  appear  to  me  that  anybody,  with  the  exception  of  mistressLorenza,  looked  upon  him  less  favourably  than  before.  However,he  neither  accosted  nor  spoke  to  me  again.  Eight  days  afterwards,he  was  baptised  with  great  solemnity,  dressed  in  white  from  headto  foot,  in  token  of the  purity  of his  regenerated  soul.  The  next  dayhe left  the  hospice,  and  I have  never  seen  him  since.My  turn  came  a  month  later;  for  it  required  all  that  time  toprocure  for  the  directors  of my  conscience  the  honour  of a  difficultconversion,  and  I was  obliged  to  examine  and  go  through  all  thedogmas,  in  order  that  my  new  docility  might  be  triumphantlyparaded.At  last,  sufficiently  instructed  and  sufficiently  prepared  to  satisfymy  masters,  I was  conducted  in  solemn  procession  to  the  metro-politan  church  of St.  John,  to  make  a  public  abjuration  of faith,  andto  receive  the  accessories  of  baptism,  although  I was  not  really  re-baptised;  but,  as  the  ceremonies  are  almost  the  same,  it  serves  todelude  the  people  with  the  idea  that  Protestants  are  not  Christians.I was  clothed  in a  grey  coat  adorned  with  white  frogs,!°  which  wasused  on  such  occasions.  Two  men,  before  and  behind  me,  carriedcopper  basins,  which  they  beat  with  a  key,  and  into  which  eachthrew  his  alms  in  proportion  to  his  piety  or  the  interest  which  hetook  in the new  convert.  Briefly,  nothing  of the pomp  of the CatholicChurch  was  omitted,  in order  to  render  the  ceremony  at  once  moreedifying  to  the  people,  and  more  humiliating  for  myself.  Only  thewhite  robe  was  wanting,  which  would  have  been  very  useful  to  me,and  which  was  not  given to  me  as  to  the  Moor,  seeing  that  I had  notthe  honour  to  be a  Jew.This  was  not  all.  I was  next  obliged  to  go  to  the  Inquisition  toreceive  absolution  from  the  crime  of  heresy,  and  to  re-enter  thebosom  of the  Church  with  the  ceremony  to  which  Henry  IV.  wassubjected  in the  person  of his  ambassador.  The  behaviour  and  lookBrandebourgs:  espèce  d'ornement  de  broderie  ou  de  galon  qui  entoure  Jes10y.Soutonniéres  de  certains  habits  (Littré).TURNED  OUT  OF  HOSPICE71of the  reverend  father  inquisitor  were  not  calculated  to  remove  thesecret  terror  which  had  seized  upon  me  when I entered  the  house.After  several  questions  about  my  belief,  my  position,  and  my  family,he  abruptly  asked  me  whether  my  mother  was  damned.  Frightcaused  me  to  repress  the  first  movement  of my  indignation.  I con-tented  myself  with  answering  that  I ventured  to  hope  that  she  wasnot,  and  that  God  might  have  enlightened  her  at  her  last  hour.  Themonk  was  silent,  but  made  a  grimace  which  by no  means  appearedto  me  a  sign  of approval.When  all  was  over,  at  the  moment  when  I expected  to  be  pro-vided  for  in accordance  with  my  hopes,  I was  put  out  of doors  witha  little  more  than  twenty  francs  in  small  money—the  result  of  thecollection  made  for  me.  I was  recommended  to  live  as  a  good  Chris-tian,  to  remain  true  to  grace;  they  wished  me  good  luck,  shut  thedoor  upon  me,  and  I saw  no  more  of them.Thus,  in  an  instant,  all  my  great  expectations  disappeared,  andthe  only result  of the  self-seeking  step  that  I had  just taken,  was  theconsciousness  of  having  been  an  apostate  and  a  dupe  at  the  sametime.  It may  be easily  imagined  what  a  sudden  revolution  took  placein  my  ideas,  when  I saw  myself  dashed  down  from  my  brilliantdreams  of fortune  into  utter  misery,  and  when,  after  having  delib-erated  in the morning  upon  the choice  of the palace  I should  inhabit,I found  myself  in  the  evening  obliged  to  go  to  bed  in  the  street.  Itwill  be imagined  that  I began  by abandoning  myself  to  a  feeling  ofdespair,  the  more  cruel  in  proportion  as  regret  for  my  errors  wasaggravated  by the  reproach  that  all  my  misfortune  was  my  ownwork.  Nothing  of the  kind.  For  the  first  time  in my  life,  I had  justbeen  shut  up  for  more  than  two  months.  My first  sensation  was  oneof joy at  the  recovery  of my  liberty.  After  a  long  period  of  slavery,again  master  of myself  and  my  actions,  I beheld  myself  in the midstof a  large city, abounding  in resources,  full  of persons  of distinction,by whom  I could  not  fail to be welcomed  in consequence  of my  goodqualities  and  my  talents  as  soon  as  I became  known.  Besides,  I hadplenty  of time  to  wait,  and  the  twenty  francs,  which  I had  in  mypocket,  appeared  to  me  an  inexhaustible  treasure.  I could  spendthem  as  I pleased,  without  being  accountable  to  anybody.  It was  thefirst  time  that  I had  ever  been  so  well  off.  Far  from  becoming  dis:72THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUheartened  or  shedding  tears,  I only  changed  my  hopes,  and  myamour-propre  lost  nothing  by the  exchange.  I had  never  felt  so  con-fident  and  secure;  I believed  my  fortune  already  made,  and  I con-sidered  it a  fine  thing  to  have  no  one  but  myself  to  thank  for it.The  first  thing  I did  was  to  satisfy  my  curiosity  by going  roundthe city, if only to  enjoy the sweets  of liberty.  I went  to  see  the soldiersmount  guard;  the military  music  pleased  me  exceedingly.  I followedprocessions;  I delighted  in the  church-music  of the  priests.  I went  tosee  the King’s  palace;  I approached  it with  awe;  but, seeing  others  goin,  I  did  the  same  without  being  stopped.  Perhaps  I  owed  thisfavour  to  the  little  parcel  which  I carried  under  my  arm.  Anyhow,  Ibegan  to  entertain  a  high  opinion  of myself  when  I found  myself  inthis  palace;  I already  began  to  consider  myself  a  resident  in  it.  Atlast,  I grew  tired  of going  backwards  and  forwards;  I was  hungry;it was  hot; I went  into  a  milk-shop;  I bought  some  giuncat}  and  sourmilk;  and  with  two  slices!”  of  the  excellent  Piedmontese  bread,which I prefer  to  any  other,  for  my  five  or  six  sous  I had  one  of thebest  meals  I have  ever  had  in my  life.I was  obliged  to  look  for  a  lodging.  As  I already  knew  enoughPiedmontese  to  make  myself  understood  it was  easy  to  find  one,  andĮ was  prudent  enough  to  make  my  choice  more  in accordance  withmy  means  than  my  taste.  I was  told  of a  soldier’s  wife  in the  Rue  duPô  who  took  in  servants  out  of employment  for  a  sou  a  night.  Shehad  a  bed  empty,  and  I took  it.  She  was  young  and  reeently  mar-ried,  although  she  already  had  five  or  six  children.  We  all  slept  inthe  same  room,  mother,  children,  and  lodgers,  and  continued  to  doso  as  long  as  I remained  with  her.  In  other  respects  she  was  a  goodwoman,  who  swore  like  a  carter,  whose  breast  was  always  exposedand her hair  untidy,  but kind-hearted  and  obliging;  she took  a likingto  me,  and  was  even  useful  to  me.I spent  several  days in abandoning  myself  solely  to  the  delights  ofindependence  and curiosity.  I wandered  about  inside  and  outside  thecity,  prying  everywhere,  looking  at  everything  which  appeared  tome  new  or  curious;  and  this was  the case  with  everything  to  a young™  Fresh  cheese  and  cream  brought  to market  on  rushes.¥  Grilles:  sorte  de pain  très  friable  en  forme  de baguette.HIS  LIFE  IN  TURIN73man  who  had  just left his  shell,  and  had  never  seen  a  capital.  I wasabove  all  very  regular i in  going  to  court,  and  was  particular in  myattendance  every  morning  at  the  royal  mass.  I thought  it  a  finething  to  be  in  the  same  chapel  as  the  prince  and  his  suite;  but  mypassion  for music,  which  was  beginning  to make  itself  felt, had  moreto  do with  my  regular  appearance  than  the pomp  of the court,  which,soon  seen  and  always  the  same,  soon  loses  the charm  of novelty.  TheKing  of  Sardinia  at  that  time  had  the  best  choir  in  Europe.  Somis,Desjardins,  the  Bezuzzi,  were  successively  its  brilliant  ornaments.This  was  more  than  sufficient  to  attract  a  young  man  whom  thesound  of the most  wretched  instrument,  if only correctly  played,  wasenough  to  enchant.  Besides,  the  admiration  I felt  for  the  magnifi-cence  which  dazzled  my  eyes  was  senseless  and  aroused  no  envy.The  only thing  which  interested  me  in all the  brilliancy  of the courtwas  to  see  whether  there  was  not  some  young  princess,  worthy  ofmy  homage,  with  whom  I might  carry  on  a  romance.I was  nearly  commencing  one  in a less  brilliant  circle,  but  one  inwhich,  if I had  carried  it out,  I should  have  found  pleasures  a  thou-sand  times  more  delicious.Although  I lived  most  economically,  my  purse  was  gradually  be-coming  exhausted.  Besides,  my  economy  was  not  so  much  the  effectof prudence  as  of a  simplicity  of taste  which,  even  at  the present  day,familiarity  with  the  tables  of  the  great  has  not  changed.  I did  notknow,  and  do not  know  even  now,  better  cheer  than  a  country  meal.Anyone  may  feel  sure  of  entertaining  me  handsomely  with  milk-food,  eggs,  vegetables,  cheese,  black  bread,  and  tolerable  wine;  myexcellent  appetite  will  do  the  rest;  while  a  maitre-d’hétel  and  foot-men  about  me  with  their  troublesome  officiousness  can  never  satisfyme.  At  that  time  I made  far  better  meals  at  a  cost  of  six  or  sevensous,  than  I have  made  since  for  six or  seven  francs.  I was  temperate,because  I had  no  temptation  to  be otherwise;  and  yet I am  wrong  tosay  I was  temperate,  for  I had  at  the  same  time  all  possible  sensualenjoyments.  My pears,  my giunca,  my cheese,  my  slices  of bread,  anda  few  glasses  of  a  full-bodied  Montferrat  wine,  which  could  havebeen  cut  into  slices,  made  me  the  happiest  of gourmands.  And  yet,in  spite  of all  that,  the  end  of my  twenty  francs  was  visible.  This  Ibecame  more  sensibly  aware  of  every  day;  and,  in  spite  of  the74THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthoughtlessness  of  my  years,  my  uneasiness  regarding  the  futuresoon  became  real alarm.  Of all my castles  in the air nothing remained.to  me  but  the  necessity  of finding  a  means  of livelihood,  which  wasby no  means  easy  to  procure.  I thought  of my  old trade, but I did  notknow  enough  of it to work  for  a  master,  and, besides,  there  were  notmany  masters  in Turin.  While  waiting  for  something  better,  I tookto  going  from  shop  to  shop  to  offer  my  services  for  engraving  fig-ures  or  coats-of-arms  on  silver,  hoping  to  tempt  customers  by  mycheapness,  since  I left the amount  of payment  to  them.  This  plan didnot  prove  very  successful.  I was  generally  shown  the  door;  and  thework  I got  was  so  little,  that  I scarcely  earned  enough  to  pay  fortwo  or  three  meals.  One  day, however,  as  I was  walking  at  an  earlyhour  through  the  Contrada  nova,  I saw  through  a  shop  window  ayoung  woman  of  so  kindly  and  attractive  an  appearance,  that,  inspite  of my  shyness  with  women,  I entered  without  hesitation  andplaced  my  humble  talemts  at  her  disposal.  She  did  not  repulse  me,but  made  me  sit down  and  tell her  my  little  history,  pitied  me,  bademe  cheer  up,  since  assuredly  good  Christians  would  not  desert  me,and,  having  sent  to  a  neighbouring  goldsmith  for  the  tools  which  Itold  her  I wanted,  she  went  into  the  kitchen  and  fetched  me  somebreakfast  with  her  own  hands.  This  beginning  appeared  to  me  topromise  well;  the  result  did  not  give the  lie to  it. She  appeared  satis-fied  with  my  bit  of work,  and  still  more  with  my  humble  chatter,when  I was  a little  more  at  my  ease;  for  she  was  brilliant  and  hand-somely  dressed,  and, in spite of her  gracious  manner,  her appearancehad  inspired  me  with  awe.  But  her  kindly  reception,  her compas-sionate  voice,  her  gentle  and  caressing  manners,  soon  put  me  at  myease.  I saw  that  I was  successful,  and  this  increased  my  success.  But,although  she  was  an  Italian  and  too  pretty  not  to  be  somewhat  of acoquette,  she was  at  the  same  time  so  modest,  and  I was  so  shy, thatit was  difficult  for  it to  lead  to  anything  further.  We  were  not  al-lowed  to  finish  the  adventure.  I remember  with  the  greater  rapturethe  brief  moments  which  I spent  by her  side,  and  I can  declare  thatin their  first  beginnings  I tasted  the  sweetest  and  purest  joys of love.She  was  an  extremely  piquant  brunette,  whose  liveliness  was  ren-dered  somewhat  touching  by the  expression  of good  nature  on  herpretty  face.  Her  name  was  Madame  Basile.  Her  husband,  who  wasMADAME  BASILE75older  than  herself  atid  somewhat  jealous,  left  her,  while  he  wastravelling,  under  the  care  of a  clerk,  who  appeared  too  disagreeableto  be  seductive,  and  yet  was  not  without  pretensions  of  his  own,which  he only  showed  by his  bad  temper.  This  he visited  upon  me,although  I was  very  fond  of hearing  him  play the  flute,  on  which  hewas  a  tolerably  good  performer.  This  new  Aegisthus  grumbledwhenever  he saw  me  enter  the place, and treated  me  with  a contemptwhich  his  mistress  returned  in full.  It even  seemed  as  if it delightedher  to  caress  me  in  his  presence,  in  order  to  plague  him;  and  thiskind  of revenge,  although  very  much  to  my  taste,  would  have  beenstill  more  agreeable  in a  téte-a-téte.  But  she  never  pushed  matters  tothat  extent,  or,  at  least, not  in the  same  manner.  Whether  it was  thatshe  found  me  too  young,  or  did  not  know  how  to  make  advances,  orreally  intended  to  be  discreet,  she  exhibited  at  that  time  a  kind  ofreserve,  which,  while  not  repellent,  intimidated  me  without  myknowing  the  reason  why.  Although  I did  not  feel  for  her  the  realand  tender  respect  that  I felt  for  Madame  de  Warens,  I was  moretimid  and  less  familiar  with  her.  I was  embarrassed  and  confused;I did  not  venture  to  look  at  her  or  to  breathe  by her  side;  and  yet  Idreaded  to  leave  her  worse  than  death.  I devoured  with  a  greedy  eyeeverything  I could  look  at  without  being  observed:  the  flowers  inher  dress,  the  tips of her  pretty  feet, the  glimpse  of a  firm  white  armwhich  I caught  between  her  glove  and  her  cuff,  and  of her  bosom,which  was  sometimes  visible  between  her  tucker  and  her  necker-chief.  Each  object  strengthened  the  impression  made  by the  rest.From  looking  at  what  I could  see,  and  even  further  than  that,  myeyes  became  troubled,  my  breast  felt  oppressed;  my  respiration  be-came  every  moment  more  choked,  I could  scarcely  breathe,  and  allI could  do was  to  heave  a  succession  of noiseless  sighs,  which  werevery  embarrassing  in the complete  stillness  in which  we  often  foundourselves.  Luckily  Madame  Basile,  busy  with  her  work,  did  notnotice  it, as  far  as  I could  see.  However,  I sometimes  saw  the  bosomof her  dress  heave  as  if in sympathy.  This  dangerous  sight made  melose  my  head  completely;  but,  when  I was  ready  to  give way  to  mytransports,  she  quietly  said  something  to  me  which  immediatelybrought me  to my  senses  again.I saw  her  several  times  alone  in  this  manner,  without  a  word,  o176THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUgesture,  or  even  a  too  expressive  look  indicating  the  least  under-standing  between  us.  This  state  of things,  very  tormenting  for  my-self,  was  nevertheless  extremely  delightful,  and  in  the  simplicity  ofmy  heart  I could  scarcely  understand  why I felt  so  tormented.  Itappeared  that  these  little  séze-d-tétes  were  not  unpleasant  to  hereither;  at  any  rate,  she  provided  opportunity  for  them  pretty  fre-quently—certainly  a  very  harmless  endeavour  on  her  part,  for  allthe  use  which  she  made  of them  herself,  or  allowed  me  to  make.One  day,  tired  of the  clerk’s  silly  conversation,  she  had  gone.  up-stairs  to her room.  I hastily  finished  my  little  task  in the room  behindthe  shop,  and  followed  her.  The  door  of her  room  was  half  open.  Ientered  without  being  seen.  She  was  working  at  her  embroiderynear  a  window,  with  her  back  turned  towards  the  door.  She  couldneither  see  me  nor  hear  me  come  in, owing  to  the  noise  of the  car-riages  in  the  street.  She  was  always  well  dressed;  on  that  day  hertoilet  was  almost  coquettish.  Her  attitude  was  graceful;  her  head,slightly  bent,  allowed  the  whiteness  of her  neck  to  be seen;  her  hair,elegantly  fastened  up,  was  ornamented  with  flowers.  Over  her wholeform  was  spread  a charm,  which  I had  time  to  consider,  and  whichmade  me  beside  myself.  I threw  myself  on  my  knees  on  the  thresh-old, stretching  out  my  arms  towards  her with  passionate  movements,feeling  certain  that  she  could  not  hear  me,  and  not  thinking  it pos-sible  that  she  could  see  me;  but  over  the  mantelpiece  was  a  looking-glass,  which  betrayed  me.  I do  not  know  what  effect  my  attack  ofmadness  produced  upon  her;  she  neither  looked  at  me,  nor  said  aword;  but,  half-turning  her  head,  with  a  simple  movement  of  herfinger  she  pointed  to  the  mat  at  her  feet.  To  tremble,  to  utter  a  cry,to  fling  myself  down  on  the  spot  she  had  indicated,  was  for  me  thework  of a  moment;  but  it will  scarcely  be believed  that,  in this  posi-tion,  I did  not  venture  to  attempt  anything  further,  to  say  a  singleword,  to  lift  my  eyes  to  her,  or  even  to  touch  her, in my  uncomfort-able  attitude,  to  support  myself  for  an  instant  upon  her  knees.  Al-though  unable  to  speak  or  move,  I was  certainly  not  tranquil;  every-thing  about  me  betrayed  my  agitation,  my  joy,  my  gratitude,  myardent  desires,  which,  without  definite  aim  or  object,  were  restrainedby the  fear  of  displeasing,  in  regard  to  which  my  youthful  heartcould  not  make  itself  easy.HIS  PASSION  FOR  HERa7She  appeared  no  less  moved  and  no  less  shy  than  myself.  Dis-turbed  at  seeing  mé there,  disconcerted  at  having  drawn  me  thither,and  beginning  to  feel  the  full  consequences  of a  sign which  she  hadno  doubt  made  without  due  reflection,  she neither  drew  me  towardsher  nor  repulsed  me.  She  did  not  take  her  eyes  from  her  work;  shetried  to  behave  as  if  she  had  not  seen  me  at  her  feet;  but  all  mystupidity  could  not  prevent  me  from  concluding  that  she  shared  myembarrassment,  perhaps  even  my  desires,  and  that  she was  restrainedby the  same  feeling  of shame  as  myself,  although  this  did  not  assistme  to  overcome  it.  Being  five  or  six  years  older  than  myself,  sheought,  as  I considered,  to  have  had  all  the  boldness  on  her  side;  andI said  to  myself  that,  as  she  did  nothing  to  awaken  mine,  she  couldnot  wish  me  to  show  any.  Even  now  I think  I was  right,  and  cer-tainly  she  was  too  clever  not  to  see  that  a  novice,  such  as  I  was,needed  to  be  not  only  encouraged,  but  also  instructed,I do not  know  what  would  have  been  the  end  of this  lively  dumbshow,  nor  how  long  I should  have  remained  without  moving in myridiculous  and  yet delicious  situation,  if we  had not  been  interrupted.At  the  moment  of my  most  violent  excitement,  I heard  the  door  ofthe  kitchen,  which  was  close  to  the  room  where  we  were,  open,  andMadame  Basile,  in  lively  alarm  which  showed  itself  in  her  wordsand  gestures,  said,  “Get  up!  here  comes  Rosina.”  Hastily  rising,  Iseized  the  hand  which  she  held  out  to  me,  and  imprinted  two  burn-ing kisses  upon  it, at  the  second  of which I felt  this  charming  handpressed  lightly  against  my  lips.  Never  in  my  life  had  I enjoyed  sosweet  a  moment;  but  the  opportunity  which  I had  lost  never  cameagain,  and  our  youthful  loves  stopped  at  that  point.This  is, perhaps,  the  very  reason  why  the  image  of  that  amiablewoman  has  remained  imprinted  on  the  bottom  of my  heart  in  suchcharming  outlines.  It has  even  grown  in beauty  in  proportion  as  myknowledge  of the  world  and  women  has  been  enlarged.  If she  hadonly  had a little  experience,  she  would  have  behaved  differently  inorder  to  encourage  a  lad;  but,  if her  heart  was  weak,  it was  upright,she  yielded  involuntarily to the  inclination  which  carried  her  away;it was,  according  to  all  appearance,  her  first  infidelity, and  I should,perhaps,  have  found  more  difficulty in  overcoming  her  shyness  thanmy  own.  Without  having  gone  so  far,  I found in  her  presence  in-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU78describable  happiness.  None  of the  feelings  caused  by the  possessionof women  have  ever  equalled  the  two  minutes  which  I spent  at  herfeet  without  even  venturing  to  touch  her  dress.  No;  there  is no  en-joyment  equal  to  that  which  a  virtuous  woman,  whom  one  loves,can  afford.  Everything  is a  favour  with  her.  A  sign with  the  finger,a hand  pressed  lightly  against  my  mouth—these  are  the  only favoursthat  I ever  received  from  Madame  Basile,  and  the  recollection  ofthese  trifling  tokens  of  regard  still  enchants  me  when  I think  ofthem.For  the  two  next  days  it  was  in  vain  that  I looked  out  for  thechance  of  another  téte-d-téte;  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  find  theopportunity,  and  I did  not  observe  any  anxiety  on  her  part  to  bringit about.  Her  manner,  although  not  colder,  was  more  reserved  thanusual;  and  I believe  that  she  avoided  my  looks,  for  fear  of  beingunable  to  control  her  own  sufficiently.  Her  confounded  clerk  wasmore  unbearable  than  ever;  he even  joked  and  bantered  me,  sayingchat  I should  get  on  with  the  ladies.  I trembled  at  the  thought  ofhaving  been  guilty  of  some  indiscretion;  and,  already  consideringthat  there  was  an  understanding  between  Madame  Basile  and  my-self,  I wished  to  keep secret  an  inclination  which,  until  then,  had  notgreatly  needed  it. This  made  me  more  careful  in  seizing  opportuni-ties  to  satisfy  it; and,  as  I wished  them  to  be  safe,  I no  longer  foundany  at  all.This  is another  romantic  folly  of which  I have  never  been  able  toeure  myself,  and  which,  combined  with  my  natural  shyness,  hasstrikingly  falsified  the  clerk’s  predictions.  I loved  too  sincerely,  toocompletely,  I venture  te  say,  to  be able  to  be happy  easily.  Never  havepassions  been  at  once  more  lively  and  purer  than  mine;  never  haslove  been  tenderer,  truer,  more  disinterested.  I would  have  sacrificedmy  happiness a thousand  times  for that  of the person  whom I loved;her  reputation  was  dearer  to  me  than  my  life,  and  I would  neverhave  wished  to  endanger  her  repose  for  a  single  moment  for  all thepleasures  of enjoyment.  This  feeling  has made  me  employ  such  care-fulness,  such  secrecy,  and  such  precaution  in my  undertakings,  thatnone  of  them  have  ever  been  successful.  My  want  of  success  withwomen  has  always  been  caused  by my  excessive  love  for  them.To return  to  the flute  player Aegisthus:  the curious  thing was  that2.MADAME’S  CONFESSOR79the  traitor,  as  he  became  more  unendurable,  appeared  to  becomemore  affable.  From  the frst  day that  his mistress  had  taken a likingto  me,  she  had  thought  of making  me  useful  in  the  shop.  I was  afairly  good  arithmetician.  She  had  proposed  to  him  to  teach  me  to  -keep  the  books;  but  the  boorish  fellow  received  the  proposal  with  avery  ill  grace,  perhaps  because  he  was  afraid  of  being  supplanted.Thus  all  my  work,  besides  that  with  my  graving-tool,  consisted  incopying  a few accounts  and memoranda,  correcting  a  few books,  andtranslating  a  few business  letters  from  Italian  into  French.  Suddenlyit occurred  to  my  friend  to  return  to  the  proposal  which  had  beenmade  and  rejected.  He  offered  to  teach  me  double  entry,  and  saidthat  he  wished  to  make  me  competent  to  offer  my  services  to  M.Basile  on  his return.  In his voice,  in his manner,  there  was  somethingfalse,  spiteful,  and  ironical,  which  did  not  inspire  me  with  confi-dence.  Madame  Basile,  without  waiting  for  me  to  answer,  said  tohim  coldly,  that  I was  obliged  to  him  for  his  offer;  that  she  hopedthat  fortune  would  in the  end  reward  my  good  qualities,  and  that  itwould  be  a  great  pity  if, with  my  talents,  I became  nothing  morethan a clerk.She  had  on  several  occasions  told  me  that  she  desired  to  introduceme  to  someone  who  might  be  of assistance  to  me.  She  was  prudentenough  to  feel  that  it was  time  for  us  to  separate.  Our  mute  declara-tions  had  been  made  on  a  Thursday.  On  the  following  Sunday  shegave  a  dinner,  at  which  I was  present,  and  amongst  the  guests  wasa  monk  of the  Jacobin  order,  a  man  of good  appearance,  to  whomshe  introduced  me.  He  treated  me  very  cordially,  congratulated  meon  my  conversion,  and  spoke  to  me  about  my  history  in  a  mannerwhich  proved  to  me  that  she  had  given  him a full  account  of it; then,giving  me  a  friendly  slap on  the  cheek  with  the  back  of his  hand,  he‘told  me  to  behave  myself  properly,  to  be  of good  courage,  and  to  goand  see  him,  that  we  might  talk  more  at  leisure.  I judged,  by therespect  which  everyone  showed  him,  that  he  was  a  person  of  someimportance;  and,  from  the  paternal  tone  which  he  adopted  towardsMadame  Basile,  that  he was  her  confessor.  I also  remember  that  hisrespectful  familiarity  was  united  with  marks  of  esteem  and  evenrespect  for  his  penitent,  which  impressed  me  less  at  the  time  thanthey  do  now.  If  I had  been  more  intelligent,  I should  have  been80THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUaffected  at  the  thought  of having  been  able  to  touch  the  feelings  of ayoung  woman  so  respected  by her  confessor.  The  table  was  not  largeenough  for  all  of us;  another  small  cne  was  called  into  requisition,at  which  I had  the  pleasure  of  sitting  opposite  the  clerk.  As  far  asattention  and  good  cheer  were  concerned,  I lost  nothing  by the  ar-rangement;  several  plates  were  sent  to  the  little  table,  which  werecertainly  not  meant  for  hifn.  Up to  this  time  all was  going  well;  theladies  were  very  gay,  the  men  very  attentive;  Madame  Basile  did  thehonours  with  charming  grace.  In  the  middle  of  dinner,  a  carriagestopped  at  the  door;  someone  came  upstairs.  It was  M.  Basile.  I seehim  now,  just as  when  he came  in, dressed  in a  scarlet  coat  with  giltbuttons,  a  colour  which,  since  that  day, I have  always  regarded  withaversion.  He  was a tall,  handsome  man  of good  appearance.  He  en-tered  noisily  with  the  air  of  a  man  surprising  his  guests,  althoughall  who  were  present  were  friends  of  his.  His  wife  flung  her  armsround  his  neck,  pressed  his  hands,  and  lavished  caresses  upon  him,which  he accepted  without  returning.  He  saluted  the  company,  andsat  down  to  eat.  The  guests  had  scarcely  begun  to  speak  of his  jour-ney,  when,  turning  his  eyes  towards  the  little  table,  he  asked,  in  asevere  tone,  who  the  little  boy  was  whom  he  saw  there.  MadameBasile  told  him  everything  quite  simply,  He  asked  whether I livedin  the  house,  and  being  told  no,  he  said  coarsely,  “Why  not?  sincehe  is here  in  the  daytime,  he  might  as  well  stop  during  the  night.”‘The  monk  took  up  the  conversation;  and,  after  speaking  of MadameBasile  in terms  of praise  that  were  earnest  and  true,  said  a  few  wordsin  my  favour,  adding  that,  far  from  blaming  his  wife’s  pious  workof charity,  he ought  to  be eager  to  take  part  in it himself,  since  noth-ing in  it overstepped  the  bounds  of  discretion.  M.  Basile  replied  ina  tone  of annoyance,  which  he  half  concealed,  out  of respect  for  themonk’s  presence,  but  which  was  enough  to  make  me  feel  that  he hadbeen  informed  about  me,  and  that  the clerk  had  done  me  an  ill turn.No  sooner  was  the  meal  over,  than  the  latter,  sent  by his  master,came  in triumph  to  tell  me,  by his  orders,  to  leave  the  house  at  onceand  never  set  foot  in it again.  He  seasoned  his  message  with  every-thing  that  could  make  it cruel  and  insulting.  I went  without  sayinga  word,  but  with  a  heart  deeply  afflicted,  not  so  much  at  the thoughtof  leaving  this  amiable  woman,  as  of  abandoning  her  to  her  hus-END  OF  FIRST  LOVE  ADVENTURESrband’s  brutality.  He  was  no  doubt  right  in  wishing  her  not  to  beuntrue  to  him;  but,  alzhough  intelligent  and  well  brought  up,  shewas  an  Italian,  that  is to  say,  of  a  sensitive  and  revengeful  disposi-tion;  and  it appears  to  me  that  he was  wrong  in treating  her  in themanner  most  calculated  to bring upon  himself  the misfortune  whichhe dreaded.Such  was  the  result  of my  first  love  adventure.  I did  not  omit  topass  two  or  three  times  through  the  street,  in  the  hope  of  at  leastseeing  again  her  whom  my  heart  unceasingly  regretted;  but, insteadof her, I only saw  the  husband  and  the  watchful  clerk,  who,  as  soonas  he  saw  me,  made  a  movement  towards  me  with  the  yard  meas-ure,  which  was  more  expressive  than  alluring.  Seeing  that  I was  sowell  watched,  I lost  heart  and  did  not  pass  the  shop  again.  I wished,at  least,  to  see  the  patron  whom  Madame  Basile  had  found  for  me.Unfortunately  I did  not  know  his  name.  I wandered  several  timesround  the  convent  in the  hope  of meeting  him,  but  without  success,At last  other  events  banished  the  delightful  recollections  of MadameBasile,  and  in  a  short  time  I forgot  her  so  completely  that,  simpleand  as  great  a novice  as  before,  J did  not  even  feel  attracted  by prettywomen.However,  her  generosity  had  somewhat  refurnished  my  ward:robe,  although  very  modestly,  and  with  the  foresight  of  a  prudenywoman  who  thought  more  of  neatness  than  of  adornment,  andwhose  wish  was  to  keep  me  from  discomfort,  not  to  deck  me  out,The  clothes  which  I  had  brought  from  Geneva  were  still  goodenough  to  wear;  she only added  a hat and  some  linen.  I had  no  cuffs;she  would  not  give  me  any,  although  I was  very  anxious  to  havesome.  She  was  satisfied  with  putting  me  in a  position  to  keep myselfneat  and  clean,  and  that  was  a  thing  which  there  was  no  need  tarecommend  me  to  be careful  about,  as  long as  I was  in her  presence.A few  days after  my  misfortune,  my  landlady  who,  as  I have  said,had  taken a liking  to  me,  told  me  that  she  had,  perhaps,  found  me  aplace,  and  that  a  lady of position  wanted  to  see  me.  At  these  words,I believed  myself already  in the  midst  of fashionable  adventures;  formy  mind  was  always  running  upon  that.  This  one,  however,  did  notprove  as  brilliant  as  I had  pictured  to  myself.  I went  to  see the  ladywith  the  servant  who  had  spoken  of me  to  her.  She  questioned  andTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU82examined  me;  I did  not  displease  her,  and  immediately  entered  herservice,  not  exactly  as  a  favourite,  but  as  a  lackey.  I was  dressed  inher  livery;  the  only  difference  was  that,  while  they  wore  shoulderknots,  I had  none;  as  there  was  no  lace  on  her  livery,  it looked  likean  ordinary  dress.  Such  was  the  unexpected  end  of all  my  grandhopes!The  Comtesse  de  Vercellis,  whose  service  I then  entered,  was  awidow  without  children;  her  husband  was  a  Piedmontese.  I alwaystook  her  to  be a  Savoyard,  since  I could  not  believe  that  a  Piedmon-tese  could  speak  French  so  well  and  with  so  pure  an  accent.  She  wasmiddle-aged,  of  distinguished  appearance,  possessed  a  cultivatedmind,  and  was.fond  of  French  literature,  of which  she  had  an  ex-tensive  knowledge.  She  wrote  much,  and  always  in French.  Her  let-ters  had  the  character  and  almost  the  grace  of those  of Madame  deSévigné,  and  some  of them  might  have  been  mistaken  for  hers.  Mychief  employment,  one  that  I did  not  dislike,  was  to  write  themfrom  her  dictation;  since  a  cancer  in  the  stomach,  from  which  shesuffered  greatly,  made  it impossible  for  her  to  write  them  herself.Madame  de  Vercellis  was  not  only  a  woman  of great  talent,  butpossessed  a  strong  and  lofty  soul.  I was  with  her  during  her  last  ill-ness.  I saw  her  suffer  and  die  without  showing  signs  of  weakness,even  for  a  moment,  without  making  the  least  effort  to  control  her-self,  without  doing  anything  unwomanly,  without  suspecting  thather  conduct  was  an  example  of philosophy,  a  word  which  was  notas  yet  fashionable,  and  with  which  she  was  not  even  acquainted  inthe  sense  which  it bears  to-day.  This  force  of  character  sometimeseven  became  coldness.  She  always  appeared  to  me  as  little  withoutfeeling  for  others  as  for  herself;  and,  when  she  did  a  kindness  toanyone  who  was  unfortunate,  she  did  it rather  from  a  desire  to  dowhat  was  good  in itself,  than  from  genuine  feelings  of pity.  Duringthe  three  months  which  I spent  with  her,  I experienced  to  someextent  this  want  of  feeling.  It  would  have  been  natural  that  sheshould  conceive  a  regard  for  a young  man  of some  promise,  whomshe  had  continually  in her  sight,  and  that,  feeling  that  her  end  wasnear,  she  should  reflect  that  he  would  afterwards  stand  in  need  ofassistance  and  support;  however,  whether  it was  that  she  did  notconsider  me  worthy  of special  attention,  or  that  those  who  besiegedTHE  COMTESSE  DE  VERCELLIS83her  did  not  allow  her  to  think  of anyone  but  themselves—she  didnothing  for  me.fs:I remember  very  well,  however,  that  she  displayed  some  curiosityto  know  my  story.  She  sometimes  asked  me  questions;  she  liked  meto  show  her  the  letters  I wrote  to  Madame  de  Warens,  and  to  giveher an  account  of my  feelings;  but  she certainly  did  not  go the rightway  to  become  acquainted  with  them,  as  she  never  disclosed  herown  to  me.  My  heart  loved  to  unbosom  itself,  provided  it felt  thatit was  doing  so  to  another  heart.  Cold  and  dry  questions,  withoutany  sign  of  approval  or  blame  at  my  answers,  gave  me  no  confidence.  When  there  was  nothing  to  show  me  whether  my  chatterpleased  or  displeased,  I was  always  in  a  state  of  alarm,  and  I en-deavoured,  not  so  much  to  show  what  I thought  as  to  say  nothingwhich  might  do  me  harm.  I have  since  observed  that  this  dry man-ner  of questioning  people  in  order  to  find  out  their  character,  is afrequent  trick  with  women  who  wish  to  be  thought  clever.  Theyimagine  that,  by concealing  their  own  feelings,  they  will  be  morelikely  to  succeed  in  finding  out  your  own;  but  they  fail  to  see  that,in  so  doing,  they  are  depriving  you  of the  courage  to  exhibit  them.A man  who  is questioned,  for that  reason  alone  begins  to put himselfon  his  guard,  and,  if he believes  that  his  questioner,  without  feelingany  genuine  interest  in  him,  merely  wants  to  make  him  talk,  heeither  lies,  holds  his  tongue,  or  redoubles  his  watchfulness,  prefer-ring to  be thought  a  fool  than  to  be the  dupe  of curiosity.  In  short,when  a  man  desires  to  read  the  hearts  of others,  it is always  a  badplan to  make  a  show  of concealing  his own.Madame  de Vercellis  never  said  a  word  to  me  expressive  of affec-tion,  pity,  or  goodwill.  She  asked  me  questions  with  coldness;  I re-plied  with  reserve.  My  answers  were  so  timid  that  she  must  havefound  them  commonplace  and  tedious.  At  length  she  gave  up  aues-tioning  me,  and  never  spoke  to  me  except  to  give  me  an  order.  Shejudged  me  less  according  to  what  I was  than  according  to  what  shehad  made  me;  and,  as  she  never  saw  anything  in  me  but a lackey,she  prevented  me  from  appearing  anything  else.I believe  that  from  that  time  I suffered  from  the  malicious  sportof secret  intrigue  which  has  ever.  since  thwarted  me,  and  which  hasinspired  me  with  a  very  natural  aversion  for  the  apparent  order  ofTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU84things  which  produces  it.  The  heir  of  Madame  de  Vercellis,  whowas  childish,  was  her  nephew,  the  Comte  de  la Roque,  who  assidu-ously  paid court  to  her.  Besides,  her  chief  servants,  who  saw  that  herend  was  near,  did  not  neglect  their  own  interests;  and  there  were  somany  devoted  attendants  round  her, that  it would  have  been  dificultfor her  to  give a  thought  to  myself.  At  the  head  of the  establishmentwas  a  certain  M.  Lorenzi,  a  clever  man,  whose  still  more  clever  wifehad  so  insinuated  herself  into  her  mistress’s  good  graces,  that  shestood  rather  on  the  footing  of  a  friend  than  of  a  paid  servant.  Shehad  bestowed  the  post  of  lady’s-maid  upon  her  own  niece,  Made-moiselle  Pontal,  a  sly creature,  who  gave  herself  the  airs  of a  maidof honour,  and  so  successfully  helped  her  aunt  to  get  round  her  mis-tress,  that  she  only  saw  through  their  eyes  and  only  acted  throughtheir  hands.  I had  not  the  good  fortune  to  please  these  three  per-sons;  I obeyed  them,  but  I did  not  serve  them;  I did  not  considerthat,  besides  serving  our  common  mistress,  I was  obliged  to  be  aservant  to  her  servants.  Besides,  I was  the  kind  of  person  whocaused  them  uneasiness.  They  saw  clearly  that  I  was  not  in  myplace;  they  were  afraid  that  Madame  saw  it as  well,  and  that  whatshe  might  do to  put me  in my  proper  position,  might  diminish  theirshare  of  her  money;  for  people  of  this  class,  too  greedy  to  be  just,look  upon  every  legacy  left  to  others  as  stolen  from  their  own  prop-erty.  They  accordingly  conspired  to  remove  me  from  her  sight.  Shewas  fond  of writing  letters;  it was  an  amusement  for  her  in her  stateof  health;  they  inspired  her  with  disgust  for  it, and  dissuaded  herfrom  continuing  it by the  advice  of her  physician,  while  persuadingher  that  it  was  too  tiring  for  her.  On  the  pretence  that  I did  notunderstand  my  duty, two  loutish  sedan-chair  carriers  were  employedin my  place;  in short,  they managed  so  cleverly  that,  when  she madeher  will,  I was  not  allowed  to  enter  her  room  for  eight  days.  It istrue  that  I subsequently  went  in  as  before,  and  I showed  her  evenmore  attention  than  anyone  else;  for  the  sufferings  the  poor  womanendured  tore  my  heart;  the  firmness  with  which  she  bore  them  in-spired  me  with  extreme  reverence  and  affection  for  her,  and  I oftenshed  tears  of  genuine  sorrow  in  my  room,  unperceived  by her  oranyone  else.DEATH  OF  MADAME  DE  VERCELLIS85.  At  length  we  lost  her.  I saw  her  die.  Her  life  had  been  the  life  ofa  woman  of talent  and  jptelligence;  her  death  was  that  of a  philoso-pher.  I can  say  that  she  inspired  me  with a feeling  of esteem  for theCatholic  religion,  by the  cheerfulness  of  soul  with  which  she  ful-filled  its  instructions,  without  carelessness  and  without  affectation.She  was  naturally  of a  serious  disposition.  Towards  the  end  of herillness,  she  assumed a sort  of  gaiety,  which  was  too  regular  to  beunreal,  and  which  was  only  a  counterpoise  to  her  melancholy  con-dition  and  was  the  gift of reason.  She  only  kept her bed  the  two  lastdays,  and  continued  to  converse  quietly  with  everybody  to  the  end.At  last,  speaking  no  more,  and  already  in  the  agonies  of  death,  shebroke  wind  loudly.  “Good!”  she said, turning  round,  “a woman  whocan  fart  is not  dead!”  These  were  the  last  words  she  uttered.She  left  a  year’s  wages  to  her  underservants.  I received  nothing.not  having  been  entered  on  the  list  of her  establishment.  However,the  Comte  de la Roque  ordered  thirty  ures  to  be given  me,  and  leftme  the new  suit which  I was  wearing,  and  which  M. Lorenzi  wantedto  take  from  me.  He  even  promised  to  try  and  find a place  for  me,and  gave  me  leave  to  go  and  see  him.  I went  there  two  or  three  timeswithout  being  able  to  speak  to  him.  Being  easily  rebuffed,  I did  notgo  again.  It will  soon  be  seen  that  I was  wrong.  Would  that I hadfinished  all that  I had  to  say  about  my  stay  at  Madame  de Vercellis’s!But,  although  my  condition  apparently  remained  the  same,  I didnot  leave  the  house  as  I entered  it.  I carried  away  from  it  lastingrecollections  of  crime  and  the  insupportable  weight  of  remorse,which,  after  forty  years,  still  lies  heavy  on  my  conscience;  while  thebitterness  of it, far from  growing  weaker,  makes  itself  more  stronglyfelt  with  my  advancing  years.  Who  would  believe  that  a  childishfault  could  have  such  cruel  consequences?  For  these  more  than  prob-able  consequences  my  heart  is inconsolable.  I have,  perhaps,  causedthe  ruin  of an  amiable,  honest,  and  estimable  girl, who  certainly  wasfar  more  worthy  than  myself,  and  doomed  her  to  disgrace  andmisery.It  is  almost  unavoidable  that  the  break  up  of  an  establishmentshould  cause  some  confusion  in  the  house,  and  that  several  thingsshould  get  lost;  however,  the  servants  were  so  honest,  and  thesTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU86Lorenzis  so  watchful,  that  nothing  was  missing  when  the  inventorywas  taken.  Only  Mademoiselle  Pontal  had  lost  a  piece  of  old  redand  silver-coloured  ribbon.  Many  other  things  of greater  value  wereat  my  disposal;  this  ribbon  alone  tempted  me;  I stole  it, and,  as  Itook  no  trouble  to  conceal  it,  it  was  soon  found.  They  wanted  toknow  how  it had  come  into  my  possession.  I became  confused,  stam-mered,  blushed,  and  at  last  said  that  Marion  had  given  it  to  me.Marion  was  a  young  girl from  Maurienne,  whom  Madame  de  Ver-cellis  had  taken  for  her  cook,  when  she  left  off  giving  dinners  anddischarged  her  own,  as  she  had  more  need  of good  soup  than  of finestews.  Marion  was  not  only  pretty  but  had  a  fresh  colour,  onlyfound  on  the  mountains,  and,  above  all,  there  was  something  abouther  so  gentle  and  modest,  that  it was  impossible  for  anyone  to  seeher  without  loving  her;  in  addition  to  that,  she  was  a  good  and  vir-tuous  girl, and  of unquestionable  honesty.  All  were  surprised  whenI mentioned  her  name.  We  were  both  equally  trusted  and  it  wasconsidered  important  to  find  out  which  of  us  two  was  really  thethief.  She  was  sent  for;  a number  of people  were  assembled,  amongstthem  the  Comte  de  la  Roque.  When  she  came,  the  ribbon  wasshown  to  her.  I boldly  accused  her;  she  was  astounded,  and  unableto  utter  a word;  looked  at  me  in a  manner  that  would  have  disarmedthe  Devil  himself,  but  against  which  my  barbarous  heart  was  proof.At  last,  she  denied  the  theft  firmly,  but  without  anger,  addressedherself  to  me,  exhorted  me  to  reflect,  and  not  to  disgrace  an  innocentgirl  who  had  never  done  me  any  harm;  but  I, with  infernal  impu-dence,  persisted  in  my  story,  and  declared  to  her  face  that  she  hadgiven  me  the  ribbon.  The  poor  girl  began  to  cry,  and  only  said  tome:  “Ah!  Rousseau,  I thought  you  were  a  good  man.  You  make  mevery  unhappy,  but  I should  not  like  to  be  in  your  place.”  That  wasall.  She  proceeded  to  defend  herself  with  equal  simplicity  and  firm-ness,  but  without  allowing  herself  to  utter  the  slightest  reproachagainst  me.  This  moderation,  contrasted  with  my  decided  tone,  didher  harm.  It did  not  seem  natural  to  suppose,  on  the  one  side,  suchdevilish  impudgnce,  and,  on  the  other,  such  angelic  mildness.  Al-though  the  matter  did  not  appear  to  be absolutely  settled,  they  werePrepossessed  in  my  favour.  In  the  confusion  which  prevailed,  theyREMORSE87did  not  give themselves  time  to  get  to  the  bottom  of the  affair;  andthe  Comte  de  la  Roqueyin  dismissing  us  both,  contented  himselfwith  saying  that  the  conscience  of  the  guilty  one  would  amplyavenge  the innocent.  His  prediction  has been  fulfilled;  it fulfils  itselfevery  day.I do not  know  what  became  of the  victim  of my  false  accusation;but  it is not  likely  that  she  afterwards  found  it easy  to  get  a  goodsituation.  She carried  away  with  her an  imputation  upon  her honestywhich  was  in every  way  cruel.  The  theft  was  only a trifling  one,  butstill  it was  a  theft,  and,  what  is worse,  made  use  of to  lead  a  youngman  astray;  lastly,  lying and  obstinacy  left  nothing  to  be hoped  fromone  in whom  so  many  vices  were  united.  I do not  even  consider  mis-ery  and  desertion  as  the  greatest  danger  to  which  I exposed  her.  Ather  age,  who  knows  to  what  extremes  discouragement  and  the  feel-ing of ill-used  innocence  may  have  carried  her?  Oh,  if my  remorseat  having,  perhaps,  made  her  unhappy  is  unendurable,  one  mayjudge  what I feel  at  the  thought  of having,  perhaps,  made  her  worsethan  myself!This  cruel  remembrance  at  times  so  sorely  troubles  and  upsets  me,that  in  my  sleepless  hours  I seem  to  see  the  poor  girl coming  to  re-proach  me  for  my  crime,  as  if it had  been  committed  only yesterday.As  long  as  I have  lived  quietly,  it has  tormented  me  less;  but  in themidst  of a  stormy  life  it robs  me  of  the  sweet  consolation  of  perse-cuted  innocence,  it makes  me  feel  what  I think  I have  said  in one  ofmy  books,  that  “Remorse  goes  to  sleep  when  our  fortunes  are  pros-perous,  and  makes  itself  felt  more  keenly  in  adversity.”  However,  Ihave  never  been  able  to  bring  myself  to  unburden  my  heart  of thisconfession  to  a  friend.  The  closest  intimacy  has  never  led  me  so  farwith  anyone,  not  even  with  Madame  de  Warens.  All  that  I havebeen  able  to  do  has  been  to  confess  that  I had  to  reproach  myselfwith  an  atrocious  act,  but  I have  never  stated  wherein  it consisted.This  burden  has  remained  to  this  day upon  my  conscience  withoutalleviation;  and  I can  affirm  that  the  desire  of freeing  myself  fromit in  some  degree,  has  greatly  contributed  to  the  resolution  I havetaken  of writing  my  Confessions.I have  behaved  straightforwardly  in  the  confession  which  I haveTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU88just made,  and  it will  assuredly  be found  that  I have  not  attemptedto  palliate  the  blackness  of  my  offence.  But  I should  not  fulfil  theobject  of this  book,  if I did  not  at  the  same  time  set  forth  my  innerfeelings,  and  hesitated  to  excuse  myself  by  what  is  strictly  true.Wicked  intent  was  never  further  from  me  than  at  that  cruel  mo-ment;  and  when I accused  the  unhappy  girl,  it is singular,  but  it istrue,  that  my  friendship  for  her  was  the  cause  of it. She  was  presentto  my  thoughts;  I threw  the  blame  on  the  first  object  which  pre-sented  itself.  I accused  her  of having  done  what  I meant  to  do, andof having  given  me  the  ribbon,  because  my  intention  was  to  give  itto  her.  When  I afterwards  saw  her  appear,  my  heart  was  torn;  butthe  presence  of so  many  people  was  stronger  than  repentance.  I wasnot  afraid  of punishment,  I was  only  afraid  of  disgrace;  and  that  Ifeared  more  than  death,  more  than  crime,  more  than  anything  elsein  the  world.  I  should  have  rejoiced  if  the  earth  had  suddenlyopened,  swallowed  me  up  and  suffocated  mes  the  unconquerablefear  of  shame  overcame  everything,  and  alone  made  me  impudent.The  greater  my  crime,  the  more  the  dread  of confessing  it made  mefearless.  I saw  nothing  but  the  horror  of being  recognised  and  pub-licly  declared,  in my  own  presence,  a  thief,  liar,  and  slanderer.  Com-plete  embarrassment  deprived  me  of  every  other  feeling.  If  I hadbeen  allowed  to  recover  myself  I should  have  assuredly  confessedeverything.  If M.  de  la Roque  had  taken  me  aside  and  said  to  me:“Do  not  ruin  this  poor  girl;  if you  are  guilty,  confess  it to  me,”  Ishould  have  immediately  thrown  myself  at  his  feet,  of  that  I amperfectly  certain.  But,  when  I needed  encouragement,  they  only  in-timidated  me.  And  yet  it is only  fair  to consider  my  age.  I was  littlemore  than a child,  or  rather,  I still  was  one.  In youth  real  crimes  areeven  more  criminal  than  in riper years;  but  that  which  is only  weak-ness  is less  so,  and  my  offence  was  at  bottom  scarcely  anything  else.Thus  the  recollection  of it afflicts  me  not  so  much  by reason  of theevil  in itself  as  on  account  of its  evil  consequences.  It has  even  doneme  the  good  of securing  me  for  the  rest  of my  life  against  every  acttending  to  crime,  by the  terrible  impression  which  I have  retainedof the only offence  that  I have  ever  committed;  and I believe  that  myhorror  of a  lie is due  in great  measure  to  my  regret  at  having  beenEXPIATION89capable  myself  of telling  one  so  shameful.  If it isxa  crime  that  can  beexpiated,  as  I venture  tobelieve,  it must  be  expiated  by all  the  un-happiness  which  has  overwhelmed  the  last  years  of my  life, by fortyyears  of honourable  and  upright  conduct  in  difficult  circumstances;and  poor  Marion  finds  so  many  avengers  in  this  world,  that,  how-ever  great  my  offence  against  her may  have  been,  I have  little  fear  ofdying  without  absolution.  This  is what  I have  to  say  on  this  matter:permit  me  never  to  speak  of it again.BOOK  III[1728-1731}'Havinc  left Madame  de Vercellis’s  house  in almost  the  same  state  asI had  entered  it,  I went  back  to  my  old  landlady,  with  whom I re-mained  for  five  or  six  weeks,  during  which  health,  youth,  and  idle-ness  again  rendered  my  temperament  troublesome.  I was  restless,absent-minded,  a  dreamer.  I wept,  I sighed,  I longed  for  a  happi-ness  of  which  I had  no  idea,  and  of  which  I nevertheless  felt  thewant.  This  state  cannot  be described;  only  few  men  can  even  imag-ine  it, because  most  of them  have  anticipated  this  fulness  of life,  atonce  so  tormenting  and  so  delicious,  which,  in  the  intoxication  ofdesire,  gives  a  foretaste  of  enjoyment.  My  heated  blood  incessantlyfilled  my  brain  with  girls and  women;  but,  ignorant  of the  relationsof sex,  I made  use  of them  in my  imagination  in accordance  with  mydistorted  notions,  without  knowing  what  else  to  do  with  them;  andthese  notions  kept  my  feelings  in  a  state  of  most  uncomfortableactivity,  from  which,  fortunately,  they  did  not  teach  me  how  to  de-liver  myself.  I would  have  given  my  life  to  have  found  anotherMademoiselle  Goton  for  a  quarter  of an  hour.  But  it was  no  longerthe  time  when  childish  amusements  took  this  direction  as  if natu-rally.  Shame,  the  companion  of a  bad  conscience,  had  made  its  ap-pearance  with  advancing  years;  it had  increased  my  natural  shynessto  such  an  extent  that  it made  it unconquerable;  and  never,  neitherthen  nor  later,  have  I been  able  to  bring  myself  to  make  an  indecentproposal,  unless  she, to  whom  I made  it, in some  measure  forced  meto  it by her  advances,  even  though  I knew  that  she  was  by no  meansscrupulous,  and  felt  almost  certain  of being  taken  at  my  word.My  agitation  became  so  strong  that,  being  unable  to  satisfy  mydesires,  I excited  them by the most  extravagant  behaviour.  I haunteddark  alleys  and  hidden  retreats,  where  I might  be  able  to  expose90THE  GIRLS  AT  THE  WELL:glmyself  to  women  in  the  condition  in  which  I should  have  liked  tahave  been  in  their  company.  What  they  saw  was  not  an  obscen¢object,  I never  even  thought  of  such  a  thing;  it  was  a  ridiculousobject.  The  foolish  pleasure  I took  in displaying  it before  their  eyescannot  be  described.  There  was  only  one  step  further  necessary  forme  to  take,  in order  to  gain actual  experience  of the  treatment  I de-  ~sired,  and  I have  no  doubt  that  someone  would  have  been  boldenough  to  afford  me  the  amusement,  while  passing  by, if I had  hadthe  boldness  to  wait.  This  folly  of mine  led  to  a  disaster  almost  ascomical,  but  less  agreeable  for  myself.One  day,  I took  up  my  position  at  the  bottom  of  a  court  wherethere  was  a  well,  from  which  the girls of the house  were  in the habitof fetching  water.  At  this  spot  there  was a slight  descent  which  led-to  some  cellars  by several  entrances.  In  the  dark  I examined  theseunderground  passages,  and  finding  them  long and  dark,  I concludedthat  there  was  no  outlet,  and  that,  if I happened  to  be  seen  and  sur-prised,  I should  find a safe  hiding-place  in them.  Thus  emboldened,I exhibited  to  the  girls who  came  to  the  well  a  sight more  laughablethan  seductive.  The  more  modest  pretended  to  see  nothing;  othersbegan  to  laugh;  others  felt  insulted  and  made a noise.  I ran  into  myretreat;  someone  followed  me.  I heard  a  man’s  voice,  which  I hadnot  expected,  and  which  alarmed  me.  I plunged  underground  at  therisk  of losing  myself;  the  noise,  the  voices,  the  man’s  voice,  still  fol-lowed  me.  I had  always  reckoned  upon  the  darkness;  I saw a light.I shuddered,  and  plunged  further  into  the  darkness.  A wall  stoppedme,  and,  being  unable  to  go  any  further,  I was  obliged  to  await  myfate.  In  a moment I was  seized  by a tall  man  with  a  big moustache,a  big hat,  and  a  big  sword,  who  was  escorted  by four  or  five  oldwomen,  each  armed  with  a  broom-handle,  amongst  whom I per-ceived  the  little  wretch  who  had  discovered  me,  and  who,  no  doubt,wanted  to  see  me  face  to face.The  man  with  the  sword,  seizing  me  by  the  arm,  asked  meroughly  what  I was  doing  there.  It may  be  imagined  that  I had  noanswer  ready.  However,  I recovered  myself;  and,  in  desperation,  atthis  critical  moment  I invented  a  romantic  excuse  which  provedsuccessful.  I begged  him  in  a  suppliant  voice  to  have  pity  upon  myage  and  condition;  I said  that  I was  a  young  stranger  of good  birth,THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU92whose  brain  was  affected;  that  I had  run  away  from  home,  becausethey  wanted  to  shut  me  up;  that  I was  lost  if he  betrayed  me;  butthat,  if he would  let me  go,  I might  some  day be able  to  reward  himfor  his  kindness.  Contrary  to  all  expectation,  my  words  and  de-meanour  took  effect;  the  terrible  man  was  touched  by them,  and,after  administering  a  short  reproof,  he  let  me  go  quietly  withoutquestioning  me  further.  From  the  demeanour  of  the  girl  and  theold  women,  when  they  saw  me  go,  I judged  that  the  man  whom  Ifeared  so  much  had  been  of  gteat  service  to  me,  and  that  I shouldnot  have  got  off  so  easily  with  them  alone.  I heard  them  murmursomething  or  other  to  which  I hardly  paid  attention;  for,  providedthat  the  man  and  his  sword  did  not  interfere,  I felt  confident,  activeand  vigorous  as  I was,  of escaping  from  them  and  their  cudgels.A few  days afterwards,  while  walking  down a street  with  a youngAbbé,  my  neighbour,  I nearly  ran  into  the  man  with  the  sword.  Herecognised  me,  and,  imitating  me  mockingly,  said:  “I  am  a  prince,I am  a  prince,  and  I am  a  coward;  but  don’t  let  his  highness  comeback  again!”  He  said  no  more,  and  I sneaked  away,  not  venturingto  look  up,  and  thanking  him  in  my  heart  for  his  discretion.  Ijudged  that  the  confounded  old  women  had  made  him  ashamed  ofhis  credulity.  Anyhow,  Piedmontese  as  he was,  he was  a  good  man,and  I never  think  of  him  without  a  feeling  of  gratitude;  for  thestory  was  so  funny  that,  merely  from  the  desire  of creating  a  laugh,anyone  else  in  his  place  would  have  shamed  me.  This  adventure,without  having  the  consequences  which  I  dreaded,  neverthelessmade  me  careful  for  a  long time.My stay  with  Madame  de Vercellis  had  gained  me  some  acquaint-ances,  whom I cultivated  in  the  hope  that  they  might  prove  usefulto  me.  Amongst  others,  I sometimes  went  to  visit  a Savoyard  Abbé,named  M.  Gaime,  tutor  to  the  children  of the  Comte  de  Mellaréde.He  was  still  young  and  went  little  into  society,  but  was  full  of goodsense,  honour  and  intelligence,  and  one  of the  most  honourable  menthat  I have  known.  He  was  not  the  least  use  to  me  for  the  objectwhich  took  me  to  him;  he had  not  sufficient  interest  to  get me  a  situ-ation;  but  I gained  from  him  still  more  precious  advantages,  whichhave  been  of use  to  me  all  my  life,  lessons  of  healthy  morality  andprinciples  of sound  reason.  In my  alternating  tastes  and  ideas,  I hadM.  GAIME,  THE  “SAVOYARD  VICAR”932always been  too  high or  too low—Achilles  or  Thersites:  now  a hero,now  a  good-for-nothing. M. Gaime  undertook  to  put  me  in  myplace,  and  to  show  me  to  myself  in my  true  colours,  without  sparingor  discouraging  me.  He  spoke  to  me  with  due  recognition  of  mynatural  talents,  but  added  that  he  saw  obstacles  arising  from  themwhich  would  prevent  me  from  making  the  best  use  of them;  so  that,in  his  opinion,  they  would  be  less  useful  to me  as  steps  to  fortunethan  as  a  means  to  enable  me  to  do  without  it.  He  put  before  me  atrue  picture  of  human  life,  of  which  I had  only  false  ideas;  heshowed  me  how,  in the  midst  of contrary  fortune,  the  wise  man  canalways  strive  after  happiness  and  sail  against  the  wind  in  order  toreach  it; that  there  is no  true  happiness  without  prudence,  and  thatprudence  belongs  to  all  conditions  of life. He  damped  my  admira-tion  for  external  grandeur,  by proving  that  those  who  ruled  otherswere  neither  happier  nor  wiser  than  the  ruled.  He  told  me  onething,  which  I have  often  remembered  since  then—that,  if  everyman  could  read  the  hearts  of  all  other  men,  there  would  be  foundmore  people  willing  to  descend  than  to  rise  in  life.  This  reflection,the  truth  of which  is striking,  and  in which  there  is no  exaggeration,has been  of great  service  to  me  during  the course  of my  life, by help-ing to  make  me  quietly  content  with  my  position.  He  gave  me  thefirst  true  ideas  of  what  was  honourable,  which  my  inflated  geniushad  only grasped  in its exaggerated  forms.  He  made  me  feel  that  theenthusiasm  of lofty  virtues  was  rarely  shown  in society;  that,  in try-ing to  climb  too  high, one  was  in danger  of falling;  that  a  continuedround  of  trifling  duties,  always  well  performed,  required  no  lesseffort  than  heroic  actions;  that  from  them  a  man  gained  more  in thematter  of honour  and  happiness;  and  that  it was  infinitely  better  toenjoy  the  esteem  of one’s  fellow  men  at  all times,  than  their  admira-tion  occasionally.In  order  to  define  the  duties  of man,  it was  necessary  to  go  backto  their  principles.  Besides,  the  step  which  I had  just taken,  and  ofwhich  my  present  condition  was  the  result,  led  us  to  speak  of  re-ligion.  It will  be already  imagined  that  the  honourable  M.  Gaime  is,in great  part  at  least,  the  original  of the  “Savoyard  Vicar.”  Only,  asprudence  constrained  him  to  speak  with  more  reserve,  he expressedhimself  less openly  upon  certain  points;  but, for the rest,  his maxims,THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU94his  sentiments,  his  opinions  were  the  same,  and,  his  advice  to  re-turn  home  not  excepted,  everything  was  just  as  I have  since  pub-licly  represented  it.  Therefore,  without  enlarging  further  upon  theconversations,  the  substance  of which  is accessible  to  everyone,  I willonly  say  that  his  lessons,  the  wisdom  of  which  was  at  first  withouteffect,  became  in  my  heart  a  germ  of virtue  and  religion  which  wasnever  choked,  and  which  only  needed  the  care  of  a  dearer  hand  inorder  to  bear  fruit.Although,  at  the  time,  my  conversion  was  by no  means  thorough,I nevertheless  felt  moved.  Far  from  feeling  tired  of  his  conversa-tions,  I was  attracted  to  them  by their  clearness  and  simplicity,  and,above  all,  by a  certain  warmth  of heart,  by which  I felt  they  werepervaded.  I have  a  loving  disposition,  and  have  always  attached  my-self  to  people  less  in proportion  to  the  good  they  have  done  me  thanthe good  they  have  wished  to  do me;  and  in regard  to  the  latter,  myjudgment  rarely  deceives  me.  I was  also  genuinely  attached  to  M.Gaime;  I was,  so  to  speak,  his  second  pupil,  and  for  the moment  thishad  for  me  the  inestimable  advantage  of turning  me  aside  from  theinclination  to  vice,  towards  which  my  want  of occupation  drew  me.One  day,  when I least  expected  it,  I was  sent  for  by the  Comtede la Roque.  The  frequent  visits  I had  made  without  being  able  tospeak  to  him  had  tired  me,  and  I gave  up  going  to  his  house;  Ithought  that  he had  forgotten  me,  or  that  he had  retained  a  bad  im-pression  of me.  I was  mistaken.  He  had  more  than  once  witnessedthe  pleasure  with  which I fulfilled  my  duties  to  his  aunt.  He  hadeven  spoken  of it to  her,  and  spoke  of  it again  to  me,  when  I hadforgotten  it myself.  He  received  me  kindly,  told  me  that,  instead  ofputting  me  off  with  idle  promises,  he  had  tried  to  find a place  forme;  that  he  had  been  successful;  that  he was  going  to  put  me  in theway  of becoming  something,  that  it was  for  me  to  do  the  rest;  thatthe  house  to  which  he  had  procured  me  admission  was  influentialand  respected;  that  I needed  no  other  patrons  to  help  me  on;  andthat,  although  treated  at  first  as  a  simple  servant,  as  I had  latelybeen,  I might  rest  assured  that  they  would  be  quite  ready  not  toleave  me  in that position  if my  disposition  and  behaviour  gave  themreason  to  think  that  I was  fit  for  something  better.  The  end  of theconversation  cruelly  belied  the  brilliant  hopes  with  which  the  com-HOUSEHOLD  OF  COMTE  DE  GOUVON95mencement  had  inspired  me.  “What!  always  a  lackey!”  I said  tomyself,  with  a  feeling  gf bitter  annoyance  which  confidence  sooneffaced.  I felt  too  little  adapted  for  such  a  position  to  fear  that  Ishould  be left  in it.He  took  me  to  the  Comte  de Gouvon,  chief  equerry  to  the  Queen,and  head  of the  illustrious  house  of  Solar.  The  dignified  air  of thisvenerable  old  man  made  the  kindness  of his  reception  more  touch-ing.  He  questioned  me  with  interest,  and  I answered  him  with  sin-cerity.  He  told  the  Comte  de  la Roque  that  I had  pleasant  features,which  gave  promise  of intelligence;  that  it appeared  to  him  that  infact  I was  not  wanting  in  it, but  that  that  was  not  everything,  andthat  it was  necessary  to  see  what  I was  in other  respects.  Then,  turn-ing to  me,  he said:  “My child,  in almost  everything  the beginning  isdifficult;  in your  case,  however,  it will  not  be  so  to  any  great  extent.Be  prudent,  and  endeavour  to  please  everyone  here;  for  the  present,that  is all  you  have  to  do;  for  the  rest,  be of good  courage;  you  willbe taken  care  of.”  Immediately  afterwards,  he went  over  to  the  Mar-quise  de  Breil,  his  step-daughter,  to  whom  he  presented  me,  andthen  to  the  Abbé  de  Gouvon,  his  son.  This  beginning  seemed  topromise  well.  I was  already  experienced  enough  to  know  that lackeyswere  not  received  with  so  much  ceremony.  In  fact,  I was  not  treatedlike  one.  I took  my  meals  at  the  steward’s  table,  and  wore  no  livery;and  when  the  Comte  de  Favria,  an  empty-headed  young  fool,wanted  me  to  get  up  behind  his  carriage,  his  grandfather  forbademy  riding  behind  anyone’s  carriage,  or  attending  upon  anyone  out-side  the  house.  However,  I waited  at  table,  and,  in  the  house,  per-formed  almost  the  duties  of a  lackey;  but  I performed  them  to a cer-tain  extent  voluntarily,  without  being especially  attached  to  anyone.With  the  exception  of  writing  a  few  letters  from  dictation,  andcarving  a  few  figures  for  the  Comte  de  Favria,  I was  master  of mytime  for almost  the whole  of the  day. This  test,  which  I did  not  per-ceive,  was  in  truth  very  dangerous;  it was  not  even  very  kind;  forthis  long  idleness  might  have  led  me  to  vices  which  I should  nototherwise  have  contracted.But,  happily,  this  did  not  occur.  M.  Gaime’s  lessons  had  made  animpression  upon  my  heart,  and  I conceived  such a liking  for  themthat  I sometimes  stole  out  to  go  and  listen  to  them  again.  I believeTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU96that  those  who  saw  me  leave  the  house  secretly  had  not  the  least  sus-picion  where  I was  going.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  sensiblethan  the  advice  which  he gave  me  concerning  my  behaviour.  I com-menced  admirably;  I displayed  assiduity,  attention,  and  eagernesswhich  charmed  everybody.  The  Abbé  prudently  advised  me  to  mod-erate  my  youthful  zeal,  for  fear  that  it  might  gradually  relax  andthat  this  might  be  noticed.  “As  you  begin,”  said  he,  “so  will  you  beexpected  to  behave  as  a  rule;  try  to  manage  to  do even  more  as  timegoes  on,  but  beware  of ever  doing  less.”As  no  one  had  taken  much  trouble  to  find  out  my  poor  talents,and  as  I was  only  credited  with  those  which  Nature  had  bestowedupon  me,  it did  not  appear  to  me,  in  spite  of what  M.  Gouvon  hadtold  me,  that  anyone  thought  of making  any  use  of me.  Other  thingscame  in the  way,  and  I was  almost  forgotten.  The  Marquis  de Breil,the  Comte  de Gouvon’s  son,  was  at  the  time  ambassador  at  Vienna.Events  happened  at  court  which  made  themselves  felt  in the  family,and  for  some  weeks  everyone  was  in a  state  of excitement  which  leftlittle  time  to  think  of  me.  However,  up  to  that  time  I had  relaxedlittle  of my  zeal.  One  thing  did  me  both  good  and  harm;  good,  bykeeping  me  away  from  any  outside  distractions;  harm,  by makingme a little  less  attentive  to  my  duties.Mademoiselle  de  Breil  was  a  young  lady  of  nearly  my  own  age,well  formed,  tolerably  good-looking,  fresh-complexioned,  with  verydark  hair, and, although  a  brunette,  she had  the expression  of gentle-ness  which  is peculiar  to  fair  women,  and  which  my  heart  has  neverbeen  able  to  resist.  Her  court  dress,  so  becoming  to  young  people,showed  her  beautiful  figure  to  advantage,  left  her  breast  and  shoul-ders  free,  and  made  her  complexion  still  more  dazzling  by reasonof  the  mourning  which  was  worn  at  the  time.  It  will  be  said  thata  servant  has  no  business  to  notice  such  things;  I was  wrong,  nodoubt,  but  I noticed  them  all  the  same,  and  I was  not  the  only  onewho  did  so.  The  maitre  d'hôtel  and  the  valets  de  chambre  some-times  spoke of them  at  table  with  a coarseness  which  made  me  suffercruelly.  My  head  was  not,  however,  so  turned  that  I fell  in  lovewithout  more  ado.  I did  not  forget  myself;  I kept  myself  in  myplace,  and  even  my  desires  were  not  allowed  too  much  freedom.  Iliked  to  see  Mademoiselle  de  Breil,  to  hear  her  say  a  few  wordsINCIDENT  AT  DINNER97which  showed  her  intelligence,  good  sense  and  modesty;  my  ambi-tion,  limited  to  the  pleagure  of serving  her,  never  went  beyond  myrights.  At  table  I was  always  on  the  look  out  to  assert  them.  If herfootman  left  her  chair  for  a moment,  I was  behind  it immediately;otherwise  I stood  opposite  to  her;  I looked  in  her  eyes  to  see  whatshe  was  going  to  ask  for, and  watched  for the  moment  to  change  herplate.  What  would  I not  have  done  if she  would  only  have  deignedto give me  some  order,  to  look  at me,  to  address  a  single  word  to  me!but  no!  I had  the  mortification  of being  nothing  to  her;  she  did  noteven  notice  that  I was  there.  However,  on  one  occasion,  when  herbrother,  who  sometimes  spoke  to  me  at  table,  addressed  a  somewhatuncivil  remark  to  me,  I gave  him  an  answer,  so  neat  and  so  wellexpressed,  that  she  noticed  it  and  turned  her  eyes  upon  me.  Thisglance,  rapid  as  it  was,  nevertheless  enchanted  me.  The  next  day,the  opportunity  of  winning  a  second  glance  presented  itself,  and  Itook  advantage  of  it.  A  big  dinner  was  given  on  that  occasion,  atwhich  for  the  first  time  I saw  the  maitre  d'hôtel,  to  my  great  aston-ishment,  waiting  with  his  hat  on  his  head  and  a  sword  at  his  side.By chance  the  conversation  turned  upon  the  motto  of  the  house  ofSolar,  which  was  embroidered  under  the  coat-of-arms,  Tel  fiert  quine  tue  pas.  As  the  Piedmontese  are  not,  as  a  rule,  masters  of  theFrench  language,  someone  detected  in  this  motto  a  mistake  inspelling,  and  declared  that  there  should  be no  ¢ in  the  word  fiert.The  old  Comte  de Gouvon  was  just going  to  answer,  but, happen-ing to  look  at  me,  saw  that  I was  smiling  without  venturing  to  sayanything,  and  ordered  me  to  speak.  I thereupon  said  that  I did  notbelieve  that  the  z was  unnecessary;  that fiert was  an  old French  word,not  derived  from  ferus,  proud,  threatening,  but from  ferit, he strikes,he wounds;  so  that  the  meaning  of the  motto  appeared  to  me  to  be,not,  Many  a  man  threatens,  but,  Many  a  man  strikes  and  does  notkill.All  the  company  looked  first  at  me  and  then  at  themselves  with-out  saying  a  word.  I had  never  seen  such  astonishment  in  my  life.But  what  flattered  me  more  was  to  see  from  Mademoiselle  de Breil’sface  that  she  was  evidently  much  pleased.  This  disdainful  younglady condescended  to  cast  a  second  glance  at  me,  which,  at  least,  wasequal  to  the  first;  then,  turning  her  eyes  towards  her  grandfather,THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU98she  appeared  to  be  waiting  with  a  sort  of  impatience  for  the  com-pliment  which  was  my  due,  and  which  he, in  fact,  paid me  so  fullyand  completely,  and  with  the  appearance  of  such  satisfaction,  thatthe  whole  table  hastened  to  join  in  the  chorus.  The  moment  wasbrief,  but  in  every  respect  delicious.  It  was  one  of  those  moments,only too  rare,  which  replace  things in their  natural  order,  and  avengedepreciated  merit  for  the  insults  of  fortune.  A  few  minutes  after-wards,  Mademoiselle  de  Breil,  lifting  her  eyes  to  me  again,  askedme,  in  a  timid  and  affable  voice,  to  give  her  something  to  drink.  Ineed  not  say  that  I did  not  keep  her  waiting;  but,  as  I came  near  to.  her,  I trembled  so  violently  that,  having  filled  the  glass  too  full,  Ispilt  some  of  the  water  over  her  plate,  and  even  over  herself.  Herbrother  asked  me  thoughtlessly  why  I was  trembling  so?  This  ques-tion  did  not  serve  to  reassure  me,  and  Mademoiselle  de Breil  blushedup  to  the  whites  of her  eyes.Here  ended  the  romance,  in  which  it will  be  observed,  as  in  thecase  of Madame  Basile  and  during  all  the  rest  of my  life,  that  I amnot  happy  in  the  conclusion  of  my  amours.  In  vain  I paid  specialattention  to  Madame  de Breil’s  ante-room;  I did  not  obtain  anothermark  of attention  from  her  daughter.  She  went  in  and  out  withoutlooking  at  me,  and,  as  for  myself,  I hardly  ventured  to  cast  eyesupon  her.  I was  even  so  stupid  and  awkward  that,  one  day,  whenshe  dropped  her  glove  while  passing,  instead  of  darting  upon  thisglove  which  I should  have  liked  to  cover  with  kisses,  I did  not  dareto  leave  my  place;  and  I allowed  it to  be picked  up  by a  great  lout  ofa  valet,  whom  I  would  gladly  have  throttled.  To  complete  mynervousness,  I perceived  that  I had  not  the  good  fortune  to  pleaseMadame  de  Breil.  She  not  only  gave  me  no  orders,  but  neveraccepted  my  services;  and  on  two  occasions,  finding  me  in her  ante-room,  she  asked  me  coldly  if  I had  not  something  to  de.  I wasobliged  to  renounce  this  dear  ante-room;  at  first  I regretted  it, butdistractions  intervened,  and  soon  I thought  no  more  of  it.The  kindness  of her  stepfather,  who  at  last  perceived  that  I wasthere,  consoled  me  for  the  coldness  of  Madame  de  Breil.  Duringthe  evening  after  the  dinner  of which  I have  spoken,  he held  a  con-versation  with  me  for half-an-hour,  with  which  he appeared  satisfied,and  I was  delighted.  This  good  old  man,  although  less  gifted  thansTUTORED  BY  ABBÉ  DE  GOUVON99Madame  de Vercellis,  had  more  heart,  and  I got on  better  with  him.He  told  me  to  attach  myself  to  the  Abbé  de Gouvon,  who  had  con-ceived  a  regard  for  me;  that  this  regard,  if  I made  good  use  of it,might be useful  to me,  and  assist  me  in acquiring  what  I still  lacked,in order  to  promote  what  they had  in view  for me.  Next  morning,  I,hastened  to  the  Abbé.  He  did  not  receive  me  as  a  servant,  but  mademe  sit  down  by the  side  of  the  fire,  and,  questioning  me  with  thegreatest  gentleness,  soon  discovered  that  my  education,  which  hadbeen  commenced  in so  many  things,  was  complete  in none.  Finding,especially,  that  I knew  very  little  Latin,  he  undertook  to.  teach  memore.  It was  arranged  that  I should  go  to  him  every  morning,  andI commenced  the  following  day. Thus,  by one  of those  curious  coin-cidences,  which  will  often  be found  in  the  course  of my  life,  I wasat  once  above  and  below  my  station—I  was  pupil  and  valet  in  thesame  house;  and,  while  still  a  servant,  I had  a  tutor  of  such  noblebirth  that  he  ought  to  have  been  the  tutor  of none  but  kings’  sons.The  Abbé  de  Gouvon  was  a  younger  son,  destined  by his  familyfor  a  bishopric;  and  for  this  reason  his  studies  had  been  pushed  onmore  than  usual  in the case  of children  of rank. He  had  been  sent  tothe  University  of  Sienna,  where  he  remained  several  years,  and‘from  which  he  had  brought  back a tolerably  strong  dose  of  crus-cantism,!  so  that  he  was  almost  the  same  at  Turin  as  the  Abbé  deDangeau”  had  formerly  been  at  Paris.  Distaste  for  theology  haddriven  him  to  Jelles-lettres—a  very  common  thing  in  Italy  in  thecase  of those  who  are  training  for  the rank  of a  prelate.  He  had  readthe poets  attentively,  and  wrote  tolerable  Latin  and  Italian  verses.  Ina  word,  he  had  sufficient  taste  to  form  my  own,  and  to  introducesome  order  into  the confused  mass  with  which  my  head  was  stuffed,But,  whether  it was  that  my  chatter  had  given  him a false  idea  ofmy  knowledge,  or  that  he  could  not  endure  the  tedium  of the  ele-ments  of Latin,  he put me  far too  high to  begin with;  and, no  sooner1  Cruscantism  is here  synonymous  with  purism.  The  word  cruscante,  in Italian,denotes  a  man  who  affects  to  use  only  words  authorised  by the  Accademia  dellaCrusca  of  Florence.2 The  Abbé  de Dangeau  was  a  member  of the  Académie  française  in  the  middleof  the  previous  century,  and  was  the  author  of  grammatical  treatises  on  theFrench  language.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU100had  he made  me  translate  a  few  fables  of Phaedrus,  than  he plungedme  into  Virgil,  of which  I scarcely  understood  anything.  It was  myfate,  as  will  be  afterwards  seen,  often  to  begin  Latin  afresh  andnever  to  learn  it.  However.  I worked  zealously  enough,  and  theAbbé  lavished  his  attention  upon  me  with  a  kindness  of  which  Icannot  think,  even  now,  without  ernotion.  I spent  a  good  part  of themorning  with  him, both  for my  own  instruction  and  for his  service—not  personal  service,  for  that  he  never  allowed  me  to  perform,  but towrite  from  his  dictation  and  to  do  copying;  and  my  duties  as  secre-tary  were  more  useful  to  me  than  my  studies  as  pupil.  In this  mannerI not  only  learnt  Italian  in  its  purity,  but  I imbibed a taste  for  litera-ture,  and  acquired  some  knowledge  of good  books  which  had  beenimpossible  at  La  Tribu’s,  and  which  proved  very  serviceable  to  meafterwards  when  I began  to  work  by myself.This  was  the  period  of my  life  when,  without  romantic  projects,I might  most  reasonably  have  hoped  for  success.  The  Abbé,  whowas  well  satisfied  with  me,  told  everybody;  and  his  father  had  con-ceived  so  special  a  regard  for  me  that  the  Comte  de  Favria  told  methat  he  had  spoken  of me  to  the  King.  Even  Madame  de  Breil  hadlaid  aside  her  contemptuous  demeanour  towards  me.  In  short,  Ibecame a sort  of favourite  in  the  house,  to  the  great  jealousy  of theother  servants,  who,  seeing  me  honoured  by receiving  instructionfrom  their  master’s  son,  well  understood  that  I was  not  long  in-tended  to  remain  one  of themselves.As  far  as  I was  able  to  judge  of  the  views  entertained  for  mefrom  a  few  words  hastily  dropped,  upon  which  I  only  reflectedlater,  it seems  to  me  that  the  house  of Solar,  eager  for  ambassadorial,and  possibly,  in the  future,  ministerial  offices,  would  have  been  veryglad  to  educate  in  advance  a  trustworthy  and  talented  person,  whobeing  entirely  dependent  upon  it, might  have  been  received  into  itsconfidence  and  have  served  it faithfully.  This  project  of the  Comtede  Gouvon  was  noble,  judicious,  generous,  and  truly  worthy  of  agreat  nobleman,  beneficent  and  far-seeing;  but,  not  to  mention  that,at  the  time,  I did  not  see  its  entire  range,  it was  too  sensible  for  meto  understand,  and  required  too  long  a  period  of  submission.  Myfoolish  ambition  only looked  for good  fortune  in the  midst  of adven-tures;  and,  as  no  woman  had  anything  to  do  with  it, this  means  ofM.  BACLEIOIsucceeding  seemed  to me  slow,  wearisome,  and  dull; whereas  I oughtto  have  considered  it safe and  more  honourable,  for the  very  reasonthat  no  women  were  mixed  up  in  it, seeing  that  the  kind  of  meritwhich  they take  under  their  protection  was  assuredly  not  so  honour-able  as  that  which  I was  supposed  to  possess.Everything  was  going  on  admirably.  I had  gained,  almost  takenby storm,  the  respect  of all;  the  time  of  probation  was  over,  and  inthe  house  I was  looked  upon  generally  as  a  young  man  of  greatpromise  who  was  not  in  his  proper  place,  but  whom  everyone  ex-pected  to  see  promoted  to  it.  But  my  place  was  not  that  which  wasgenerally  assigned  to  me,  and  I was  destined  to  reach  it by a  verydifferent  road.  I now  come  to  one  of those  characteristic  traits  whichare  peculiar  ta  me,  and  which  I need  only  put  before  the  readerwithout  further  discussion.Although  there  were  several  new  converts  like  myself  at  Turin,I was  not  fond  of  them  and  had  never  wished  to  see  any  of  them.But  I had  made  the  acquaintance  of  some  Genevese  who  did  notbelong  to  them,  amongst  others,  a  M.  Mussard,  surnamed  Tord-gueule,  a  miniature-painter  and  a sort  of  connection  of  mine.  Hefound  out  that  I was  staying  with  the  Comte  de  Gouvon  and  cameto  see  me  with  another  Genevese,  named  Bacle,  whose  companion  Ihad  been  during  my  apprenticeship.  This  Bacle  was  a  very  amusingfellow,  very  lively,  and  full  of  witty  sallies  which  his  age  renderedagreeable.  Behold  me,  then,  suddenly  infatuated  with  M.  Bacle  tosuch  a  degree  that  I was  unable  to  leave  him!  He  intended  soon  toset  out  on  his  return  to  Geneva.  What  a  loss  for  me!  I realised  itsfull  extent.  In  order,  at  least,  to  make  the  best  use  of the  time  thatremained  to  me,  I never  left  his  side,  or: rather,  he never  left  me,  forI did  not  at  first  lose  my  head  so  entirely  as  to  spend  the  day  withhim  outside  the  hotel  without  leave;  but  soon,  seeing  that  he  oc-cupied  my  time  entirely,  they  forbade  him  the  house,  and  I becameso  enraged  that,  forgetting  everything  except  my  friend  Bacle,  Inever  went  near  the  Abbé  or  the  Count,  and  was  never  seen  in  thehouse.  I paid no  heed  to  reprimands.  I was  threatened  with  dismissal,and  this  proved  my  ruin;  it showed  me  that  it was  possible  not  to  letBacle  go unaccompanied.  From  this moment  I saw  no  other  pleasure,no  other  destiny,  no  other  happiness,  than  that  of making  a  similarTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU102journey,  and  I saw  nothing  but  the  unspeakable  bliss  of the journey,at  the  end  of  which,  as  a  further  happiness,  I perceived  Madame  deWarens,  but  in  the  remote  distance;  for  I never  had  the  least  ideaof  returning  to  Geneva.  Mountains,  meadows,  woods,  brooks,  vil-lages,  passed  in  never-ending  succession  before  me  with  freshcharms;  this  happy  journey  appeared  to  absorb  my  whole  life.  I re-called  with  delight  how  charming  this  same  journey  had  seemed  tome  on  my  way  to  Turin.  What  would  it be  like  when,  in  additionto  all the  charm  of independence,  I should  enjoy  the  further  delightof the  companionship  of a  friend  of my  own  age  and  tastes,  and  ofcheerful  temper,  without  restraint,  without  duties,  without  check,without  being obliged  to  go or  remain  anywhere  unless  it pleased  us!I thought  that  a man  must  be a  fool  to  sacrifice  such  good  fortune  toambitious  plans,  slow,  difficult,  and  uncertain  of  fulfilment,  which,even  supposing  them  to  be  some  day  realised,  in  spite  of  all  theirbrilliancy,  were  not  worth  a  quarter  of an  hour  of real  pleasure  andyouthful  freedom.Full  of this  wise  idea, I behaved  in such  a  manner  that  I succeededin  getting  myself  dismissed,  although,  in  truth,  not  without  con-siderable  difficulty.  One  evening,  on  my  return  to  the  house,  themaitre  d'hôtel  gave  me  my  dismissal  from  the  Count.  This  wasexactly  what  I wanted;  for,  well  aware,  in  spite  of  myself,  of  theextravagance  of my  conduct,  in order  to  excuse  myself,  I added  to  itinjustice  and  ingratitude,  thinking  that,  in  this  manner,  I shouldbe able  to  lay the  blame  upon  others,  and  justify  myself,  as  if  I hadbeen  obliged  to  take  measures  for  which  I had  been  solely  responsi-  -ble.  The  Comte  de Favria  sent  a  message  that  I was  to  go and  speakto  him  before  I left  on  the  following  morning;  and,  as  they  saw  thatI had  completely  lost  my  head  and  was  quite  capable  of doing noth-ing  of  the  kind,  the  maitre  d'hôtel  informed  me  that,  after  I haddone  so,  he would  give me  a  sum  of money  which  was  intended  forme,  and  which  I certainly  did  not  deserve;  for,  as  it had  not  beenintended  that  I should  remain  in  the  position  of  a  valet,  no  wageshad  been  fixed  for  me.The  Comte  de  Favria,  young  and  thoughtless  as  he  was,  on  thisoccasion  spoke  to  me  most  sensibly—I  might  almost  say,  most  ten-derly—so  earnestly  and  in  such  a  flattering  and  touching  manner=DISMISSED  FROM  THE  HOUSEHOLD103did  he  put  before  me  his  uncle’s  sympathy  and  his  grandfather’sintentions  in  regard  tome.  At  last,  after  having  represented  to  me,as  strongly  as  he  was  able,  all  the  advantages  I was  sacrificing  inorder  to  rush  to  my  own  destruction,  he  offered  to  make  peace  forme,  on  the  sole  condition  that  I would  give up  the  little  wretch  whohad  led  me  astray.  It was  so  evident  that  he did  not  say  all this  on  hisown  responsibility,  that,  in  spite  of  my  foolish  blindness,  I  wassensible  of all  the  kindness  of my  old  master  and  felt  touched  by it;but my  beloved  journey  was  too  deeply  impressed  upon  my  imagina-tion  for  anything  to  be able  to  outweigh  its  attractions.  I was  quiteout  of my  mind;  I grew  callous  and  hardened,  stood  on  my  dignityand  answered  haughtily  that,  as  I had  received  my  dismissal,  I hadaccepted  it; that  there  was  no  time  now  to  recall  it; and  that,  what-ever  might  happen  to  me  during  my  life,  I was  determined  not  toallow  myself  to  be dismissed  twice  from  the  same  house.  Then  theyoung  man,  justly  irritated,  called  me  the  names  I deserved,  tookme  by the  shoulders  and  put  me  out  of his  room,  and  shut  the  doorbehind  me.  I went  out  in triumph,  as  if I had  just gained a brilliantvictory;  and,  for  fear  of being  obliged  to  endure  a  second  struggle,I was  base  enough  to  depart  without  thanking  the  Abbé  for  hiskindness.To  form  an  idea  of the  lengths  to  which  my  madness  carried  meat  this  moment,  one  ought  to  know  to  what  a  degree  my  heart  isliable  to  become  heated  about  the  smallest  trifles,  and  how  violentlyit plunges  into  the  idea  of the  object  which  attracts  it, however  idleand  worthless  this  object  may  be.  The  oddest,  the  most  childish,  themost  foolish  plans  flatter  and  support  my  favourite  idea,  in order  toconvince  me  of the  reasonableness  of devoting  myself  to  it.  Wouldit be believed  that  anyone,  almost  nineteen  years  of age,  could  placehis hopes of support  for the  rest  of his life  on  an  empty  bottle?  Thenlisten.The  Abbé  de Gouvon,  some  weeks  before,  had  made  me  a  presentof  a  pretty  little  heron-fountain,®  with  which  I was  delighted.  Aswe  were  constantly  playing  with  this  artificial  fountain,  while  talk-ing about  our  journey,  the  wise  Bacle  and  myself  thought  that  the3 Fontaine  de  héron:  the  proper  name  is fontaine  de Hièron,  called  after  its in-ventor,  Hiero  of Alexandria.104THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUone  might  prove  very  serviceable  in  lengthening  the  other.  Whatcould  there  be  more  curious  in  the  world  than  a  heron-fountain?This  axiom  was  the  foundation  upon  which  we  built  the  edifice  ofour  future  fortune.  We  need  only  assemble  the  peasants  of  eachvillage  round  our  fountain,  and  food  and  all  kinds  of  good  cheerwould  be  showered  upon  us  in  so  much  greater  abundance,  as  wewere  both  convinced  that  provisions  cost  nothing  to  those  whoprocure  them,  and  that,  if they  do  not  stuff  passers-by  with  them,it is pure  ill-will  on  their  part.  Everywhere  we  expected  weddingsand  festivities,  reckoning  that,  without  further  expenditure  than  thebreath  of our  lungs  and  the  water  of our  fountain,  it would  pay  ourway  through  Piedmont,  Savoy,  France—in  fact,  all  over  the  world.We  made  endless  plans  for  our  journey,  and  first  took  our  waynorthwards,  more  for  the  pleasure  of  crossing  the  Alps  than  withthe  idea  that  we  should  be  obliged  to  stop  anywhere  at  last.[1731-1732.]—-Such  was  the  plan with  which I set  out,  abandon-ing without  regret  my  protector,  my  tutor,  my  studies,  my  hopes andthe  expectation  of  a  fortune  almost  assured,  to  begin  the  life  of  aregular  vagabond.  I said  good-bye  to  the  capital,  to  the  court,  toambition,  vanity,  love,  pretty  women,  and  all  the  exciting  adven-tures,  the  hope of which  had  brought  me  there  the  year  before.  I setout  with  my  fountain  and  my  friend  Bacle,  with  a  light  purse  buta  heart  filled  with  joy,  thinking  of  nothing  but  the  enjoyment  ofthis  reving  happiness  to  which  I had  suddenly  limited  my  brilliantprojects.I made  this  extravagant  journey  quite  as  agreeably  as  I had  ex-pected,  but  not  exactly  in  the  same  way;  for, although  our  fountainamused  the  landladies  and  their  servants  for  a  few  moments  at  theinns,  we  had  to  pay  just  the  same  when  we  went  out.  But  thistroubled  us  little,  and  we  only  thought  of  seriously  utilising  thisresource  when  our  money  failed  us.  An  accident  spared  us  thetrouble,  the  fountain  broke  when  we  were  near  Bramant;  and,  in-deed,  it was  time,  for  we  felt, without  venturing  to  admit  it, that  wewere  beginning  to  get  tired  of  it.  This  misfortune  made  us  morecheerful  than  before,  and  we  laughed  greatly  at  our  folly  in  for-getting  that  our  clothes  and boots  would  wear  out,  and  in believingthat  we  should  be  able  to  get  new  ones  by making  our  fountainRETURN  TO  ANNECY105play. We  continued  our  journey  as  cheerfully  as  we  had  commencedit, but  making  our  way  g little  more  directly  towards  the goal whichthe  gradual  exhaustion  of our  resources  made  it necessary  for  us  tereach.At  Chambéri  I became  thoughtful,  not  on  account  of  the  follywhich  I had  just  committed—no  man  ever  knew  how  te  consolehimself  so  rapidly  or  so  completely  in  regard  to  the  past  -but  inregard  to  the reception  which  awaited  me  from  Madame  de Warens;for I looked  upon  her  house  quite  as  my  own  home.  I had  written  toinform  her  of my  entry  into  the Comte  de Gouvon’s  house;  she knewon  what  footing  I stood  there,  and,  while  congratulating  me,  shehad  given  me  some  excellent  advice  as  to  the  manner  in  which  Iought  to  requite  the  kindness  shown  to  me.  She  looked:  upon  myfortune  as  assured,  unless  I destroyed  it  by  my  own  fault.  Whatwould  she  say  when  she  saw  me  arrive?  The  possibility  of her  shut-ting the  door  upon  me  never  occurred  to  me;  but  I was  afraid  of thesorrow  which  I was  about  to  cause  her;  I was  afraid  of  her  re-proaches,  harder  for  me  to  bear  than  the  greatest  misery.  I resolvedto  endure  all  in  silence,  and  to  do  all  I could  to  calm  her.  In  theworld  I saw  no  one  but  her;  to  live  in  disgrace  with  her  was  animpossibility!  What  troubled  me  most  was  my  travelling  com-panion,  with  whom I had  no  desire  to  burden  her,  and  whom  I wasafraid  I should  find  it no  easy  matter  to  get  rid  of.  I prepared  himfor  the  separation  by treating  him  somewhat  coldly  on  the  last  day,The  rascal  understood  me;  he  was  more  a  madman  than a fool.  ]thought  he  would  take  my  fickleness  to  heart;  I was  wrong;  myfriend  Bacle  took  nothing  to  heart.  Hardly  had  we  set  foot  inAnnecy,  when  he  said  to  me:  “Here  you  are  at  home,”  embracedme,  said  good-bye,  turned  round  on  his heel, and  disappeared.  I havenever  heard  of him  since.  Our  acquaintance  and  friendship  lastedabout  six  months  in  all;  their  consequences  will  remain  as  long  asI live.How  my  heart  beat  as  I drew  near  to  her  house!  My legs trembledbeneath  me;  my  eyes  seemed  covered  with  a  veil;  I saw  nothing,  Iheard  nothing,  I should  not  have  recognised  anybody;  I was  obligedto stop  several  times  to  recover  my  breath  and  compose  myself.  Wasit the  fear  of not  obtaining  the  assistance  I needed  that  troubled  me106THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUso?  does  the  fear  of  starvation  cause  such  alarm  to  a  person  of  myage?  No!  that  I can  declare  with  as  much  truth  as  pride;  never,  atany  moment  of my  life,  has  self-interest  or  want  been  able  to  openor  shut  my  heart.  In  the  course  of a  life,  uneven  and  memorable  forits vicissitudes,  often  without  shelter  and  bread,  I have  always  lookedwith  the  same  eye  upon  wealth  and  poverty.  In  time  of need  I couldhave  begged  or  stolen  like  anybody  else,  but  never  distressed  myselfin consequence  of being  reduced  to  do  so.  Few  men  have  sighed  somuch  as  I, few  have  shed  so  many  tears  in  their  life;  but  never  haspoverty  or  the  fear  of  being  reduced  to  it made  me  utter  a  sigh  orshed  a  tear.  My  soul,  proof  against  fortune,  has  never  known  trueblessings  or  misfortunes  other  than  those  which  do not  depend  uponher;  and,  when  I am  in  want  of  nothing  that  is  needful,  that  isjust  the  time  when I feel  myself  the  unhappiest  of  mortals.No  sooner  had  I shown  myself  to  Madame  de  Warens,  than  hermanner  reassured  me.  I trembled  at  the  first  sound  of  her  voice.  Ithrew  myself  at  her  feet, and,  in transports  of liveliest  joy, I fastenedmy  lips upon  her  hand.  I do  not  know  whether  she  had  heard  anynews  of me,  but  her  face  showed  little  surprise  and  no  displeasure.“Poor  little  one,”  she  said,  in  a  caressing  voice,  “here  you  are  againthen?  I knew  you  were  too  young  for the journey.  I am  glad,  at  anyrate,  that  it has  not  turned  out  so  badly  as  I had  feared.”  Then  shemade  me  tell my  story,  which  was  not  a  long one,  and  which I faith-fully  related,  suppressing  a  few  details,  but  otherwise  neither  spar-ing nor  excusing  myself.It was  a  question  where  I was  to  sleep.  She  consulted  her  maid.  Ihardly  ventured  to  breathe  during  the  discussion;  but  when  I heardthat  I was  to  sleep  in  the  house  I could  scarcely  contain  myself,  andI saw  my  little  bundle  carried  into  the  room  appointed  for  me  withmuch  the  same  feelings  as  St.  Preux  saw  his  chaise  taken  intoMadame  de  Wolmar’s*  coach-house.  To  increase  my  delight,  Ilearned  that  this  favour  was  not  to  be  a  passing  one,  and,  at  themoment  when  I was  believed  to  be  thinking  of  something  quitedifferent,  I heard  her  say:  “Let  them  say  what  they like;  since  Provi-dence  sends  him  back  to  me,  I am  resolved  not  to  abandon  him.”Thus  I was  at  last  settled  in her  house.  This  settlement,  however,“Two  of the  characters  in  the  “New  Héloise.”sLOVE  AND  FRIENDSHIP107was  not  as  yet that  from  which J date  the  happy  days of my  life, butit  served  to  pave  the  way  for  it.  Although  this  sensibility  of  theheart,  which  makes  us  truly  enjoy  ourselves,  is the  work  of Nature,and,  perhaps,  a  product  of  the  organisation,  it  requires  certainsituations  to  develop  it.  Without  such  developing  causes,  a  manborn  with  powerful  susceptibilities  would  feel  nothing,  and  would,perhaps,  die  without  ever  having  known  his  real  self.  Up  to  thattime,  it had  been  so,  or  nearly  so,  with  me:  and  I should,  perhaps,have  always  remained  such,  if  I had  never  known  Madame  deWarens,  or  if,  having  known  her,  I had  not  lived  with  her  longenough  to  contract  the  sweet  habit  of  affectionate  feelings  withwhich  she  inspired  me.  I venture  to  say  that  he  who  only  feels  lovedoes  not  feel  what  is  sweetest  in  life.  I know  another  feeling,  lessimpetuous,  perhaps,  but  a  thousand  times  more  delightful,  whichis sometimes  combined  with  love,  but  is frequently  separated  fromit. This  feeling  is not  simple  friendship  either;  it is more  voluptuous,more  tender.  I do  not  believe  that  it can  be  felt  for  a  person  of thesame  sex;  at  any  rate,  I was  a friend,  if ever  a man  was,  and  I neverfelt  it in  the  presence  of  any  of  my  friends.  This  is  somewhat  ob-scure,  but  it  will  become  clear  in  the  sequel;  feelings  can  only  besatisfactorily  described  by  their  effects.Madame  de  Warens  lived  in  an  old  house,  large  enough  to  con-tain  a  pretty  spare  room,  which  she  made  her  drawing-room;  in  thisI was  lodged.  It led  into  the  passage  of which  I have  already  spoken,where  our  first  interview  took  place;  on  the  other  side  of the  brookand  the  gardens  the  country  could  be  seen.  This  view  was  not  amatter  of indifference  to  the  youthful  occupant.  Since  I had  lived  atBossey,  it was  the  first  time  that  I had  seen  anything  green  beforemy  windows.  Always  surrounded  by  walls,  I had  nothing  beforemy  eyes  except  the  roofs  of  houses  or  the  dull  grey  of  the  streets.How  vividly  I felt  the  charm  of  novelty,  which  strengthened  myinclination  to  tender  emotions!  I looked  upon  this  enchanting  land-scape  as  another  of  my  dear  patroness’s  kindnesses;  it  seemed  teme  that  she  had  put  everything  there  on  purpose  for  me;  I placedmyself  in  it  by  her  side  full  of  peaceful  contentment;  I saw  hereverywhere,  in the midst  of the flowers  and  verdure;  her charms  andthose  of spring  melted  together  insensibly  before  my  eyes.  My heart,THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU108until  then  restricted,  expanded  in  this  unconfined  space,  and  mysighs  found  freer  vent  amongst  the  fruit-gardens.I did  not  find  with  Madame  de  Warens  the  magnificence  whichI had  seen  at  Turin,  but  I found  cleanliness,  neatness,  and  a  patri-archal  abundance,  with  which  pomp  and  pride  are  never  combined.She  had  little  plate,  no  porcelain,  no  game  in  the  larder,  no  foreignwines  in the  cellar;  but  both  kitchen  and  cellar  were  sufficiently  wellfurnished  for  anybody,  and  in  Delft-ware  cups  she  provided  excel-lent  coffee.  All  who  came  to  visit  her  were  invited  to  dine  with  heror  in  her  house;  no  workman,  messenger,  or  passer-by  left  withouteating  or  drinking.  Her  servants  consisted  of  a  rather  pretty  maidfrom  Fribourg,  named  Merceret;  a  valet  from  her  own  country,named  Claude  Anet,  of whom  more  will  be  said  later;  a  cook,  andtwo  hired  sedan-chair  carriers  for  the  rare  occasions  when  she  went`  to  pay  a  visit.  That  was  a  great  deal  for  a  yearly  pension  of  twothousand  livres;  nevertheless,  her little  income,  well  managed,  mighthave  been  sufficient  in  a  country  where  the  soil  is  very  good  andmoney  very  scarce.  Unfortunately,  economy  was  never  her  favouritevirtue;  she  got  into  debt  and  paid  what  she  could;  the  money  wentin  all  directions,  and  things  went  on  as  best  they  could.The  manner  in  which  her  establishment  was  arranged  was  justsuch  as  I should  have  chosen  myself;  it may  be imagined  that  I wasonly  too  pleased  to  take  advantage  of it.  What  was  less  pleasant  tome  was  to  be  obliged  to  remain  a  long  time  at  table.  She  couldscarcely  endure  the first  smell  of the  soup  and  other  dishes;  the  smellalmost  made  her  faint,  and  this  feeling  of  aversion  lasted  sometime.  By degrees  she  recovered  herself,  talked,  and  ate  nothing.  Itwas  at  least  half-an-hour  before  she  tried  to  eat  a  morsel.  I couldhave  eaten  three  dinners  in  the  time,  and  I had  always  finished  mymeal  long  before  she  had  begun.  For  the  sake  of keeping  her  com-pany,  I used  to  begin  again;  in this  manner  I ate  for  two,  and  neverfelt  any  the  worse  for  it.  In  a  word,  I abandoned  myself  the  morefreely  to  the  sweet  sensation  of  comfort,  which  I felt  when  withher, as  this  comfort  which  I enjoyed  was  free  from  all  uneasiness  asto  the  means  of  preserving  it.  Not  being  yet  admitted  with  com-plete  confidence  into  the  state  of  her  affairs,  I imagined  that  thepresent  state  of  things  would  always  continue.  I found  the  same.“MAMMA”  AND  “LITTLE  ONE”104.comfort  again  in  her  house  in  after  times;  but,  being  better  in-formed  as  to  her  real  pgsition,  and  seeing  that  she  drew  upon  herincome  in advance,  I never  enjoyed  it with  the  same  content.  Look-ing ahead  always  spoils  my  enjoyment.  It is not  the  least  use  to  meto  foresee  the  future;  I have  never  known  how  to  avoid  it.From  the  first  day,  the  most  complete  intimacy  was  establishedbetween  us,  which  has  continued  during  the  rest  of her  life.  “Littleone”  was  my  name;  “Mamma”  was  hers;  and  we  always  remained“Little  one”  and  “Mamma,”  even  when  advancing  years  had  almostobliterated  the  difference  between  us.  I find  that  these  two  namesgive  a  wonderfully  good  idea  of the  tone  of our  intercourse,  of thesimplicity  of our  manners,  and,  above  all, of the  mutual  relation  ofour  hearts.  For  me  she  was  the  tenderest  of  mothers,  who  neversought  her  own  pleasure,  but  always  what  was  best  for  me;  and  ifsensuality  entered  at  all  into  her  attachment  for  me,  it did  not  alterits character,  but  only  rendered  it more  enchanting,  and  intoxicatedme  with  the  delight  of  having  a  young  and  pretty  mamma  whomit was  delightful  to  me  to  caress—I  say  caress  in the  strictest  sense  ofthe  word,  for  it never  occurred  to  her  to  be  sparing  of  kisses  andthe  tenderest  caresses  of  a  mother,  and  it  certainly  never  enteredmy  mind  to  abuse  them.  It will  be objected  that,  in the  end,  we  hadrelations  of a  different  character;  I admit  it, but  I must  wait  a little—I  cannot  say  all  at  once.The  moment  of our  first  meeting  was  the  only  really  passionatemoment  which  she  has  ever  made  ine  feel;  yet this  moment  was  thework  of surprise.  My  looks  never  ventured  to  peep  indiscreetly  be-neath  her  neckerchief,  although  an  ill-concealed  embonpoint  mightvery  well  have  attracted  them.  I felt  no  transports  or  desires  in  herpresence.  I was  in  a  state  of charming  repose  and  enjoyment,  with-out  knowing  in  what  the  enjoyment  consisted.  I could  have  spentall my  life  in this  manner,  and  eternity  as  well,  without  a  moment'sweariness.  She  is the  only  person  with  whom  I have  never  felt  thatdearth  of conversation  which  makes  the  obligation  of keeping  it upa  martyrdom.  Our  #éte-d-tétes  were  not  so  much  conversations  asan  inexhaustible  gossip,  which  never  came  to  an  end  unless  it wasinterrupted.  There  was  no  need  to  invite  me  to  talk;  it was  far morenecessary  to  impose  silence  upon  me.  From  constantly  thinking  overTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUIIOher  plans,  she  often  fell  into  a  reverie.  Well,  then  I let  her  alone;  Iheld  my  tongue,  I looked  at  her,  and  was  the  happiest  of men.  I hadstill  a  singular  fancy.  Without  claiming  the  favour  of a  téte-a-téte,  Iincessantly  sought  one;  and  enjoyed  it  with  a  passion  which  de-generated  into  madness  when  troublesome  visitors  disturbed  it.  Assoon  as  anyone  came—whether  man  or  woman,  it  did  not  matterwhich—I  left  the  room  grumbling,  being  unable  to  remain  with  herin the  presence  of a  third  party.  I counted  the  minutes  in  her  ante-room,  cursing  these  eternal  visitors  a  thousand  times,  and  unableto  imagine  how  it was  that  they  had  so  much,  because  I myself  hadstill  more,  to  say.I only  felt  the  full  strength  of  my  attachment  when  I no  longersaw  her.  When  I saw  her,  I was  only  content;  but,  during  her  ab-sence,  my  restlessness  became  painful.  The  need  of living  with  hercaused  me  outbreaks  of  tenderness  which  often  ended  in  tears.  Ishall  never  forget  how,  on  the  day of a  great  festival,  while  she  wasat  vespers,  I went  for  a  walk  outside  the  town,  my  heart  full  of herimage  and  a  burning  desire  to  spend  my  life  with  her.  I had  senseenough  to  see  that  at  present  this  was  impossible,  and  that  the hap-piness  which  I enjoyed  so  deeply  could  only  be  short.  This  gave  tomy  reflections  a  tinge  of  melancholy,  about  which,  however,  therewas  nothing  gloomy,  and  which  was  tempered  by flattering  hopes.The  sound  of  the  bells,  which  always  singularly  affects  me,  thesong  of  the  birds,  the  beauty  of  the  daylight,  the  enchanting  land-scape,  the  scattered  country  dwellings  in  which  my  fancy  placedour  common  home—all  these  produced  upon  me  an  impressicn  sovivid,  tender,  melancholy  and  touching,  that  I saw  myself  trans-ported,  as  it were,  in ecstasy,  into  that  happy  time  and  place, whereinmy  heart,  possessing  all  the  happiness  it could  desire,  tasted  it withinexpressible  rapture,  without  even  a  thought  of sensual  pleasure.  Inever  remember  to  have  plunged  into  the  future  with  greater  forceand  illusion  than  on  that  occasion;  and  what  has  struck  me  most  inthe recollection  of this  dream  after  it had been  realised,  is that  I havefound  things  again  exactly  as  I had  imagined  them.  If  ever  thedream  of  a man  awake  resembled  a prophetic  vision,  it was  assuredlythat  dream  of mine.  I was  only deceived  in the  imaginary  duration;for the  days,  the  years,  and  our  whole  life  were  spent  in  serene  andATTACHMENT TO  MADAME  DE  WARENSIITundisturbed  tranquillity,  whereas  in  reality  it  lasted  only  for  amoment.  Alas!  my  most  fasting  happiness  belongs  to  a  dream,  thefulfilment  of  which  was  almost  immediately  followed  by  theawakening.I should  never  have  done,  if I were  to  enter  into  the  details  of allthe  follies  which  the  remembrance  of this  dear  mamma  caused  meto  commit  when  I was  no  longer  in  her  presence.  How  often  haveI kissed  my  bed,  since  she  had  slept in  it; my  curtains,  all  the  furni-ture  of my  room,  since  they belonged  to  her, and  her  beautiful  handhad  touched  them;  even  the  floor,  on  which  I prostrated  myself,since  she  had  walked  upon  it!  Sometimes,  even  in  her  presence,  Iwas  guilty of extravagances,  which  only the most  violent  love  seemedcapable  of inspiring.  At table  one  day, just when  she  had  put  a  pieceof food  into  her  mouth,  I exclaimed  that  I saw a hair  in  it; she  putback  the  morsel  on  her  plate,  and  I eagerly  seized  and  swallowed  it.In a  word,  between  myself  and  the  most  passionate  lover  there  wasonly  one,  but  that  an  essential,  point  of  distinction,  which  makesmy  condition  almost  unintelligible  and  inconceivable.I had  returned  from  Italy  not  quite  the  same  as  I had  entered  it,but  as,  perhaps,  no  one  of my  age  had  ever  returned  from  it.  I hadbrought  back,  not  my  mental  and  moral,  but  my  bodily  virginity.I had  felt  the  progress  of years;  my  restless  temperament  had  at  lastmade  itself  felt, and  its first  outbreak,  quite  involuntary,  had  causedme  alarm  about  my  health  in  a  manner  which  shows  better  thananything  else  the  innocence  in  which  I had  lived  up  to  that  time.Soon  reassured,  I  learned  that  dangerous  means  of  assisting  it,which  cheats  Nature  and  saves  up  for  young  men  of  my  tempera-ment  many  forms  of excess  at  the  expense  of their  health,  strength,and,  sometimes,  of their  life.  This  vice,  which  shame  and  timidityfind  so  convenient,  possesses,  besides  a  great  attraction  for  livelyimaginations—that  of being  able  to  dispose  of the  whole  sex  as  theydesire,  and  to  make  the  beauty  which  tempts  them  minister  to  theirpleasures,  without  being  obliged  to  obtain  its  consent.  Seduced  bythis  fatal  advantage,  I did  my  best  to  destroy  the  good  constitutionwhich  Nature  had  restored  to  me,  and  which  I had  allowed  time  tostrengthen  itself.  Add  to  this  habit  the circumstances  of my  position,living  as  I was  with  a  beautiful  woman,  caressing  her  image  in theTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUII2bottom  of  my  heart,  seeing  her  continually  throughout  the  day,surrounded  in  the  evening  by objects  which  reminded  me  of  her,sleeping  in the  bed  in which  I knew  she  had  slept!  What  causes  forexcitement!  Many  a  reader,  who  reflects  upon  them,  no  doubt  al-ready  considers  me  as  half-dead!  Quite  the  contrary;  that  whichought  to  have  destroyed  me  was  just  the  thing  that  saved  me,  atleast  for  2  time.  Intoxicated  with  the  charm  of living  with  her,  withthe  ardent  desire  of spending  my  life  with  her,  I always  saw  in her,whether  she  were  absent  or  present,  a  tender  mother,  a  belovedsister,  a  delightful  friend,  and  nothing  more.  I saw  her  always  thus,always  the  same,  and  I never  saw  anyone  but  her.  Her  image,  everpresent  to  iny  heart,  left  room  for  no  other;  she  was  for  me  the  onlywoman  in the  world;  and  the extreme  sweetness  of the  feelings  withwhich  she  inspired  me  did  not  allow  my  senses  time  to  awake  forothers,  and  protected  me  against  her  and  all her  sex.  In a  word,  I waschaste,  because  I loved  her.  Considering  these  results,  which  I canonly  imperfectly  describe,  let him  who  can  say  what  was  the  natureof my  attachment  for  her.  For  myself,  all  that  I can  say  about  it isthat,  if  it  already  seems  to  be  very  extraordinary,  in  the  sequel  itwill  appear  far  more  so.I  spent  my  time  in  the  pleasantest  manner  possible,  althoughoccupied  with  things  which  were  least  attractive  to  me.  There  wereplans  to  draw  up,  fair  copies  of  accounts  to  make,  recipes  to  tran-scribe,  herbs  to  pick out,  drugs  to  pound,  stills  to  werk.  In the  midstof all  this,  chance  travellers,  beggars,  and  visitors  of all  classes  keptcoming  in crowds;  we  were  obliged  to  entertain  at  one  and  the  sametime a soldier,  an  apothecary,  a  canon,  a fine  lady,  and a lay brother.I cursed,  I grumbled,  I swore,  I wished  the  whole  accursed  gang  atthe  devil.  Madame  de  Warens,  who  took  it  all  good-humouredly,laughed  at  my  rage  till  she  cried;  and  what  made  her  laugh  stillmore  was  to  see  me  the more  furious,  as  I was  unable  to  prevent  evenmyself  from  laughing.  These  brief  interruptions,  during  which  Ihad  the  pleasure  of grumbling,  were  delightful,  and,  if another  un-welcome  visitor  arrived  during  the  dispute,  she  knew  how  to  ex-tract  amusement  from  it by maliciously  prolonging  his  visit,  castingglances  at  me  for  which  I should  have  liked  to  beat  her.  She  couldhardly  keep  from  bursting  out  laughing,  when  she  saw  me,  re-=LIFE  AT  ANNECY113strained  and  kept  in  check  by politeness,  glaring  at  her  like  onepossessed,  while  in the  kottom  of my  heart,  and  even  in spite of my-self,  I found  it all  very  amusing.All  this, without  being pleasant  in itself,  nevertheless  amused  me,because  it formed  part  of a  kind  of  existence  which  was  delightfulto  me.  Of  all  that  was  going  on  around  me,  of all  that  I was  obligedto  do,  nothing  suited  my  taste,  but  everything  suited  my  heart.  Ibelieve  that  I should  have  come  to  like  medicine,  had  not  my  naturaldistaste  for  it  caused  those  comical  scenes  which  delighted  us  somuch;  this  is, perhaps,  the  first  time  that  this  art  has  produced  asimilar  effect.  I pretended  to  be able  to  recognise  a  medical  work  byits  smell,  and  the  amusing  thing  is that  I was  rarely  mistaken.  Shemade  me  taste  the  most  horrible  drugs.  It was  no  use  to  run  awayor  try  to  defend  myself;  in  spite  of my  resistance  and  wry  faces,  inspite  of  myself  and  my  teeth,  when  I saw  her  pretty  fingers,  allbesmeared,  near  my  mouth,  I was  obliged  at  last  to  open  it and  suckthem.  When  all  her  little  household  was  assembled  in  the  sameroom,  to  hear  us  running  about  and  shrieking  with  laughter,  any-one  would  have  thought  we  were  performing  some  farce,  insteadof compounding  opiates  and  elixirs..My time,  however,  was  not  entirely  occupied  with  these  fooleries,In  the  room  which  I occupied  I had  found  a  few  books:  the  “Spec-tator,”  “Puffendorf,”  “St.  Evremond,”  the  “Henriade.”  AlthoughI no  longer  had  my  old  mania  for  reading,  I read a little  when  I hadnothing  else  to  do.  The  “Spectator,”  especially,  pleased  me  andproved  beneficial  to  me.  The  Abbé  de  Gouvon  had  taught  me  toread  less  greedily  and  with  more  reflection;  and,  accordingly,  myreading  did  me  more  good.  I accustomed  myself  to  think  about  thelanguage  and  style, and  the elegance  of the constructions;  I practisedmyself  in  distinguishing  pure  French  from  my  provincial  idioms.For  instance,  I learned  to  correct  an  orthographical  error,  of whichI, in common  with  all us  Genevese,  was  guilty,  by the  two  followinglines  of  the  “Henriade”:“Soit  qu’un  ancien  respect  pour  le  sang  de  leurs  maitresParlât  encore  pour  lui  dans  le cceur  de  ces  traitres.”I was  struck  by this  word  parldt,  which  taught  me  that  the  third;THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUI14person  subjunctive  must  end  in  #,  whereas  formerly  I wrote  andpronounced  parla,  as  if it had  been  the  perfect  indicative.Sometimes  I talked  with  mamma  about  my  reading,  sometimesI read  to  her, which  afforded  me  great  pleasure.  I tried  to  read  well,and  this,  also,  was  useful  to  me.  I have  mentioned  that  she  had  acultivated  mind,  and  just  at  that  time  it  was  in  its  prime.  Severalmen  of letters  had  shown  themselves  eager  to  win  her  favour  andhad  taught  her  to  distinguish  the  productions  of genius.  Her  taste,if I may  say  so,  smacked  of Protestantism;  she  talked  only  of Bayle,and  thought  highly  of St.  Evremond,  who  had  died  some  time  agoin  France.  But  this  did  not  hinder  her  from  an  acquaintance  withgood  literature,  and  she  discussed  it  intelligently.  She  had  beenbrought  up in select  society  and  had  come  to  Savoy  while  still  young;in  the  charming  society  of the  nobility  of this  country  she  had  lostthe  affected  manners  of  the  Vaud  country,  where  women  considerattempts  at  wit  to  be  good  style,  and  can  only  speak  in epigrams.Although  she  had  only  a  passing  acquaintance  with  the  Court,she  had  cast  a  rapid  glance  at  it, which  had  been  sufficient  to  giveher  a  knowledge  of  it.  She  always  retained  her  friends  there,  and,in  spite  of  secret  jealousies,  in  spite  of  the  disapproval  excited  byher  conduct  and  her  debts,  she  never  lost  her  pension.  She  possessedknowledge  of the world  and  that  capacity  of reflection  which  makesthis  knowledge  useful.  Worldly  matters  formed  the  chief  topic  ofher  conversations,  and,  considering  my  romantic  ideas,  this  wasexactly  the  kind  of  instruction  of  which  I stood  most  in  need.  Wevead  La  Bruyére  together;  he pleased  her  better  than  La  Rochefou-cauld,  a  gloomy  and  comfortless  author,  especially  for  the  young,who  do  not  care  to  see  men  as  they  are.  When  she  moralised,  shesometimes  lost  herself  in  lengthy  discourses;  but,  by  kissing  hermouth  or  hands  from  time  to  time,  I managed  to  endure  it, and  herprolixity  ceased  to  weary  me.This  life  was  too  delightful  to  be  able  to  last.  I felt  this,  and  mydistress  at  the  thought  of  seeing  it  come  to  an  end  was  the  onlything that  disturbed  my  enjoyment  of it. In the midst  of her playful-ness,  mamma  studied,  observed,  and  questioned  me,  and  sketchedout  a  number  of  plans  for  my  advancement,  which  I could  wellM.  D’AUBONNE115have  dispensed  with.  Happily,  it  was  not  enough  to  know  myinclinations,  my  tastes,  my abilities;  it was  necessary  to  find  or  tocreate  opportunities  for  employing  them  profitably,  and  this  wasnot  the  work  of a  day.  The  prejudices  which  the  poor  woman  hadconceived  in  favour  of  my  talents,  served  to  defer  the  moment  of -putting  them  to  the  proof,  by making  her  more  particular  in regardto  the  choice  of means.  In  short,  everything  went  on  in  accordancewith  my  wishes,  thanks  to  her  good  opinion  of  me;  but,  sooner  orlater,  this  life  was  bound  to  come  to  an  end, and, from  that  moment,good-bye  to  all  hope  of  tranquillity.  One  of  her  relations,  a  M.d’Aubonne,  came  to  pay  her  a  visit.  He  was  a  man  of considerableendowments,  an  intriguer,  and  a  born  schemer  like  herself,  but  tooclever  to  allow  his  plans  to  ruin  him—a  sort  of adventurer.  He  hadjust  proposed  to  the  Cardinal  de  Fleury  a  very  intricate  plan  of  alottery,  which  had  not  met  with  approval.  He  was  now  going  to  layit before  the  Court  of Turin,  where  it was  adopted  and  carried  out.He  remained  some  time  at  Annecy  where  he  fell  in  love  with  thewife  of the  Intendant,  a  very  amiable  person  much  to  my  taste,  andthe only one  whom I cared  to  see  at  mamma’s  house.  M.  d’Aubonnesaw  me;  his  relative  spoke  of me  to  him;  he  undertook  to  examineme,  to  see  what  I was  fit  for,  and,  if he  found  anything  in  me,  toendeavour  to  get  me a place.Madame  de  Warens  sent  me  to  him  on  two  or  three  successivemornings,  on  the  pretence  of  executing  some  commission  for  her,and  without  giving  me  any  intimation  of the  truth.  He  succeededadmirably  in  making  me  talk,  became  quite  intimate  with  me,  putme  at  my  ease  as  far  as  possible,  spoke  to  me  about  matters  of  noimportance  and  all  kinds  of  subjects—all  without  appearing  towatch  me,  without  the  least  formality,  as  if  he  found  pleasure  inmy  society  and  desired  to  converse  with  me  without  restraint.  I wasenchanted  with  him.  The  result  of  his  observations  was  that,  inspite  of  my  attractive  appearance  and  animated  features,  I was,  ifnot  quite  silly,  a  lad  of little  intelligence,  without  any  ideas,  almostwithout  knowledge—in  a  word,  of very  limited  capacities  in  everyrespect;  and  that  the  highest  position  to  which  I had  any  right  toaspire  was  that  of some  day becoming a village  curé.  Such  was  theTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU£16account  of me  which  he gave  to  Madame  de Warens.  This  was  thesecond  or  the  third  time  that  I was  thus  judged;  it was  not  the  last,and  M.  Masseron’s  opinion  has  often  been  confirmed.The  reason  of the  judgments  passed  upon  me  is too  closely  con-nected  with  my  character  not  to  require  some  explanation;  for  tospeak  honestly,  it will  be  readily  understood  that  I cannot  subscribeto  them  unreservedly,  and  that,  with  all  possible  impartiality,  inspite  of  all  that  MM.  Masseron,  d’Aubonne,  and  many  others  mayhave  said,  I cannot  take  them  at  their  word.Two  things,  almost  incompatible,  are  united  in  me  in  a  mannerwhich  I  am  unable  to  understand:  a  very  ardent  temperament,lively  and  tumultuous  passions,  and,  at  the  same  time,  slowlydeveloped  and  confused  ideas,  which  never  present  themselves  untilit is  too  late.  One  might  say  that  my  heart  and  my  mind  do  notbelong  to  the  same  person.  Feeling  takes  possession  of my  soul  morerapidly  than  a  flash  of  lightning;  but,  instead  of  illuminating,  in-flames  and  dazzles  me.  I feel  everything  and  see  nothing.  I  amcarried  away  by my  passions,  but  stupid;  in  order  to  think,  I mustbe  cool.  The  astonishing  thing  is  that,  notwithstanding,  I exhibittolerably  sound  judgment,  penetration,  even  finesse,  if  I am  nothurried;  with  sufficient  leisure  I can  compose  excellent  impromptus;but  I have  never  said  or  done  anything  worthy  of notice  on  the  spurof the  moment.  I could  carry  on  a  very  clever  conversation  throughthe post,  as  the Spaniards  are  said  to  carry  on  a  game  of chess.  WhenI read  of that  Duke  of Savoy,  who  turned  round  on  his  journey,  inorder  to  cry,  “At  your  throat,  Parisian  huckster,”  I  said,  “Thereyou  have  myself!”This  sluggishness  of  thought,  combined  with  such  liveliness  offeeling,  not  only enters  into  my  conversation,  but  I feel  it even  whenalone  and  at  work.  My  ideas  arrange  themselves  in  my  head  withalmost  incredible  difficulty;  they  circulate  in  it  with  uncertainsound,  and  ferment  till  they excite  and  heat  me,  and  make  my  heartbeat  fast;  and,  in the  midst  of this  excitement,  I see  nothing  clearlyand  am  unable  to  write  a  single  word—I  am  obliged  to  wait.  Im-perceptibly  this  great  agitation  subsides,  the  confusion  clears  up,everything  takes  its proper  place,  but  slowly,  and  only after  a  periodof long and  confused  agitation,  Have  you  ever  been  to  the  opera  inHIS  DIFFICULTY  IN  WRITINGT7Italy?  During  the changes  of scene,  there  prevails  upon  the  stage  ofthose  vast  theatres  an  unpleasant  disorder  which  continues  for  sometime:  all  the  decorations  are  mixed  up,  things  are  pulled  about  indifferent  directions  in a  manner  most  painful  to  see,  which  producesthe  impression  that  everything  must  be  upset.  Gradually,  however,complete  order  is  restored,  nothing  is  wanting,  and  one  is  quite’astounded  to  see  an  enchanting  spectacle  succeed  this  long  con-tinued  disorder.  This  mode  of procedure  is almost  the  same  as  thatwhich  takes  place  in  my  brain  when  I attempt  to  write.  If  I hadknown  how  to  wait  first  and  then  to  restore  in  all  their  beauty  thethings  represented  therein,  few  writers  would  have  surpassed  me.Hence  comes  the  extreme  difficulty  which  I find  in  writing.  Mymanuscripts,  scratched,  smeared,  muddled  and  almost  illegible,bear  witness  to  the  trouble  they  have  cost  me.  There  is not  one  ofthem  which  I have  not  been  obliged  to  copy  four  or  five  times  beforeI could  give it to  the  printer.  I have  never  been  able  to  produce  any-thing,  pen  in  hand,  in  front  of  my  table  and  paper;  it is during  awalk,  in  the  midst  of  rocks  and  forests,  at  night  in  my  bed  whilelying  awake,  that  I write  in  my  brain;  one  may  judge  how  slowly,especially  in  the  case  of  a  man  utterly  without  verbal  memory  andwho  has  never  been  able  to  learn  six  lines  by heart  in his  life.  Manyof my  periods  have  been  turned  and  turned  again  five  or  six  nightsin my  head  before  they  were  fit to  be set  down  on  paper.  This,  also,is the  reason  why  I succeed  better  in  works  which  require  labour‘than  in those  which  require  to  be written  with  a  certain  lightness  ofstyle,  such  as  letters—a  style  of  which  I have  never  been  able  toproperly  catch  the  tone,  so  that  such  occupation  is a  perfect  tortureto me.  I cannot  write  a  letter  on  the most  trifling  subject,  which  doesnot  cost  me  hours  of fatigue;  or,  if I try  to  write  down  immediatelywhat  occurs  to  me,  I know  neither  how  to.  begin  nor  how  to  end;my  letter  is  a long  and  confused  mass  of verbosity,  and,  when  it isread,  my  meaning  is difficult  to  make  out.Not  only  is it painful  for  me  to  put  my  ideas  into  shape:  I also‘find  a  difficulty  in  grasping  them.  I have  studied  mankind,  andbelieve  that  I any  a  fairly  shrewd  observer;  nevertheless,  I cannot  seeclearly  anything  of all ‘that  I perceive;  I only  see-clearly  what  I re-“imember,  and  only  show  intelligence  in  my  recollections.  Of  allTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU118that  is said,  of all  that  is done,  of all that  goes  on  in my  presence,  Ifeel  nothing,  I see  through  nothing.  The  outward  sign  is the  onlything that  strikes  me.  But,  later,  all comes  back  to  me:  I recall  place,time,  manner,  look,  gesture,  and  circumstance:  nothing  escapes  me.Then,  from  what  people  have  said  or  done,  I discover  what  theyhave  thought;  and  I am  rarely  mistaken.If, when  alone  with  myself,  I am  so  little  master  of my  intellectualcapacity,  it may  be imagined  what  I must  be in conversation,  when,in order  to  speak to the purpose,  it is necessary  to think  of a thousandthings  at  the  same  time  and  at once.  The  mere  idea  of all the  usagesof  society—which  it is so  necessary  to  observe,  and  of  which  I amcertain  to  forget  one  or  other—is  enough  to  frighten  me.  I do  noteven  understand  how  anyone  can  dare  to  speak  at  all  in  society,where,  at  every  word,  it is essential  to  pass  in  review  all  those  whoare  present;  it is essential  to  be  acquainted  with  all  their  charactersand  histories,  in  order  to  make  sure  of  saying  nothing  which  cangive offence.  In this  respect,  those  who  live  in the  world  have  a  greatadvantage;  since  they know  better  than  others  what  ought not  to  bespoken  about,  they  are  more  confident  of  what  they  say;  and  yet,even  they  frequently  let  fall  awkward  and  ill-timed  remarks.  Howmust  it fare  with  one  who  drops  into  their  midst  as  it were  from  theclouds!  It is almost  impossible  for  him  to  speak  for  a  minute  withimpunity.  In  2  téte-d-téte,  there  is  another  inconvenience  which  Ifind  even  worse:  the  necessity  of talking  perpetually.  When  one  isspoken  to,  one  is  obliged  to  answer,  and,  when  silence  ensues,  totake  up  the  conversation  again.  This  unbearable  constraint  wouldalone  have  disgusted  me  with  society.  I find  no  compulsion  moreterrible  than  the  obligation  of  speaking  continuously  and  on  thespur  of  the  moment.  I do  not  know  whether  this  has  anything  todo  with  my  mortal  aversion  to  constraint  of  any  kind;  but  to  beabsolutely  obliged  to  speak  is  enough  to  make  me  infallibly  talknonsense.A  still  more  fatal  defect  of mine  is that,  instead  of being  able  tohold  my  tongue  when  I have  nothing  to  say,  that  is just  the  timewhen,  in  order  to  discharge  my  debt  sooner,  I am  mad  to  speak.  Ihasten  to  stammer  out  a  few  words  destitute  of ideas,  and  am  onlytoo  happy  when  they  have  no  meaning  at  all.  When  attempting  toHIS  AWKWARDNESS  IN  SOCIETYIIQovercome  or  conceal  my  stupidity,  I rarely  fail  to  show  it.  Out  ofnumerous  instances  that  F could  cite,  I will  select  one  which  doesnot  belong  to  my  youthful  days,  but  to  a  period  of  my  life  when,having  lived  several  years  in  society,  I should  have  caught  its  easytone,  if the  thing  had  been  possible.  One  evening,  I was  sitting  be-tween  two  great  ladies  and  a  gentleman,  whose  name  I may  men-tion—it  was  the Duc  de Gontaut.  There  was  no  one  else in the room,and  I was  doing  my  utmost  to  supply  a  few  words—heaven  knowswhat!—during  a  conversation  between  four  persons,  three  of whomcertainly  had  no  need  of my  supplementary  efforts.  The  mistress  ofthe  house  ordered  an  opiate  to  be  brought  to  her,  which  she  tooktwice  a  day to  ease  her  stomach.  The  other  lady,  seeing  the  wry  faceshe  made,  said,  laughingly:  “Is  it M.  Tronchin’s  opiate?”  “I  don’tthink  so,”  the  first  replied  in the  same  tone.  “I  think  it is little  bet-ter,”  politely  added  the  witty  Rousseau.  Everyone  was  amazed;  nota  word  was  uttered,  not  a  smile  was  seen,  and  immediately  after-wards  the  conversation  took  a different  turn.  In  the  presence  ofanyone  else  this  awkward  remark  might  have  been  only  amusing,but,  addressed  to  a woman  who  was  too  amiable  not  to  have  madeherself  somewhat  talked  about,  and  whom  I most  certainly  had  no  |desire  to  offend,  it  was  terrible;  and  I believe  that  the  two  whoheard  it, both  the  lady  and  the  gentleman,  could  scarcely  refrainfrom  bursting  out  into  a  laugh.  Such  are  the  flashes  of genius  whichescape  me  when  I attempt  to  speak  without  having  anything  to  say.I shall  not  easily  forget  that  particular  instance,  for  not  only  is  itin  itself  worthy  of  record,  but  I cannot  help  thinking  that  it  hasproduced  results  which  recall  it to  my  mind  only  too  often.I think  this  is enough  to  make  it intelligible  how,  although  nota  fool,  I have  often  been  taken  for  one,  even  by people  who  werein  a  position  to  judge  correctly;  what  aggravates  my  misfortune  isthe  fact  that  my  eyes  and  features  give promise  of something  better,and  the  failure  of  this  hope  makes  my  stupidity  more  startling  toothers.  This  detailed  explanation,  to  which  a special  circumstancehas led me,  is not  without  its use  in reference  to  what  follows.  It con-tains  the  solution  of many  extraordinary  things  which  I have  done,and  which  are  attributed  to  an  unsociable  disposition  which  I by nomeans  possess.  I should  be as  fond  of society  as  anyone  else, if I wasTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU120not  sure  of appearing  in  it, not  only  to  my  own  disadvantage,  butquite  a  different  person  from  what  I really  am.  My  resolution  towrite  and  live  in  seclusion,  is exactly  that  which  suits  me.  If I hadbeen  present,  my  powers  would  never  have  been  known,  or  evensuspected;  this  actually  happened  in  the  case  of  Madame  Dupin,although  she  was  a  woman  of intelligence,  and  although I lived  forseveral  years  in her  house.  Since  that  time,  she  has  often  told  me  soherself.  However,  this  rule  is liable  to  certain  exceptions,  to  whichI will  subsequently  return.The  extent  of  my  capacities  having  thus  been  settled,  and  theposition  for  which  I was  adapted  marked  out  for  the  second  time,the  only  question  remaining  was  how  to  fit  me  for  fulfilling  myvocation.  The  difficulty  was  that  I had  not  studied  sufficiently,  anddid  not  even  know  enough  Latin  to  be a  priest.  Madame  de Warensthought  of  having  me  taught  for  some  time  at  the  seminary.  Shespoke  of  it  to  the  Superior,  a  Lazarist,  named  M.  Gros,  a  goodlittle  man,  lean  and  grey-haired,  who  had  almost  lost  the  sight  ofone  eye,  and  who  was  the  most  intelligent  and  the  least  pedanticLazarist  that  I have  ever  known—although,  to  tell  the  truth,  thatis not  saying  much.He  came  sometimes  to  see  mamma,  who  welcomed  him,  pettedhim,  teased  him,  and  sometimes  made  him  lace  her  stays,  a  servicewhich  he was  only too  glad  to  perform.  While  he was  thus  engaged,she  ran  from  one  side  of  the  room  tothe  other,  doing  first  onething and  then  another.  Dragged  along by her  staylace,  the  Superiorfollowed,  grumbling  and  crying  out  every  minute:  “Madame,  doplease  keep  still!”  It  was  an  extremely  attractive  picture!M.  Gros  entered  heartily  into  mamma’s  plan.  He  was  satisfiedvith  a  very  modest  fee  for  my  board,  and  undertook  to  teach  me.‘Nothing  else  was  required  except  the  consent  of  the  bishop,  whoiiot  alone  granted  it, but  offered  to  pay  the  fee.  He also  gave  mepermission  to  wear  my  lay dress  until  the  degree  of  success  whichmight  be  hoped  for  could  be  estimated  by a trial.What  a  change!  I was  obliged  to  submit.  I went  to  the  seminaryas  I should  have  gone  to  execution.  A  seminary  is  a  melancholyabode,  especially  for one  who  has  just left  the  house  of an  amiable5 A monk  of  the  order  of  St.  Lazare.MUSIC  AND  LATINI2Iwoman.  I took  with  me  only  a  single  book,  which  I had  beggedmamma  to  lend  me,  ang which  was  a  great  consolation  to  me.  Noone  would  guess  what  kind  of book  it was;  it was  a  book  of music.Amongst  the  accomplishments  which  she had  cultivated,  music  hadnot  been  forgotten.  She  had  a  good  voice,  sang  fairly  well,  andplayed  the piano a little;  she  had  been  good  enough  to give me  somelessons  in  singing,  in  which  she  was  obliged  to  begin  at  the  verybeginning,  for  I hardly  knew  the  music  of our  psalms.  Eight  or  tenlessons,  constantly  interrupted,  and  given  me  by a  woman,  were  notenough  to  teach  me  a quarter  of the notes,  much  less  to  enable  me  tosing  the  scales.  However,  I had  such  a  passion  for  the  art  that  Idetermined  to  try  to  practise  by myself.  The  volume  which  I tookwith  me  was  not  even  one  of  the  easiest;  it  was  the  cantatas  ofClérambault.  The  doggedness  of my  application  may  be imagined,when  I mention  that,  without  any  knowledge  of  transposition  orquantity,  I succeeded  in deciphering  and  singing  without  a  mistakethe  first  air  and  recitative  of the  cantata  Alpheus  and  Arethusa;  al-though,  certainly,  this  air  is so  correctly  set,  that  it is only necessaryto  recite  the  verses  in  proper  time  in  order  to  catch  the  air.At  the  seminary  there  was  a  confounded  Lazarist,  who  tookcharge  of  me,  and  disgusted  me  with  the  Latin  which  he  wantedto  teach  me.  He  had  sleek,  greasy,  black  hair,  a  gingerbread  face,a  voice  like a buffalo,  the  look  of a night-owl  and a beard  like  boar’sbristles;  his  smile  was  sardonic,  his  limbs  moved  like  those  of  ajointed  doll.  I have  forgotten  his hateful  name,  but  his frightful  andmawkish  face  has  remained  in my  memory,  and I can  scarcely  thinkof it without  a  shudder.  I fancy I still  meet  him  in  the  corridors,politely  holding  out  his  dirty  square  cap,  as  an  invitation  to  enterhis  room,  which  was  more  dreadful  to  me  than a prison  cell.  Imag-ine  the  impression  such  a  teacher  produced  by contrast  upon  thepupil  of a  court  Abbé.If  I had  remained  two  months  at  the  mercy  of this  monster,  I amconvinced  that  I should  have  lost my  reason.  But  good M. Gros,  wheperceived  that  I was  depressed,  that  I ate  nothing  and  grew  thin,guessed  the reason  of my  grief;  it was  not  hard  to  do so!  He  rescuedme  from  the  claws  of  my  wild  beast,  and,  by a still  more  markedcontrast,  handed  me  over  to  the  gentlest  of  men,  a  young  AbbéTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU122from  Le  Faucigny,®  named  Gatier,  who  was  going  through  his  col-lege  course,  and  who,  from a desire  to  oblige  M.  Gros,  and  also,  Ibelieve,  from  feelings  of  humanity,  was  so  good  as  to  rob  his  ownstudies  of the time  he devoted  to  the  direction  of mine.  I have  neverseen  a  more  touching  expression  than  M.  Gatier’s.  He  was  fair,  andhis  beard  inclined  to  be  red;  he  had  the  ordinary  appearance  ofthose  who  came  from  his  province,  who  all  conceal  considerable  in-telligence  under  a  heavy  exterior;  but  what  truly  distinguished  himwas  a  tender,  affectionate  and  loving  heart.  There  was  in  his  largeblue  eyes  a  mixture  of  gentleness,  tenderness  and  sadness,  whichmade  it impossible  for  anyone  to  see  him  without  being  attracted  byhim.  From  the looks  and  manner  of this  poor  young  man,  one  wouldhave  said  that  he  foresaw  his  destiny,  and  that  he  felt  he  was  bornto  be unhappy.His  character  did  not  belie  his  looks;  full  of  patience,  and  everready  to  oblige,  he  seemed  rather  to  study  with  than  to  teach  me.That  alone  was  more  than  enough  to  make  me  love  him;  his  prede-cessor  had  made  that  exceedingly  easy.  However,  in  spite  of all  thetime  that  he  devoted  to  me,  in  spite  of  the  hearty  goodwill  withwhich  we  both  devoted  ourselves  to  our  studies,  and  although  hewent  quite  the  right  way  to  work,  I made  little  progress,  althoughI worked  hard.  It is singular  that,  although  endowed  with  consid-erable  powers  of apprehension,  I have  never  been  able  to  learn  any-thing  with  tutors,  with  the  exception  of  my  father  and  M.  Lam-bercier.  The  little  additional  knowledge  I possess  I owe  to  my  ownunaided  efforts,  as  will  be presently  seen.  My spirit,  impatient  of anykind  of constraint,  cannot  submit  to  the  laws  of  the  moment;  eventhe  fear  of not  learning  prevents  my  attention;  for  fear  of  makingthose  who  are  talking  to  me  impatient,  I pretend  to  understandthem;  they  accordingly  go  on,  and  I understand  nothing.  My mindmust  fix  its  own  time  for  work;  it cannot  submit  to  that  which  isfixed  by another.The  time  of ordination  came,  and  M.  Gatier  returned  to  his  prov-ince  in  deacon’s  orders.  He  took  with  him  my  regrets,  my  attach-ment,  my  gratitude.  I offered  prayers  on  his  behalf,  which  were  nomore  granted  than  those  which  I offered  for  myself.  Some  years° A small  province  of  the  Duchy  of  Savoy.DEPARTURE  OF  M.  D’AUBONNE123afterwards,  I learned  that,  while  vicaire  of  a  parish,  he  seduced  agirl, the  only one  whom,#n  spite of a  very  tender  heart,  he had  everloved.  The  girl had  a  child  by him,  which  caused a terrible  scandalin  a  parish  which  was  very  strictly  managed.  The  priests,  beingunder  good regulations,  are  not  allowed  to  have  children—except  by .married  women.  For  his  offence  against  this  rule  of  propriety,  hewas  imprisoned,  disgraced,  and  deprived  of  his  benefice.  I do  notknow  whether  he afterwards  regained  his position,  but  the  thoughtof his  misfortune,  deeply  graven  on  my  heart,  returned  to  me  whenI wrote  “Emile”;  and,  uniting  M.  Gatier  with  M.  Gaime,  [ made  ofthese  two  worthy  priests  the  original  of  the  “Savoyard  Vicar.”  Iflatter  myself  that  the  imitation  has  not  disgraced  its originals.While  I was  at the  seminary,  M.  d’Aubonne  was  obliged  to  leaveAnnecy.  The  Intendant  took  it into  his  head  to  be  displeased  thathe made  love  to  his wife.  This  was  playing  the part  of the  dog in themanger;  for,  although  Madame  Corvezi  was  extremely  amiable,  helived  on  very  bad  terms  with  her;  ultra-montane  tendencies  ren-dered  her  useless  to  him,  and  he treated  her  so  brutally  that  a  separa-tion  was  talked  of.  M.  Corvezi  was  an  ugly-looking  fellow,  black  asa mole,  knavish  as  an  owl, and  who,  by continued  abuse  of his office,ended  in  getting  dismissed  himself.  It  is  said  that  the  natives  ofProvence  revenge  themselves  upon  their  enemies  by  songs;  M.d’Aubonne  revenged  himself  upon  his  by a  comedy;  he  sent  thepiece  to  Madame  de  Warens,  who  showed  it to  me.  It pleased  me,and  put into  my  head  the  idea  of writing  one  myself,  in order  to  seewhether  I was  really  such  a  fool  as  the  author  had  declared  me  tobe; but  I did  not  carry  out  this  idea  until  I went  to  Chambéri,  whereI wrote  L’Amant  de  lui-même.  Consequently,  when  I state  in  thepreface  to  this  piece  that  I wrote  it when  I was  eighteen  years  old, Ihave  deviated  from  the  truth  in the  matter  a  few  years.It was  nearly  about  this  time  that  an  event  occurred,  of little  im-portance  in  itself,  but  which  affected  me,  and  made a stir  in  theworld  when I had  already  forgotten  it. One  day in every  week  I hadpermission  to  go out;  it is not  necessary  to  say  what  use  I made  of it.One  Sunday  when  I was  with  mamma,  a  fire  broke  out  in  a  build-ing  belonging  to  the  Grey  Friars,  which  adjoined  the  house  sheoccupied.  This  building,  in  which  was  their  oven,  was  crammed124THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUfull  of  dry  faggots.  In  a  very  short  time  the  whole  was  in  flames.The  house  was  in  great  danger,  already  enveloped  by  the  flameswhich  the  wind  drove  in  that  direction.  Everyone  made  ready  toremove  the  furniture  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  to  carry  it into  thegarden,  which  was  opposite  the  windows  of  my  old  room,  beyondthe  brook  of which  I have  already  spoken.  I was  so  confused,  that  Ithrew  out  of the  window  promiscuously  everything  that  came  intomy  hands,  even  a  large  stone  mortar,  which  at  any  other  time  Ishould  scarcely  have  been  able  to  lift;  in like  manner  I should  havethrown  out a large  looking-glass,  had  not  someone  stopped  me.  Thegood  bishop,  who  had  come  to  pay  mamma a visit,  did  not  remainidle.  He  took  her  into  the  garden,  where  he began  to  pray  with  her,and  all  those  who  were  there,  so  that,  when  I came  up  some  timelater,  I found  all on  their  knees  and  followed  theiz  example.  Duringthe  holy  man’s  prayer,  the  wind  changed,  but  so  suddenly  and  justat  the  right  moment,  that  the  flames,  which  enveloped  the  houseand  were  already  making  their  way  through  the  windows,  wereblown  to  the  other  side  of the court,  and  the  house  suffered  no  dam-age.  Two  years  later,  after  the  death  of  M.  de  Bernex,  his  formerbrethren,  the  Antonines,  began  to  collect  evidence  which  mightserve  towards  his  beatification.  At  the  earnest  request  of  FatherBoudet,  I added  to  this  evidence  an  attestation  of  the  fact  which  Ihave  just related,  in which  I was  right;  but, in giving  out  the  fact  fora  miracle,  I was  wrong.  I had  seen  the  bishop  at  prayers,  and  duringhis  prayers  I had  seen  the  wind  change,  and  just  at  the  critical  mo-ment;  this  I was  able  to  state  and  certify;  but  that  one  of these  twothings  was  the  cause  of the  other,  this  I ought  not  to  have  certified,because  I could  not  possibly  know.  However,  as  far  as  I can  recollectmy  ideas,  I was  at  that  time  a  sincere  Catholic,  and  therefore  a  goodbeliever.  The  love  of the  marvellous,  so  natural  to  the  human  heart,my  veneration  for  this  virtuous  prelate,  the  feeling  of secret  pride  athaving,  perhaps,  contributed  to  the  miracle  myself,  helped  to  leadme  astray;  and  it is quite  certain  that,  if this  miracle  had  been  theresult  of fervent  prayer,  I might  with  good  reason  have  claimed  ashare in  it.  More  than  thirty  years  afterwards,  when  I published  myLettres de  la Montagne,”  M.  Fréron  somehow  or  other  unearthedthis  testimony  and  made  use  of it in his  papers.  I must  confess  thatBEGINS  ro  LEARN  MUSIC125it was  a  fortunate  discovery,  and  it seemed  to  me  very  amusing  thatit was  made  at  so  opportyne  a  moment.I was  destined  to  be  the  rejected  of all  professions.  Although  M.Gatier  had  given  the  least  unfavourable  account  of my  progress  thathe possibly  could,  it was  easily  seen  that  it was  out  of proportion  tomy  efforts,  and  that  was  no  encouragement  to  make  me  study  fur-ther.  Accordingly,  the  bishop  and  the  Superior  refused  to  have  anymore  to  do  with  me,  and  gave  me  back  to  Madame  de Warens  as  aperson  not  even  good  enough  for  a  priest;  in  other  respects,  a  goodenough  lad,  they  said,  and  free  from  vice:  which  was  the  reasonwhy, in spite of so  many  discouraging  prejudices  against  me,  she didnot  desert  me.I brought  back  to  her  in  triumph  her  volume  of music,  of whichI had  made  such  good  use.  My  air  of  Alpheus  and  Arethusa  wasnearly  all  that  I had  learnt  at  the  seminary.  My  marked  taste  forthis  art  gave  her  the idea  of making  me  a  musician;  the  opportunitywas  favourable;  she  had  music  at  her  house  at  least  once  a  week,and  the  choir-master  of the  cathedral,  who  directed  these  little  con-certs,  was  a  frequent  visitor.  He  was  a  Parisian,  named  Le  Maitre,  a‘good  composer,  very  lively,  very  gay,  still  young,  tolerably  good-looking,  not  very  intelligent,  but,  on  the  whole,  a  good  fellow.Mamma  introduced  me  to  him.  I took  a  fancy  to  him,  apd he  wasnot  displeased  with  me;  the  fee  was  discussed  and  settled.  In  short,‘I went  to  his  house,  where  I passed  the  winter  the  more  agreeably,‘as  it was  only  twenty  yards  distant  from  mamma’s;  we  were  withher  in  a  moment,  and  very  often  supped  there  together.It  will  be  readily  imagined  that  life  in  the  choir-master’s  house,where  singing  and  gaiety  prevailed,  together  with  musicians  andchoir-boys,  pleased  me  far  better  than  life  in  the  seminary  with  thefathers  of  St.  Lazare.  However,  this  life,  although  more  unre-strained,  was  not  less  orderly  and  regular.  I was  born  to  love  inde-pendence,  without  abusing  it.  For  six  whole  months,  I never  went‘out  once,  except  to  visit  mamma  or  to  attend  church,  nor  did  I everfeel  tempted  to  do  so.  This  period  is one  of  those  during  which  Ihave  enjoyed  the  greatest  calm,  and  which  I recall  with  the  greatestpleasure.  Of  the  various  situations  in  which  I have  found  myself,some  have  been  distinguished  by such  a  feeling  of comfort;  that, in’THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU126recalling  them,  I am  as  affected  by them  as  if  I were  still  similarlysituated.  I not  only recall  times,  places,  persons,  but  all the  surround-ing objects,  the  temperature  of the  air, its  smell,  its  colour,  a  certainlocal  impression  only  felt  there,  the  lively  remembrance  of  whichstirs  my  old  transports  anew.  For  instance,  all  that  was  repeated  inthe  choir-master’s  house,  all  that  was  sung  in  the  choir,  everythingthat  took  place  there,  the  beautiful  and  majestic  dress  of the  canons,the  chasubles  of the  priests,  the  mitres  of  the  chanters,  the  faces  ofthe  musicians,  an  old  lame  carpenter,  who  played  the  counterbass,a  fair  little  Abbé  who  played  the  violin,  the  ragged  cassock  which,after  laying  down  his  sword,  M.  le Maitre  put  on  over  his  lay-coat,and  the  beautiful  fine  surplice  with  which  he covered  its  rags  whenhe went  to  the  choir;  the  pride  with  which,  holding  my  little  flageo-let, I took  my  place in the  orchestra  in the  gallery,  to  assist  in the endof a  recitative  which  M.  le Maitre  had  composed  on  purpose  for  me;the  good  dinner  waiting  for  us  afterwards,  the  good  appetite  wetook  to  it—all  these  objects  together,  recurring  most  vividly  a  hun-dred  times  to  my  memory,  have  enchanted  me  as  much  or  evenmore  than  the  reality  had  ever  done.  I have  always  preserved  a  ten-der  affection  for  a  certain  air  of  the  Conditor  alme  siderum  whichgoes  in  iambics,  because,  one  Advent  Sunday,  I heard  from  my  bedthis  hymn  being  sung  before  daybreak  on  the  steps  of the  cathedral,according  to  a  custom  of  that  church.  Mademoiselle  de  Merceret,mamma’s  chambermaid,  knew a little  music.  I shall  never  forget  alittle  motet,  called  Afferte,  which  M.  le Maitre  made  me  sing  withher, and  which  her  mistress  listened  to  with  great  pleasure.  In  short,everything,  down  to  the  good  servant  Perrine,  who  was  so  good  agirl,  and  whom  the  choir-boys  teased  to  madness,  frequently  comesback  to  me  from  those  innocent  and  happy  times,  to  enchant  andsadden  me.I lived  at  Annecy  for  nearly  a  year  without  the  least  reproach;everybody  was  satisfied  with  me.  Since  my  departure  from  TurinI had  committed  no  follies,  nor  was  I guilty  of any  as  long as  I wasunder  mamma’s  eyes.  She  guided  me,  and  always  guided  me  well;my  attachment  to  her  had  become  my  only  passion,  and,  a  proofthat  it was  not  a foolish  passion,  my  heart  formed  my  reason.  It istrue  that  a  single  sentiment,  absorbing,  so  to  speak,  all my  faculties,VENTURE  DE  VILLENEUVE127put it out  of my power  to learn  anything,  even  music,  although  I didmy  utmost.  But  it was  ngt  my  fault;  the  most  perfect  goodwill  wasthere,  and  steady  application.  But  I was  distracted,  a  dreamer;  Isighed.  What  could  I do?  Nothing  that  depended  upon  me  waswanting  to  ensure  my  progress;  but, in order  for me  to  commit  freshfollies,  I only  needed  a  subject  to  put  them  into  my  head.  This  sub-ject  presented  itself;  chance  arranged  matters,  and,  as  will  be  seenin  the  sequel,  my  stupid  head  knew  how  to  profit  by it.One  evening  during  the  month  of February,  in very  cold  weather,while  we  were  all  seated  round  the  fire,  we  heard  a  knock  at  thestreet  door.  Perrine  took  her  lantern,  went  down  and  opened  it;and  returned  with  a  young  man,  who  came  upstairs,  introducedhimself  with  an  easy  air, paid  M.  le Maitre  a  short  and  well-turnedcompliment,  and  told  us  that  he  was  a  French  musician,  obliged  bythe low  state  of his finances  to  offer  his  services  to  churches,  in orderto  pay  his  way.  When  he  heard  the  words  “French  musician,”  LeMaitre’s  good  heart  leaped  for  joy;  he  was  passionately  fond  of  hiscountry  and  his profession.  He  received  the  young  wayfarer,  offeredhim  a  night’s  lodging,  of  which  he  seemed  sorely  in  want,  andwhich  he  accepted  without  much  ceremony.  I examined  him  whilehe  was  warming  himself  and  chattering,  while  waiting  for  supper.He  was  short  of  stature,  but  broad-shouldered.  There  was  some-thing  misshapen  about  his figure,  without  any  special  deformity;  hewas,  so  to  speak,  a  hunchback  with  straight  shoulders,  and  I fancythat  he limped a little.  His  black  coat  was  worn  out  by constant  userather  than  old,  and  was  falling  to  pieces;  his  shirt,  made  of veryfine  linen,  was  very  dirty;  he  wore  beautiful  fringed  ruffles  andgaiters,  in  either  of which  he could  have  put  both  his  legs;  and,  byway  of protection  against  the  snow,  he  had a little  hat  only  fit  tocarry  under  his  arm.  In  this  whimsical  attire,  however,  there  wassomething  noble,  to  which  his  general  demeanour  did  not  give  thelie. His expression  was  pleasant  and  intelligent:  he spoke readily  andwell,  although  his  language  was  rather  too  free.  Everything  abouthim  showed  him  to  be a  young  libertine  of good education,  who  didnot  go begging  like  a  beggar,  but  like  a madcap.  He  told  us  that  hisname  was  Venture  de  Villeneuve,  that  he came  from  Paris,  that  hehad  lost  his  way,  and,  forgetting  for  the  moment  his  rőle  of musi-128THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUcian,  he added  that  he  was  going  to  Grenoble  to see  one  of his  rela-tions  whe  was  a  member  of the  parliament.During  supper  the  conversation  turned  upon  music,  and  he  spokewell  upon  the  subject.  He  was  acquainted  with  all the  great  virtuosi,all the famous  works,  all the  actors  and  actresses,  pretty  women,  andgreat  noblemen.  He  appeared  familiar  with  everything  that  wasalluded  to;  but,  directly  a  subject  was  broached,  he upset  the  discus-sion  with  some  broad  joke,  which  made  us  laugh  and  forget  whathad been  said.  It was  Saturday;  on  the following  day there  was  musicin  the  cathedral.  M.  le  Maitre  proposed  to  him  to  take  part  in  thesinging;  “With  pleasure,”  he  replied.  Being  asked  what  part  hetook,  he  answered,  “Alto,”  and  went  on  to  speak  of  something  else.Before  church,  his  part  was  given  him  to  look  through;  but  he nevereven  glanced  at  it. This  piece  of swagger  surprised  Le  Maitre.  “Youwill  see,”  he whispered  to  me,  “that  he  doesn’t  know a note.”  “I amvery  much  afraid  so,”  I replied.  I followed  them  full  of uneasiness.‘When  the  singing  began,  my  heart  beat  violently,  for  I was  greatlyinterested  in  him.I soon  found  I had no  reason  for uneasiness.  He  sang  his two  partswith  the greatest  correctness  and  the best  taste  imaginable,  and, whatwas  more,  in  a  charming  voice.  I have  rarely  experienced  a moreagreeable  surprise.  After  mass,  he  was  highly  complimented  by thecanons  and  musicians,  whom  he  thanked  in  his  usual  jesting  man-ner,  but  with  perfect  grace.  M.  le Maitre  embraced  him  heartily;  Idid  the  same;  he saw  that  I was  very  glad,  and  this  seemed  to  affordhim  pleasure.The  reader  will  assuredly  agree  with  me  that,  after  having  be-come  infatuated  with  Bacle,  who,  when  all  is  said  and  done,  wasnothing  but  a  boor,  it was  only  to  be  expected  that  I should  been-chanted  by Venture,  a  man  of  education,  talent,  imtelligence,  andworldly  experience,  who  might  be  called  an  agreeable  rake.  Thiswas  just  what  happened to me,  and  which,  I think,  would  havehappened  to  any  other  young  man  in my  position,  the  more  easily  inproportion  as  he possessed  better  judgment  in recognising  merit,  andgreater  inclination  to  allow  himself  to  be  fascinated  by it;  for  un-doubtedly.  Venture  possessed  merit,  and  a  merit  very  rare at  his  age—that  of not  being  too  eager  to  display  his  accomplishments.  It isCHARACTER  OF  VENTURE129true  that  he  boasted  about  many  things  which  he  did  not  under-stand  at  all; but  of those  things  which  he knew  well,  and  these  wereby no  means  few, he said  nothing—he  waited  for  the  opportunity  ofshowing  his  knowledge,  and  when  it came,  he took  advantage  of itwithout  exhibiting  too  much  eagerness,  which  produced  a  great  |effect.  As  he  stopped  at  each  subject,  without  speaking  of  the  rest,one  could  never  tell  when  his  knowledge  was  exhausted.  Witty,droll,  inexhaustible,  seductive  in  conversation,  always  smiling  andnever  laughing,  he  would  say  the  rudest  things  in  the  most  refinedtone  without  ever  giving  offence.  Even  the  most  modest  womenwere  astonished  at  what  they  endured  from  him.  It was  useless  forthem  to  feel that  they ought to be angry—they  could  not.  He  wanted,nothing  but  loose  women,  and  I do not  believe  that  he was  made  tosucceed  with  the  sex,  but  he  was  certainly  made  to  enliven  im-mensely  the  society  of  those  who  enjoyed  that  good  fortune.  In  acountry  where  such  agreeable  accomplishments  were  duly  esteemedand  loved,  he  could  not  long  remain  limited  to  the  sphere  of  amusician.My liking  for  M.  Venture,  more  reasonable  in its  cause,  was  alsoless  extravagant  in  its  effects  than  my  friendship  for  M.  Bacle,  al-though  it was  warmer  and  more  lasting.  I loved  to  see  him,  to listento  him;  everything  he  did  appeared  to  me  charming,  everything  hesaid  was  an  oracle  to  me;  but  my  infatuation  did  not  go  so  far  that  Icould  not  have  endured  separation  from  him.  I had  in my neighbour-hood  a  good  safeguard  against  such  extravagance.  Besides,  I felt thathis principles,  although  they might  be very  good for him,  were  of novalue  to  me;  I wanted  a  different  kind  of pleasure,  of which  he hadno  idea,  and  of  which  J did  not  even  venture  to  speak  to  him,  as  Ifelt  sure  that  he would  only have  laughed  at  me.  However,  I wouldgladly have  united  this  new  attachment  with  that  which  already  hadpossession  of  me.  I spoke  of  him  to  mamma  with  transport;  LeMaitre  spoke  of him  to  her  in terms  of the  highest  praise.  She  con-sented  that  he should  be introduced  to  her; but  the  meeting  was  alto-gether  unsuccessful.  He  found  her  affected;  she  found  him  dissolute,and,  being  alarmed  to  think  that  I had  formed  so  undesirable  anacquaintance,  she  not  only  forbade  me  to  bring  him  again,  butpainted  in  such  lively  colours  the  risks  I ran  with  this  young  man,THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU130that  I became a little  more  reserved  in my  intercourse  with  him,  and,luckily  for  my  morals  and  my  understanding,  we  were  soon"separated.:M.  le Maitre  had  the  taste  of all the  followers  of his  profession:  hewas  fond  of wine.  At  table,  however,  he was  temperate;  when  work-ing  in  his  study,  he  was  obliged  to  drink.  His  maidservant  knewhim  so  well  that,  as  soon  as  he  arranged  his  paper  in  order  to  com-pose,  and  took  up  his  violoncello,  his  jug and  glass  arrived  the  mo-ment  after,  and  the  jug was  replenished  from  time  to  time.  Withoutever  being  completely  drunk  he was  always  fuddled;  this  was  reallya  pity,  for  he  was  essentially  a  good  fellow,  and  so  playful  thatmamma  always  called  him  the  “Kitten.”  Unfortunately,  he was  fondof  his  talent,  worked  hard  and  drank  proportionately.  This  toldupon  his health,  and, in the  end, upon  his temper;  he was  sometimessuspicious  and  ready  to  take  offence.  Incapable  of rudeness,  incapa-ble  of failing  in respect  to  anyone,  he never  used  bad  language,  evento  one  of  his  choir-boys;  but  neither  was  anyone  allowed  to  fail  inrespect  to  him,  as  was  only  fair.  The  misfortune  was  that  he had  toolittle  intelligence  to  distinguish  manners  and  characters,  and  oftentook  offence  at  nothing.The  ancient  Chapter  of  Geneva,  into  which  formerly  so  manyprinces  and  bishops  esteemed  it an  honour  to  be  admitted,  has  lostin exile  some  of its  ancient  splendour,  but  has  retained  its  pride.  Inorder  to  be admitted,  it is still  necessary  to  be a  gentleman  or  doctorof Sorbonne;  and  if there  is an  excusable  pride,  next  after  that  whichis derived  from  personal  merit,  it is that  which  is derived  from  birth.Besides,  all  the  priests,  who  have  laymen  in  their  service,  as  a  ruletreat  them  with  considerable  arrogance.  It was  thus  that  the  canonsoften  treated  Le  Maitre.  The  precentor  especially,  the  Abbé  de  Vi-donne,  who  in other  respects  was  extremely  polite  but  too  proud  ofhis  noble  birth,  did  not  always  treat  him  with  the  respect  which  histalents  deserved,  and  Le  Maitre  could  not  endure  this  disdain.  Thisyear,  during  Passion  week,  they  had  a  more  serious  dispute  thanusual  at  a  regulation  dinner  given  by the  bishop  to  the  canons,  towhich  Le  Maitre  was  always  invited.  The  precentor  showed  himsome  slight,  and  said  something  harsh  to  him,  which  he was  unableto  stomach.  He  immediately  resolved  to  run  away  the  next  night,SETS  OUT  FOR  LYONS131and’ nothing  could  dissuade  him  from  this;  although  Madame  deWarens,  to  whom  he  went  to  say  good-bye,  did  her  utmost  to  ap-pease  him.  He  could  not  forego  the  pleasure  of  avenging  himselfupon  his tyrants,  by leaving  them  in the Jurch  during  the  Easter  fes-tival,  which  was  just the  time  when  his  services  were  most  needed.But  what  troubled  him  most  was  his  music,  which  he  wanted  totake  with  him—no  easy  task,  for  it  filled  a  tolerably  heavy  boxwhich  could  not  be carried  under  the  arm.Mamma  did  what  I should  have  done  in her  place,  and  should  doagain.  After  many  fruitless  attempts  to  keep  him  back,  seeing  thathe had  made  up his mind  to  depart,  whatever  happened,  she  devotedherself  to  assisting  him  as  far  as  she  possibly  could.  I venture  to  saythat  it was  her  duty  to  do so.  Le  Maitre  had,  so  to  say,  devoted  him-self  entirely  to  her  service.  In  reference  to  his  art,  as  well  as  otherattentions,  he was  entirely  at  her  command;  and  the  heartiness  withwhich  he carried  out  what  she  desired  attached  a  double  value  to  hisreadiness  to  oblige.  Consequently,  she  only  repaid  a  friend,  on  acritical  occasion,  for  all  that  he  had  done  for  her  on  many  separateoccasions  during  three  or  four  years,  although  she had  a heart  which,in order  to  repay  such  obligations,  had  no  need  to  be reminded  thatthey were  obligations.  She  sent  for  me  and  ordered  me  to  follow  LeMaitre  at  least  as  far  as  Lyons,  and  not  to  leave  him  as  long  as  heneeded  my  assistance.  She  has  since  confessed  to  me  that  the  desireof separating  me  from  Venture  had  been  one  of her  chief  considera-tions  in  this  arrangement.  She  consulted  Claude  Anet,  her  faithfulservant,  about  the  removal  of  the  box.  He  was  of  opinion  that  itwould  infallibly  lead  to  discovery  if we  hired  a  beast  of burden  inAnnecy;  that,  as  soon  as  it was  dark,  we  ought  to  carry  the  box  our-selves  a  certain  distance,  and  then  hire  an  ass  in  some  village  to  con-vey  it as  far  as  Seyssel,  where,  being  on  French  territory,  we  shouldno  longer  run  any  risk.  We  followed  his advice;  we  set  out  the  samenight  at  seven  o'clock,  and  mamma,  on  pretence  of paying  my  ex-penses,  reinforced  the  light-filled  purse  of  the  poor  “Kitten”  by asum  of money  which  was  very  useful  to  him.  Claude  Anet,  the  gar-dener,  and  myself  carried  the  box  as  best  we  could  as  far  as  the  first:village,  where  an  ass  relieved  us;  and  the  same  night  we  reachedSeyssel.X32THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUI believe  that  I have  already  observed  that  there  are  times  when  Iso  little  resemble  myself,  that  one  would  take  me  for  another  man  ofquite  an  opposite  character.  The  following  is  a  case  in  point.  M.Reydelet,  curé  of  Seyssel,  was  canon  of St.  Peter’s,  consequently  ac-quainted  with  Le  Maitre,  and  one  of the  persons  from  whom  it wasmost  important  that  he  should  conceal  himself.  My  advice,  on  thecontrary,  was  that  we  should  present  ourselves  to  him,  and,  on  somepretext  or  other,  ask  him  for  a  night's  lodging  as  if we  were  at  Seys-sel with  the  sanction  of the  Chapter.  Le  Maitre  liked  the  idea,  whichmade  his  revenge  ironical  and  amusing.  We  accordingly  proceededboldly  to  M.  Reydelet’s  house,  and  were  kindly  received.  Le  Maitretold  him  that  he was  going  to  Bellay,  at  the  request  of the  bishop,  toconduct  the  choir  at  the  Easter  festival,  and  that  he expected  to  passthrough  Seyssel  again  in  a  few  days;  while  I, to  back  up  these  lies,poured  out  a  hundred  others  so  unconcernedly,  that  M.  Reydelet,finding  me  a  nice-looking  lad,  took  a  fancy  to  me,  and  spoke  to  mein  a  most  friendly  manner.  We  were  well  entertained  and  welllodged.  M.  Reydelet  did  not  know  how  to  make  enough  of  us;  andwe  parted  the  best  friends  in the  world,  promising  to  stop  longer  onour  return.  We  could  scarcely  wait  till  we  were  alone  before  weburst  out  laughing,  and  I declare  that  I do  the  same  now,  wheneverI think  of it; for  I cannot  imagine  a  piece  of waggery  better  plannedor  more  happily  executed.  It  would  have  kept  us  in  good  spiritsthroughout  the  journey,  had  not  Le  Maitre,  who  drank  incessantly,and  went  from  one  tavern  to  another,  been  attacked  two  or  threetimes  by fits  to  which  he  was  very  liable,  which  strongly  resembledepilepsy.  These  attacks  alarmed  me,  and  made  me  think  how  I couldbest  get  out  of it.We  went  on  to  Bellay  to  spend Easter,  as  we  had  told  M.  Reydelet;and,  although  we  were  not  expected  there,  we  were  received  by thechoir-master,  and  joyfully  welcomed  by all. Le  Maitre  had  a  reputa-tion, and  deserved  it.  The  choir-master  made  a  point  of  producinghis best  works,  and  endeavoured  to  obtain  the  approval  of so  experi-enced a  critic;  for  Le Maitre,  besides  being a  connoisseur,  was  alwaysfair,  free  from  jealousy,  and  no  flatterer.  He  was  so  superior  to  allthese  provincial  choir-masters,  and  they  were  so  well  aware  of  it,2DESERTS  M.  LE  MAITRE133that  they  looked  upon  him  rather  as  their  chief  than  as  a  brotherprofessional.eAfter  having  spent  four  or  five  days  very  agreeably  at  Bellay,  weset  out  again  and  continued  our  journey  without  any  further  adven-tures  than  those  which  I have  just  mentioned.  When  we  arrived  at  |Lyons,  we  put  up  at  Notre  Dame  de Pitié;  and, while  we  were  wait-ing for  the  box  (which,  thanks  to  another  lie, we  had  persuaded  ourkind  patron,  M.  Reydelet,  to  put  on  board a vessel  on  the  Rhéne),Le  Maitre  went  to  see  his  acquaintances,  amongst  others  FatherCaton,  a  Grey  friar,  of  whom  I shall  have  something  to  say  later,and  the  Abbé  Dortan,  Comte  de  Lyon.  Both  received  him  kindly,but afterwards  betrayed  him,  as  will  presently  be seen;  his good luckhad  become  exhausted  at  M.  Reydelet’s.Two  days after  our  arrival  at  Lyons,  as  we  were  going  through  alittle  street  not  far  from  our  inn, Le  Maitre  was  overtaken  by one  ofhis  attacks,  which  was  so  violent  that  I was  seized  with  affright.  |cried  out  and  shouted  for help, gave  the name  of his inn,  and  beggedsomeone  to  take  him  there;  then  while  the  crowd  gathered  roundeager  to  assist  a  man  who  had  fallen  senseless  and  foaming  at  themouth  in  the  middle  of  the  street,  he  was  abandoned  by the  onlyfriend  on  whom  he had a right to  depend.  I seized  the moment  whennobody  was  thinking  of  me;  I turned  the  corner  of  the  street  anddisappeared.  Thank  Heaven,  I have  finished  this  third  painful  con-fession!  If  I had  many  more  of  a  similar  kind  to  make,  I shouldabandon  the  task  I have  commenced.Of  all  the  incidents  I have  related  up  to  the  present  time  sometraces  have  remained  in  all  the  places  where  I have  lived;  thosewhich I shall  relate  in  the  next  book  are  almost  entirely  unknown,They  are  the  greatest  extravagances  of  my  life,  and  it is  fortunatethat  they  have  not  led  to  worse  results.  But  my  head,  raised  to  thepitch of a  foreign  instrument,  was  out  of its proper  key; it recoveredit of  itself,  and  I abandoned  my  follies,  or  at  least  only  committedsuch  as  were  more.in  agreement  with  my  natural  disposition.  Thisperiod  of my  youth  is the  one  of  which  I have  the  most  confusedidea.  During  this  time  scarcely  anything  occurred  of sufficient  inter-est  to  my  heart  for  me  to  preserve a lively  recollection  of it; and  it isTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU134almost  unavoidable  that, amidst  so  many  wanderings  backwards  andforwards,  so  many  successive  changes,  I should  transpose  times  orplaces.  I am  writing  entirely  from  memory,  without  notes,  withoutmaterials  to  assist  my  recollection.  There  are  events  in my  life  whichare  as  fresh  in my  mind  as  if they  had  just  happened;  but  there  arealso gaps  and  voids,  which  I can  only fill up by the  aid  of a  narrativewhich  is as  confused  as  the  recollection  of it which  has  remained  tome.  It is, therefore,  possible  that  I have  sometimes  made  mistakes,and  I may  do so  again,  in unimportant  matters,  up  to  the  time  whenI possess  surer  information  regarding  myself;  but, in all that  is reallyof essential  importance,  I feel  sure  of being  an  accurate  and  faithfulchronicler,  as  I shall  always  endeavour  to  be  in  everything—of  thatthe  reader  may  rest  assured.As  soon  as  I had  left  Le  Maitre,  I made  up  my  mind,  and  set  outagain  for  Annecy.  The  reason  and  secrecy  of  our  departure  hadgreatly  interested  me  in  the  safety  of  our  retreat;  and  this  interest,which  entirely  absorbed  my  attention,  had  for  some  days  divertedme  from  the  thought  of return;  but  as  soon  as  a feeling  of  securityleft  me  free  from  anxiety,  the  ruling  passion  recovered  its  ascend-ency.  Nothing  flattered  or  tempted  me;  my  only desire  was  to  returnto  mamma.  The  warmth  and  tenderness  of  my  attachment  to  herhad  uprooted  from  my  heart  all imaginary  projects,  all  the  follies  ofambition.  I saw  no  other  happiness  than  that  of living  with  her,  andI never  went  a  step  without  feeling  that  I was  removing  further  fromthis  happiness.  I accordingly  returned  to  her  as  soon  as  it was  pos-sible.  My return  was  so  speedy,  and  my  mind  so  distracted,  that,  al-though I recall  to  mind  all my  other  journeys  with  the liveliest  pleas-ure,  I have  not  the  slightest  recollection  of this;  I remember  nothingabout  it, except  my  departure  from  Lyons and  my  arrival  at  Annecy.I leave  it to  the  reader  to  imagine  whether  this  latter  period  is everlikely  to  fade  from  my  memory.  On  my  arrival,  I no  longer  foundMadame  de Warens;  she had  set  out  for Paris.I have  never  learnt  the  real  secret  of this  journey.  She  would  havetold  me,  I am  convinced,  if I had  pressed  her  to  do  so;  but  no  onewas  ever  less curious  than  myself  about  his friends’  secrets;  my  heart,occupied  only  with  the  present,  is  entirely  filled  with  it, and,  ex-cept  for  past  pleasures,  which  henceforth  form  my  only  enjoyment,MADAME’S  JOURNEY  TO  PARIS`135there  is no  empty  corner  in it for anything  that  is past.  From  the littlethat  she  told  me,  I fangjed  that,  owing  to  the  revolution  at  Turin,caused  by the  abdication  of the  King  of  Sardinia,  she  was  afraid  ofbeing forgotten,  and  was  anxious,  with  the assistance  of the intriguesof M. d’Aubonne,  to  endeavour  to  obtain  the  same  advantages  at  theFrench  court,  which,  as  she  often  told  me,  she  would  herself  havepreferred,  because,  in the  midst  of so  many  important  affairs,  one  isnot  kept under  such  disagreeable  surveillance.  If this  is true,  it is sur-prising  that,  on  her  return,  she  was  not  regarded  with  greater  dis-favour,  and  that  she  has  always  drawn  her  pension  uninterruptedly.Many  believe  that  she  was  charged  with  some  secret  commission,either  by the  bishop,  who  had  business  at  the  French  court  and  wasobliged  to  undertake  a journey  thither  himself,  or  by some  even  morepowerful  personage,  who  knew  how  to  insure  her  a  happy  return.It  is certain  that,  if this  be  the  case,  the  ambassadress  was  not  ill-  -chosen,  and  that,  still  young  and  beautiful,  she  possessed  all  the  nec-essary  qualifications  for  carrying  out  a  negotiation  successfully.BOOK  IV[1731-1732]I arrtvep  at  Annecy,  where  I no  longer  found  her.  Imagine  my  sur-prise  and  grief!  Then,  for  the  first  time,  my  regret  at  having  aban-doned  Le Maitre  in so  cowardly  a  manner  made  itself  felt.  It becamekeener  still,  when  I heard  of the  misfortunes  that  had  befallen  him.His  box  of music,  which  contained  all his worldly  goods, the preciousbox,  which  had  cost  such  trouble  to  save,  had  been  seized  on  its  ar-rival  at  Lyons,  in consequence  of a letter,  in  which  the  Chapter  hadinformed  Comte  Dortan  of  its  secret  removal.  Le  Maitre  in  vainclaimed  his property,  his  means  of livelihood,  the  work  of his  wholelife.  The  ownership  of the  box  was  at  least  open  to  dispute;  but  thequestion  was  not  raised.  The  matter  was  decided  on  the  spot  by thelaw  of  the  stronger,  and  poor  Le  Maitre  thus  lost  the  fruit  of  histalents,  the  work  of his  youth  and  the  resource  of his  old  age.Nothing  was  wanting  to  the  blow  which  fell  upon  me  to  make  itoverwhelming.  But  I was  at  an  age  when  great  sorrow  takes  littlehold,  and  I soon  found  means  of consolation.  I expected  soon  to  hearnews  of Madame  de  Warens,  although  I did  not  know  her  addressand  she  was  ignorant  of my  return;  and,  as  for  my  desertion  of LeMaitre,  all things  considered,  I did  not  find  it so  blameworthy.  I hadbeen  of service  to  him  in his  flight;  that  was  the  only  service  I couldrender  him.  If I had  remained  with  him  in France,  I could  not  havecured  him  of  his  illness,  I could  not  have  saved  his  box,  I shouldonly  have  doubled  his  expenditure  without  being  able  to  help  him.This  was  the  light  in  which  I then  regarded  the  matter:  I regard  itdifferently  now.  A  mean  action  does  not  torture  us when  we  havejust  committed  it, but  long  afterwards,  when  we  recall  it to  mind;for the remembrance  of it never  dies.In  order  to  get news  of mamma,  the  only thing I could  do was  to136THE  ABSENCE  OF  MADAME  DE  WARENS137wait;  for  where  could  I look  for  her  in  Paris,  and  what  means  hadI to  make  the  journey?  Annecy  was  the  safest  place  to  gain  tidingsof  her  whereabouts,  sooner  or  later.  I therefore  remained  where  Iwas,  but  behaved  very  badly.  I never  called  on  the  bishop,  who  hadalready  assisted  me,  and  might  have  assisted  me  further;  my  patron-  ,ess  was  no  longer  near  me,  and  I was  afraid  of being  reprimandedby him  for running  away.  Still  less did  I go to the  seminary;  M. Groswas  no  longer  there.  I visited  none  of my  acquaintances;  however,  Ishould  have  liked  to  go  and  see  the  Intendant’s  wife,  but  was  afraidto  do so.  I did  worse  than  this;  I found  M.  Venture  again,  of whom,in  spite  of my  enthusiasm  for  him,  I had  not  even  thought  since  mydeparture.  I found  him  resplendent,  féted  throughout  Annecy;  theladies  fought  for  him.  This  success  completely  turned  my  head.  Isaw  no  one  but  Venture,  who  almost  made  me  forget  Madame  deWarens.  In  order  to  profit  by his  lessons  more  easily,  I proposed  tohim  to  share  his  lodgings;  he agreed.  He  lodged  at  a  shoemaker’s,  apleasant  and  amusing  fellow,  who  in his patois  never  called  his  wifeanything  except  salopiere  (slut),  a  name  which  she  fully  deserved.He  often  had  quarrels  with  her,  which  Venture  did  his  best  to  pro-long, while  pretending  that  he wanted  to  put  a  stop  to  them.  Coldly,and  in his Provengal  dialect,  he used  words  and  expressions  to  themwhich  produced  the  greatest  effect;  the  scenes  that  took  place  wereenough  to  make  one  burst  with  laughter.  In  this  manner  the  morn-ings  passed  before  we  were  aware  of it; at  two  or  three  o'clock  wetook  a  modest  lunch;  Venture  went  to  visit  his  friends,  with  whonghe  took  dinner,  while  I went  for  a  solitary  walk,  meditating  uponhis  great  advantages,  admiring  and  envious  of  his  rare  talents,  andcursing  my  unlucky  star  for not  summoning  me  to  an  equally  happylot.  How  little  I knew  about  it! my  own  life  would  have  been  a  hun-dred  times  more  delightful,  if I had  been  less foolish,  and  had  knownbetter  how  to  enjoy  it!Madame  de  Warens  had  only  taken  Anet  with  her;  she  had leftMerceret  behind,  her  maid  of  whom  I have  already  spoken,  andwhom I found  still  occupying  her  mistress’s  room.  MademoiselleMerceret  was  a little  older  than  myself,  not  pretty, but  sufficientlyagreeable;  a  good  Fribourgeoise,  free  from  vice,  in  whom I discov-ered no  other  failing except  that  at  times  she  was  somewhat  insubor-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU138dinate  to  her  mistress.  I went  to  see  her  pretty  often;  she  was  an  oldacquaintance,  and  the  sight  of  her  reminded  me  of  another  stilldearer,  for  whose  sake  I loved  her.  She  had  several  friends,  amongstthem  a  certain  Mademoiselle  Giraud,  a Genevese,  who,  for  my  sins,took  it into  her  head  to  take  a  fancy  to  me.  She  continually  pressedMerceret  to  take  me  to  see  her,  which  I allowed  her  to  do, because  Iwas  fond  of  her,  and  there  were  other  young  persons  there  whosecompany  was  very  agreeable.  As  for  Mademoiselle  Giraud,  whomade  up to  me  in every  possible  way,  nothing  could  add  to  the  aver-sion  I felt  towards  her.  When  she  put  her  withered  black  snout,filthy  with  snuff,  near  my  face  I could  hardly  keep  from  spitting  onit. But  I bore  it patiently;  besides,  I enjoyed  myself  very  much  withall the girls, all of whom,  either  to  pay  court  to  Mademoiselle  Giraud,or  for  my  own  sake,  vied  with  one  another  in  making  much  of me.In  all  this  I saw  nothing  but  friendship.  Since  then,  I have  some-times  thought  that  it only rested  with  myself  to  see  something  more;but  it never  occurred  to  me,  I never  even  gave  it a  thought.Besides,  sempstresses,  chambermaids,  and  shop girls had  not  muchtemptation  for  me;  I wanted  young  ladies.  Everyone  has  his  fancies;this  has  always  been  mine,  and  my  ideas  on  this  point  are  not  thoseof Horace.  However,  it is certainly  not  the  vanity  of rank  and  posi-tion  that  attracts  me;  it  is  a  well  preserved  complexion,  beautifulhands,  a  charming  toilet,  a  general  air  of elegance  and  neatness,  bet-ter  taste  in  dress  and  expression,  a  finer  and  better  made  gown,  anattier  pair of shoes,  ribbons,  lace, better  arranged  hair—this  is whatattracts  me.  I should  always  prefer a girl, even  of less  personal  attrac-tions,  if better  dressed.  I myself  confess  this  preference  is ridiculous;but  my  heart,  in spite  of myself,  makes  me  entertain  it.Well!  once  again  these  advantages  offered  themselves,  and  it onlyrested  with  myself  to  profit by them.  How I love,  from  time  to  time,to  come  suddenly  upon  the  delightful  moments  of my  youth!  Theywere  so  sweet  to  me;  they have  been  so  brief,  so  rare,  and  I have  en-joyed  them  so  cheaply!  Ah!  the  mere  remembrance  of them  bringsback  to  my  heart  an  unmixed  pleasure  which  I sorely  need  to  reani-mate  my  courage  and  to  sustain  the  weariness  of  my  remainingyears.One  morning,  the dawn  appeared  so  beautiful  that  I threw  on  myMADEMOISELLE  DE  GRAFFENRIED139clothes  and hurried  out  into  the country  to  see  the sun  rise.  I enjoyedthis  sight  in  all  its  charm;  it was  the  week  after  the  festival  of  St,John.  The  earth,  decked  in its greatest  splendour,  was  covered  withverdure  and  flowers;  the  nightingales,  nearly  at  the  end  of  theirsong,  seemed  to  delight  in singing  the  louder;  all  the  birds,  unitingin  their  farewell  to  Spring,  were  singing  in  honour  of  the  birth  ofa  beautiful  summer  day,  one  of  those  beautiful  days  which  one  nelonger  sees  at  my  age  and  which  are  unknown  in  the  melancholy  .land?  in which  I am  now  living.Without  perceiving  it,  I had  wandered  some  distance  from  thetown;  the  heat  increased,  and  I walked  along  under  the  shady  treesof a little  valley  by the  side  of a  brook.  I heard  behind  me  the  soundof horses’  hoofs  and  the  voices  of girls,  who  seemed  in  a  difficulty,but,  nevertheless,  were  laughing  heartily  at  it.  I turned  round,  andheard  myself  called  by name;  when  I drew  near,  I found  two  youngladies  of my  acquaintance,  Mademoiselle  de Graffenried  and  Made-moiselle  Galley,  who,  being poor  horsewomen,  did  not  know  how  tomake  their  horses  cross  the brook.  Mademoiselle  de Graffenried  wasan  amiable  young  Bernese,  who,  having  been  driven  from  her  homein consequence  of some  youthful  folly,  had  followed  the  example  ofMadame  de Warens,  at  whose  house  I had  sometimes  seen  her;  but,as  she  had  no  pension,  she  had  been  only  too  glad  to  attach  herselfto  Mademoiselle  Galley,  who,  having  conceived  a  friendship  for  her,had  persuaded  her  mother  to  let her  stay  with  her  as  her  companionuntil  she  could  find  some  employment.  Mademoiselle  Galley  was  ayear  younger  than  her  companion,  and  better-looking;  there  wassomething  about  her  more  delicate  and  more  refined;  at  the  sametime,  she  had  a  very  neat  and  well-developed  figure,  the  greatestcharm a girl can  possess.  They  loved  each  other  tenderly,  and  theirgood  nature  could  not  fail  to  keep  up  this  intimacy,  unless  somelover  came  to  disturb  it. They told  me  that  they were  on  their  way  toToune,  an  old  château  belonging  to  Madame  Galley;  they  beggedme  to  assist  them  to  get  their  horses  across,  which  they  could  nof.manage  by themselves.  I wanted  to  whip  the  horses,  but  they  wereafraid  that  I might  be  kicked  and  they  themselves  thrown  off.  Iaccordingly  had  recourse  to  another  expedient.  I took  Mademoiselle1 Rousseau  was  at  this  time  at  Wootton,  in  Staffordshire.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU140Galley’s  horse  by the  bridle,  and  then,  pulling  it  after  me,  crossedthe  brook  with  the  water  up  to  my  knees;  the  other  horse  followedwithout  any  hesitation.  After  this,  I wanted  to  take  leave  of  theyoung  ladies  and go my  way  like  a fool.  They whispered  a  few  wordsto  each  other,  and  Mademoiselle  de  Graffenried,  turning  to  me,said,  “No,  no;  you  shan’t  escape  us  like  that.  You  have  got  wet  inserving  us,  and  we  owe  it as  a  duty to  our  conscience  to  see  that  youget  dry.  You  must  come  with  us,  if you  please;  we  make  you  ourprisoner.”  My  heart  beat;  I looked  at  Mademoiselle  Galley.  “Yes,yes,”  added  she,  laughing  at  my  look  of  affright;  “prisoner  of  war.Get  up behind  her; we  will give a  good account  of you.”  “But,  made-moiselle,”  I objected,  “I  have  not  the  honour  of  your  mother’s  ac-quaintance;  what  will  she  say  when  she  sees  me?”  “Her  mother  isnot  at  Toune,”  replied  Mademoiselle  de Graffenried;  “we  are  alone;we  return  this  evening,  and  you can  return  with  us.”The  effect  of  electricity  is not  more  rapid  than  was  the  effect  ofthese  words  upon  me.  Trembling  with  joy,  I sprang  upon  Made-moiselle  de  Graffenried’s  horse;  and,  when  I was  obliged  to  put  myarm  round  her  waist  to  support  myself,  my  heart  beat  so  violentlythat  she  noticed  it.  She  told  me  that  hers  was  beating  too,  since  shewas  afraid  of falling.  In the situation  in which  I was,  this was  almostan  invitation  to  me  to  verify  the  truth  for  myself;  but  I had  not  thecourage;  and, during the whole  of the ride, my  two  arms  surroundedher  like  a  belt,  which  certainly  held  her  tight,  but  never  shifted  itsplace  for  a moment.  Many  women  who  read  this  would  like  to  boxmy  ears—and  they  would  not  be wrong.The  pleasant  excursion  and  the  chatter  of the  young  ladies  mademe  so  talkative  that  we  were  never  silent  for  a  moment  until  eve-ning—in  fact, as  long as  we  were  together.  They had put me  so  com-pletely  at  my  ease,  that  my  tongue  was  as  eloquent  as  my  eyes,  al-though  not  in  the  same  manner.  For  a  few  moments  only,  when  Ifound  myself  alone  with  one  or  the  other,  the  conversation  becamea  little  constrained;  but  the  absent  one  soon  returned,  and  did  notallow  us  time  to  investigate  the  reason  of our  embarrassment.When  we  reached  Toune,  after  I had  first  dried  myself,  we  break-fasted.  Next,  it was  necessary  to  proceed  to  the  important  businessof dinner.  The  young  ladies  from  time  to  time  left  off their  cookingDINNER  AT  TOUNEI41to  kiss  the  farmer’s  children,  and  their  poor  scullion  looked  on  andsmothered  his vexation.  Provisions  had  been  sent  from  the town,  andall  that  was  requisite  for  a  good  dinner,  especially  in  the  matter  ofdelicacies;  but,  unfortunately,  the  wine  had  been  forgotten.  Thiswas  no  wonder,  since  the  young  ladies  did  not  drink  it; but  I wassorry  for  it, since  I had  counted  upon  its  assistance  to  give me  cour-age.  They also  were  annoyed,  possibly  for  the  same  reason,  althoughI do  not  think  so.  Their  lively  and  charming  gaiety  was  innocencepersonified;  besides,  what  could  the  two  of  them  have  done  withme?  They  sent  all  round  the  neighbourhood  to  try  and  get  somewine,  but  without  success,  so  abstemious  and  poor  are  the  peasantsof  this  canton.  They  expressed  their  regret  to  me;  I said  that  theyneed  not  be so  concerned  about  it, that  they did  not  require  wine  inorder  to  intoxicate  me.  This  was  the  only compliment  I ventured  topay  them  during  the  day;  but  I believe  that  the  roguish  creaturessaw  clearly  enough  that  the  compliment  was  sincere.We  dined  in  the  farmer’s  kitchen,  the  two  friends  seated  onbenches  on  either  side  of  the  long  table,  and  their  guest  betweenthem  on a three-legged  stool.  What  a  dinner!  what  an  enchantingremembrance!  Why  should  a  man,  when  he  can  enjoy  pleasures  so,pure  and  real  at  so  little  cost,  try  to  find  new  ones?  No  supper  at  anyof the  petites  maisons  of Paris  could  be  compared  to  this  meal,  notonly  for  gaiety  and  cheerfulness,  but,  I declare,  for  sensual  enjoy-ment.After  dinner  we  practised a little  economy.  Instead  of  drinkingthe  coffee  which  remained  over  from  breakfast,  we  kept  it for  ourtea  with  the  cream  and  cakes  which  they  had  brought  with  them;and,  to  keep up  our  appetites,  we  went  into  the  orchard  to  finish  ourdessert  with  cherries.  I climbed  up  the tree,  and  threw  down  bunchesof  fruit,  while  they  threw  the  stones  back  at  me  through  thebranches.  Once  Mademoiselle  Galley,  holding  out  her  apron  andthrowing  back  her  head,  presented  herself  as  a  mark  so  prettily,  andI took  such  accurate  aim,  that  I threw  a  bunch  right into  her  bosom.How  we  laughed!  I said  to  myself,  If my  lips  were  only  cherries,how  readily  would  I throw  them  into  the  same  place!The  day  passed  in  this  manner  in  the  most  unrestrained  enjoy-ment,  which,  however,  never  overstepped  the  limits  of  the  strictestTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU142decency.  No  double-entendre,  no  risky  jest was  uttered;  and  this  de-cency  was  by no  means  forced,  it  was  perfectly  natural,  and  weacted  and  spoke  as  our  hearts  prompted.  In  short,  my  modesty—others  will  call  it stupidity—was  so  great,  that  the  greatest  liberty  ofwhich  I was  guilty  was  once  to  kiss  Mademoiselle  Galley’s  hand.  Itis true  that  the  circumstances  gave  special  value  to  this  favour.  Wewere  alone,  I was  breathing  with  difficulty,  her  eyes  were  cast  down;my  mouth,  instead  of giving  utterance  to  words,  fastened  upon  herhand,  which  she gently  withdrew  after  I had  kissed  it, looking  at  mein  a  manner  that  showed  no  irritation.  I do not  know  what  I mighthave  said  to  her;  her  friend  came  into  the  room,  and  appeared  tome  distinctly  ugly at  that  moment.At  last,  they  remembered  that  they  ought  not  to  wait  till  nightbefore  returning  to  the  town.  We  only  just  had  time  to  get  backwhile  it was  daylight,  and  we  hastened  to  set  out  in the  same  orderas  we  came.  If I had  dared,  I would  have  changed  the  order;  forMademoiselle  Gailey’s  looks  had  created  a  profound  impressionupon  my  heart;  but  I did  not  venture  to  say  anything,  and  it was  notfor  her  to  make  the  proposal.  On  the  way,  we  said  to  ourselves  thatit was  a  great  pity that  the  day was  over;  but,  far  from  complainingthat  it had  been  too  short,  we  agreed  that  we  had  possessed  the  secretof lengthening  it by the  aid  of  all  the  amusements  with  which  wehad  known  how  to  occupy  it.I left  them  almost  at  the  spot  where  they  had  found  me.  Withwhat  regret  we  separated!  with  what  delight  we  planned  to  meetagain!  Twelve  hours  spent  together  were  for  us  as  good  as  centuriesof  intimacy.  The  sweet  remembrance  of  that  day  cost  the  younggirls nothing;  the  tender  union  between  us  three  was  worth  far  live-lier  pleasures,  which  would  not  have  suffered  it to  exist;  we  lovedone  another  openly  and  without  shame,  and  were  ready  to  love  oneanother  always  in  the  same  manner.  Innocence  of  character  has  itsenjoyment,  which  is certainly  equal  to  any  other,  since  it knows  norelaxation  and  never  ceases.  As  for  me,  I know  that  the  memory  ofso  beautiful  a  day touches  and  charms  me  more,  and  goes  straighterto  my  heart,  than  the  recollection  of  any  pleasures  that  I have  everenjoyed,  I did  not  exactly  know  what  I  wanted  with  these  twocharming  persons,  but  both  of them  interested  me  exceedingly.  I do=REFLECTIONS  ON  HIS  ADVENTURE  .143not  say that,  if  I had  had  control  of  the  arrangements,  my  heartwould  have  been  equally  shared  between  them.  I had  a  slight  feel-ing of preference;  I should  have  been  quite  happy  to  have  Mademoi-selle  de  Graffenried  as  a  mistress;  but,  if it had  depended  entirelyupon  myself,  I think  I should  have  preferred  her  for  an  intimatefriend.  Be  that  as  it may,  it seemed  to  me,  when  I left  them,  that  Icould  no  longer  live  without  them  both.  Who  would  have  said  thatI was  never  to  see  them  in  my  life  again,  and that  our  love  of a  daywas  to  end  there?My  readers  will  not  fail  to  laugh  at  my  love  adventures,  and  toremark  that,  after  lengthy  preliminaries,  even  those  which  madegreatest  progress,  end  in a  kiss  of the  hand.  Oh,  my  readers,  do  notbe mistaken!  I have,  perhaps,  had  greater  enjoyment  in  my  amourswhich  have  ended  in  a  simple  kiss  of  the  hand,  than  you  will  everhave  in yours,  which,  at  least,  have  begun  with  that!Venture,  who  had  gone  to  bed  very  late  the  night  before,  camehome  soon  after  me.  This  time  I did  not  feel  as  pleased  as  usual  tosee  him,  and  I was  careful  not  to  tell  him  how  I had  spent  the  day.The  young  ladies  had  spoken  of  him  somewhat  contemptuously,and  had  seemed  ill-pleased  to  know  that  I was  in  such  bad  hands;this  did  him  harm  in my  estimation,  and,  besides,  everything  whichdrew  my  attention  from  them  could  not  fail  to be disagreeable.  How-ever,  he soon  brought  me  back  to  myself  and  to  him,  by speaking  ofmy  position.  It  was  too  critical  to  be  able  to  continue.  Although  Ispent  very  little,  my  purse  was  almost  empty,  and  I was  without  re-sources.  No  news  of  mamma  arrived;  I did  not  know  what  to  do,and  I felt  a  cruel  pang  at  seeing  the  friend  of Mademoiselle  Galleyreduced  to  beggary.Venture  told  me  that  he had  spoken  about  me  to  the  Juge-Mage?and  that  he  would  take  me  to  dine  with  him  on  the  following  day;that  he  was  a  man  who  might  be  able  to  assist  me  through  hisfriends,  and  a  pleasant  acquaintance  to  make,  being  a  man  of intel-ligence  and  education,  and  an  agreeable  companion  who  possessedtalent  himself  and  respected  it in others;  then,  mingling  together  inhis  usual  fashion  the  most  serious  matters  with  the  most  trifling2 The  lieutenant  of  the  seneschal,  an  important  officer  of  the  crown,  who  ad-ministered  justice  in  the  King’s  name.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU144frivolities,  he  showed  me  a pretty  little  couplet  just  arrived  fromParis,  set  to  an  air  out  of one  of  Mouret’s  operas,  which  was  beingplayed  at  the  time.  This  couplet  had  pleased  M.  Simon  (the  Juge-Mage)  so  much,  that  he  wanted  to  compose  another  to  the  sametune  to  answer  it; he  had  also  told  Venture  to  compose  one,  and  thelatter  had  been  seized  with  the  mad  idea  of  making  me  compose  athird,  in order,  as  he said,  that  the couplets  might be seen  arriving  onthe  next  day like  the  sedan-chairs  in  the  Roman  comique.*Being  unable  to  sleep,  I composed  my  couplet  to  the  best  of myabilities.  Considering  that  they  were  the  first  verses  that  I had  evermade,  they were  tolerable,  even  better,  or,  at  any  rate,  more  tasteful,than  they  would  have  been  the  day  before,  as  the  subject  turnedupon  a  tender  situation,  for  which  my  heart  was  already  sympa-thetic.  I showed  my  couplet,  in  the  morning,  to  Venture,  who,thinking  it pretty,  put  it in  his  pocket  without  telling  me  whetherhe  had  composed  his  own.  We  went  to  dine  with  M.  Simon,  whoreceived  us  cordially.  The  conversation  was  animated,  indeed,  itcould  not  have  been  anything  else,  when  carried  on  by two  intelli-gent  and  well-read  men.  As  for  me,  I played  my  usual  part;  I lis-tened  and  held  my  tongue.  Neither  of  them  said  a  word  about  thecouplet;  I said  nothing  either,  and, as  far  as  I know,  mine  was  nevermentioned,M.  Simon  appeared  satisfied  with  my  behaviour;  this  was  nearlyall  that  he learned  about  me  at  this  interview.  He  had  already  seenme  several  times  at  mamma’s  house,  without  paying  particular  at-tention  to  me.  It  is  from  this  dinner  that  I date  my  acquaintancewith  him,  which  proved  useless  as  far  as  the  object  I had  in  viewwas  concerned,  but  from  which  I afterwards  gained  other  advan-tages,  which  cause  me  to  remember  him  with  pleasure.I must  not  omit  to  say  something  about  his  personal  appearance,of which,  considering  his  magisterial  capacity  and  the  bel  esprit  onwhich  he prided  himself,  it would  otherwise  be impossible  for  any-one  to  form  an  idea.  His  height  was  certainly  not  three  fect.  Hislegs,  straight,  thin,  and  tolerably  long,  would  have  made  him  looktaller, if they  had  been  vertical;  but  they  formed  an  obtuse  anglelike  those  of  a  wide-opened  pair  of  compasses.  His  body  was  not? By  Scarron.M.  SIMON145only  short,  but  thin  and  in  every  way  indescribably  small.  Whennaked,  he  must  have  loőked  like  a  grasshopper.  His  head,  of ordi-nary  size,  with  a  well-formed  face,  noble  features,  and  nice  eyes,looked  like  a  false  head  set  upon  a  stump.  He  might  have  sparedhimself  much  expense  in  the  matter  of clothing,  for  his  large  wig-alone  covered  him  completely  from  head  to  foot.He  had  two  entirely  different  voices,  which,  when  he  spoke,  con-tinually  mingled  together,  and  contrasted  in a  manner  which  at firstwas  very  amusing,  but  scon  became  disagreeable.  One  was  graveand  sonorous;  if I may  say  so,  it was  the voice  of his  head.  The  other—clear,  sharp,  and  piercing—was  the  voice  of  his  body.  When  hewas  very  careful,  spoke  very  deliberately,  and  husbanded  his breath,he could  always  speak  with  his  deep voice;  but  as  soon  as  he becameever  so  little  animated  and  spoke  in a livelier  tone,  his  accent  resem-bled  the  whistling  of a  key,  and  he  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  re-covering  his  bass.With  the  appearance  which  I have  described,  and  which  is notin  the  least  exaggerated,  M.  Simon  was  polite,  a  great  courtier,  andcareful  in  his  dress  even  to  foppishness.  As  he  desired  to  make  themost  of his  advantages,  he  liked  to  give audience  in bed;  for  no  one,who  saw a fine  head  on  the  pillow,  was  likely  to  imagine  that  thatwas  all.  This  sometimes  caused  scenes,  which  I am  sure  all  Annecystill  remembers.One  morning,  when  he  was  waiting  for  some  litigants  in,  orrather  upon,  this bed, in a beautiful  fine  white  nightcap,  ornamentedwith  two  large  knots  of rose-coloured  ribbon,  a  countryman  arrivedand  knocked  at  the  door.  The  maidservant  had  gone  out.  M.  Simon,hearing  the  knock  repeated,  cried  out,  “Come  in,”  and  the  word,spoken a little  too  vigorously,  came  out  of his  mouth  with  his  shrillutterance.  The  man  entered,  looked  to  see  where  the  woman’s  voicecame  from,  and,  seeing  in  the  bed  a  woman’s  mob-cap  and a top-knot,  was  going to  retire  with  profound  apologies.  M.  Simon  becameangry,  and  cried  out  in a still  shriller  voice.  The  countryman,  con-firmed  in  his  idea  and  considering  himself  insulted,  overwhelmedhim  with  abuse,  told  him  that  he  was  apparently  nothing  but  aprostitute,  and  that  the  Juge-Mage  set  anything  but  a  good  examplein  his  house.  M.  Simon,  full  of fury,  and  having  no  other  weaponTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU146but  his  chamberpot,  was  going  to  throw  it at  the  poor  man’s  head,when  his  housekeeper  came  in.This  little  dwarf,  although  so  cruelly  treated  by nature  in  regardto  his  person,  had  received  compensation  for  this  in  his  mental  tal-ents,  which  were  naturally  agreeable,  and  which  he  had  carefullydeveloped.  Although  he  was  said  to  be  a  tolerably  good  lawyer,  hehad  no  liking  for  his  profession.  He  had  thrown  himself  into  politeliterature,  and  had  succeeded.  He  had,  above  all, acquired  that  bril-liant  superficiality,  that  gift  of  varied  conversation  which  gives  so-ciety  its  charm,  even  in  the  company  of women.  He  knew  by heartall  the  little  characteristics  of  the  Anas*  and  the  like;  he  possessedthe  art  of making  the  most  of them,  relating  them  to  advantage  andwith  an  air  of mystery,  as  if that  which  had  taken  place  sixty  yearsago  had  been  an  anecdote  of yesterday.  He  understood  music,  andsang  agreeably  with  his  man’s  voice—in  short,  he  possessed  manypretty  accomplishments  for  a  magistrate.  By  dint  of  long  payingcourt  to  the  ladies  of Annecy,  he  had  become  the  fashion  amongstthem:  he was  always  in attendance  upon  them  like  a  little  monkey.®He  even  pretended  to have  great  success  with  women,  which  amusedthem  exceedingly.  A certain  Madame  d’Epagny  said  that  the  great-est  favour  for  him  was  to  be allowed  to  kiss  a woman’s  knee.As  he  had  a  knowledge  of good  literature  and  was  very  fond  oftalking  about  it, his  conversation  was  not  only  amusing,  but  also  in-structive.  Afterwards,  when  I had  acquired a taste  for  study,  I culti-vated  his acquaintance,  and  derived  great  advantage  from  it.  I some-times  went  from  Chambéri,  where  I was  at  that  time,  to  see  him.He  commended  and  encouraged  my  zeal,  and  gave  me  some  goodadvice  about  my  reading,  by which  I often  benefited.  Unfortunately,in this  weakly  body  dwelt  a  very  sensitive  soul.  Some  years  later,  hehad  some  trouble  or  other  which  so  grieved  him  that  he  died  of it.It was  a  pity;  he  was  certainly  a  good  little  man,  whom  one  beganby laughing  at  and  ended  by loving.  Although  his life  has  had  littleto do with  mine,  yet as  I have  received  some  useful  lessons  from  him,Collections  of  memorable  sayings  of  certain  persons,  and  anecdotes  con-nected  with  them,  as  Johnsoniana,  Walpoliana.  These  titles  originated  in France.lSapajou:  an  American  monkey;  used  figuratively  in  the  sense  of  “an  uglylittle  man.”A532:.sWRITES  TO  MLLE.  DE  GRAFFENRIED147I thought  I might,  out  of gratitude,  dedicate  a  niche  in my  memoryto  him.eAs  soon  as  I was  at  liberty,  I ran  to  the  street  where  MademoiselleGalley  lived,  flattering  myself  with  the  hope  of seeing  someone  go-ing in  or  out,  or  opening  a  window.  Nothing,  not  even  a cat,  wasto  be seen;  and  all  the  time  I was  there  the  house  remained  as  firmlyclosed  as  if it had  never  been  inhabited.  The  street  was  narrow  anddeserted;  the  presence  of  a  man  attracted  attention;  from  time  totime  someone  passed,  or  went  in or  out  of the  neighbourhood.  I wasmuch  troubled  about  my  person;  it seemed  to  me  that  they guessedwhy I was  there;  and  this  idea  tormented  me,  for  I have  always  pre-ferred  the  honour  and  repose  of those  who  were  dear  to  me  to  myown  pleasures.At  last,  tired  of playing  the  Spanish  lover  and  having  no  guitar,  Idetermined  to  write  to  Mademoiselle  de Graffenried.  I would  ratherhave  written  to  her  friend,  but  I did  not  dare  to  do so;  besides,  it wasmore  becoming  to  begin  with  the one  to  whom  I owed  the  acquaint-ance  of the  other,  and  with  whom  I was  more  intimate.  When  myletter  was  finished,  I took  it to  Mademoiselle  Giraud,  as  had  beenagreed  with  the  young  ladies  when  we  parted.  It was  they who  sug-gested  this  expedient.  Mademoiselle  Giraud  was  a  quilter,  and,  asshe  sometimes  worked  at  Madame  Galley’s,  she  had  access  to  herhouse.  The  messenger,  certainly,  did  not  appear  to  me  well  chosen:but  I was  afraid  that,  if I made  any  difficulty  about  her,  they wouldpropose  no  other.  Besides,  I did  not  dare  to  hint  that  she  wanted  toestablish  a  claim  of her  own  upon  me. I felt  mortified  that  she shouldventure  to  think  that  she  was,  in  my  eyes,  of the  same  sex  as  thoseyoung  ladies.  In  short,  I preferred  this  means  of  delivering  my  let-ter  to  none  at  all, and  took  my  chance.At  the  first  word  Giraud  guessed  my  secret;  it was  not  difficult.Even  if a  letter  to  be  delivered  to  a  young  lady  had  not  spoken  foritself,  my  silly  and  embarrassed  air  alone  would  have  betrayed  me.It may  be  imagined  that  this  commission  did  not  afford  her  greatpleasure;  however,  she  undertook  it, and  executed  it faithfully.  Thenext  morning  I ran  to  her  house,  where  I found  my  answer.  HowI hastened  to  get  outside,  to  read  and  kiss  it to  my  heart’s  content—that  there  is no  need  to  tell;  but  there  is all the  more  reason  to  men-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU148tion  the  manner  in  which  Mademoiselle  Giraud  behaved,  in  whichshe  showed  greater  delicacy  and  reserve  than  I should  have  expectedfrom  her.  Sensible  enough  to  perceive  that,  with  her  thirty-sevenyears,  her  leveret’s  eyes,  her  snuff-bedaubed  nose,  her  shrill  voiceand  her  black  skin,  she  stood  a  bad  chance  against  two  young  per-sons,  full  of  grace  and  in  all  the  splendour  of  beauty,  she  resolvedneither  to  betray  nor  to  assist  them,  and  preferred  to  lose  me  ratherthan  help them  to  win  me.[1732.]—Merceret,  not  having  received  any  tidings  of  her  mis-tress,  had  for some  time  thought  of returning  to Fribourg;  Mademot-selle  Giraud  made  her  decide  to  do so.  She  did  more;  she  gave  her  tounderstand  that  it  would  be  right  that  someone  should  take  herback  to  her  father,  and  proposed  myself.  Little  Merceret,  who  byno  means  disliked  me  either,  thought  this  idea  a  very  good one.  Thesame  day  they  spoke  to  me  of it as  a settled  affair,  and,  as  I foundnothing  disagreeable  in  this  manner  of  disposing  of  myself,  I con-sented,  considering  the  journey  as  a  matter  of  a  week  at  most.Giraud,  who  thought  otherwise,  arranged  everything.  I was  obligedto  confess  the  state  of my  finances.  Provision  was  made  for me;  Mer-ceret  undertook  to  defray  my  expenses,  and,  to  make  up  for  the  lossshe thus  incurred,  it was  agreed,  at  my  entreaty,  that  her  few  belong-ings  should  be  sent  on  in  advance,  and  that  we  should  make  thejourney  slowly  on  foot.  This  was  done.I ami  sorry  to  be obliged  to  describe  so  many  girls in love  with  me;but,  as  I have  very  little  reason  to  be  vain  of the  advantages  I havegained  from  these  amours,  I think  I may  tell  the  truth  withoutscruple.  Merceret,  younger  and  not  so  cunning  as  Giraud,  nevermade  such  lively  advances;  but  she  imitated  the  tone  of  my  voiceand  accent,  repeated  my  words,  showed  me  the  attention  which  Iought to  have  shown  to  her, and, being  naturally  very  timid,  alwaystook  care  that  we  slept in the  same  room;  an  intimacy  which  rarelystops  at  such  a  point  in  the  case  of  a  young  man  of  twenty  and  ayoung  woman  of twenty-five  who  are  travelling  together.On  this  occasion,  however,  such  was  the  case.  My  simplicity  wassuch that,  although  Merceret  was  not  disagreeable  to  me,  not  onlydid  the  slightest  attempt  at  gallantry  never  occur  to  my  mind,  dur-ing the  whole  journey,  but  I never  even  had  the  remotest  idea  of2VISITS  HIS  FATHER149anything  of the  kind;  and,  even  if the.idea  had  occurred  to  me,  Ishould  have  been  too footish  to  know  how  to  take  advantage  of  it.I could  not  imagine  how  a  young  man  and  a  young  woman  couldever  sleep  together;  I believed  that  it  required  ages  to  prepare  forthis  terrible  arrangement.  If  poor  Merceret,  when  she  offered  to  |defray  my  expenses,  reckoned  upon  some  equivalent,  she  was  de-ceived;  we  reached  Fribourg  exactly  as  we  had  left  Annecy.When  we  passed  through  Geneva,  I did  not  go  to  see  anyone;  butI almost  had a serious  attack  of illness  on  the  bridges.  I have  neverseen  the  walls  of  this  happy  city,  never  entered  its  gates,  withoutfeeling  a certain  heart-sinking,  the  result  of  excessive  emotion.While  the  noble  image  of  liberty  elevated  my  soul,  thoughts  ofequality,  union,  and  gentleness  of manners  moved  me  even  to  tears,and  inspired  me  with a lively  regret  at  having  lost  all these  blessings.How  mistaken  I was,  and  yet how  naturally!  J thought  I saw  all this:in  my  native  land,  because I carried  it in  my  heart.We  were  obliged  to  pass  Nyon.  Pass  without  seeing  my  goodfather!  Had  I been  able  to  bring  myself  to  do  this,  I should  after-`  wards  have  died  of  grief.  I left  Merceret  at  the  inn,  and  went  atall risks  to  see  him.  Ah!  how  wrong I was  to  be afraid  of him!  WhenI approached  him, his heart  opened  itself  to  those  feelings  of a  fatherwith  which  it was  filled.  How  he  wept  while  we  embraced!  He  atfirst  thought  that  I had  returned  to  him.  I told  him  my  story  andmy  resolution.  He  feebly  opposed  it.  He  pointed  out  to  me  thedangers  to  which  I was  exposing  inyself,  and  told  me  that  the  brief-est  follies  were  the  best.  For  the  rest,  he  did  not  feel  the  slightesttemptation  to  detain  me  by force,  and in  that  I am  of opinion  thathe  was  right;  but  it is none  the  less  certain  that  he  did  not  do  allthat  he  might  have  done  to  bring  me  back,  whether  it was  that  hehimself  was  of opinion  that  I ought  not  to  retrace  the  step  that  I hadalready  taken,  or,  perhaps,  did  not  quite  know  what  he  could  dowith  me  at  my  age.  I have  since  learned  that  he  had  formed  a  veryunjust  and  entirely  false,  although  very  natural,  opinion  of  mytravelling  companion.  My  step-mother,  a  good  woman  but  rathermawkish,  pretended  to  want  to  keep  me  to  supper.  I did  not  stay,but told  them  that  I intended  to stop  longer  with  them  on  my  return,and  left in their  charge  my  little  bundle  which  I had  sent  by the boatTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU150and  did  not  know  what  to  do with.  I set  out  early  the  next  morning,pleased  that  I had  had  the  courage  to  do  my  duty  and  had  seen  myfather.We  arrived  without  accident  at  Fribourg.  Towards  the  end  ofthe  journey,  my  companion’s  advances  became  less  pronounced.After  our  arrival,  she  showed  me  nothing  but  coldness,  and  herfather,  who  was  not  rolling  in money,  did  not  give me  a  very  favour-able  reception;  and  I went  to  an  inn  to  sleep.  The  following  day  Iwent  to  see  them;  they  invited  me  to  dinner;  I accepted.  Then  weseparated  with  dry  eyes.  In  the evening  I returned  to  my  beershop,and  left  the  place  two  days  after  my  arrival,  without  exactly  know-ing which  way I intended  to  go.Here  again  was  an  incident  in  my  life  when  Providence  offeredme  exactly  what  I wanted,  in order  to  spend  my  days  in  happiness.Merceret  was  a  very  good  girl,  certainly  not  brilliant  or  handsome,but  neither  was  she  ugly;  she  possessed  little  animation,  and,  butfor  occasional  exhibitions  of temper,  which  passed  off with  tears  andnever  led  to  any  stormy  results,  was  very  sensible.  She  was  reallyattached  to  me;  I might  have  married  her  without  any  difficulty,and  followed  her father’s  trade;  my  taste  for music  would  have  mademe  fond  of it.  I should  have  settled  at  Fribourg—a  little  town,  notpretty,  certainly,  but  inhabited  by  very  good-natured  people.  1should,  no  doubt,  have  lost  much  pleasure,  but  I should  have  livedin  peace  to  my  last  hour;  and  J, better  than  anyone  else,  ought  toknow  that  there  was  no  reason  for  a moment’s  hesitation  about  sucha  bargain.I returned,  not  to  Nyon,  but to  Lausanne.  I wanted  to  sate  myselfwith  the  sight  of this  beautiful  lake,  which  is there  seen  in its  great-est  extent.  Few  of the  secret  motives  which  have  determined  me  toact  have  been  more  rational.  Things  seen  at  a  distance  are  rarelypowerful  enough  to  make  me  act.  The  uncertainty  of the  future  hasalways  made  me  lock  upon  plans,  which  need  considerable  time  tocarry  them  out,  as  decoys  for  fools.  I indulge  in  hopes  like  others,provided  it costs  me  nothing  to  support  them;  but  if they  requirecontinued  attention,  I have  done  with  it. The  least  trifling  pleasurewhich  is within  my  reach  tempts  me  more  than  the joys of Paradise.However,  I make  an  exception  of the  pleasure  which  is followed  byTHE  INN  AT  MOUDON151pain;  this  has  no  temptation  for  me,  because  I love  only pure  enjoy-ments,  and  these  a  man  ever  has  when  he  knows  that  he  is  pre-paring  for  himself  repentance  and  regret.It was  very  necessary  for  me  to  reach  some  place,  the  nearer  thebetter;  for,  having  lost  my  way,  I found  myself  in  the  evening  at  |Moudon,  where  I spent  the  little  money  I had  left,  except  ten  kreut-zers,  which  went  the  next  day for  dinner;  and,  in the  evening,  whenI reached a little  village  near  Lausanne,  I entered  an  inn  without  asou  to  pay  for  my  bed,  and  not  knowing  what  to  do.  Being  veryhungry,  I put  a  good  face  upon  the  matter,  and  called  for  supper,as  if I had  been  quite  able  to  pay  for  it.  I went  to  bed  without  think-ing of anything,  and  slept  soundly;  and,  after  I had  breakfasted  inthe  morning  and  reckoned  with  my  host,  I wanted  to  leave  him  mywaistcoat  as  security  for the seven  batz,  which  was  the amount  of mybill.  This  good  fellow  refused  it; he  said  that,  thanks  to  heaven,  hehad  never  stripped  anyone;  that  he  did  not  mean  to  begin  for  thesake  of seven  batz;  that  I could  keep my  waistcoat  and  pay  him  whenI could.  I was  touched  by his  kindness,  but  less  than  I ought to  havebeen,  and  less  than  I have  been  since,  when  I have  thought  of  itagain.  I soon  sent  him  his money,  with  thanks,  by a messenger  whomI could  trust;  but  fifteen  years  afterwards,  returning  from  Italy  byway  of Lausanne,  I sincerely  regretted  to  find  that  I had  forgottenthe name  of the landlord  and  of the inn.  I should  certainly  have  goneto  see  him;  it would  have  been a real  pleasure  to  me  to  remind  himof his  act  of charity,  and  to  prove  to  him  that  it had  not  been  ill-applied.  The  simple  and  unpretentious  kindness  of this  worthy  manappears  to  me  more  deserving  of gratitude  than  services,  doubtlessmore  important,  but  rendered  with  greater  ostentation.When  approaching  Lausanne,  I mused  upon  the  straits  in  whichI found  myself,  and  thought  how  I might  extricate  myself  withoutbetraying  my  distress  to  my  step-mother;  and,  in this  pilgrimage  onfoot,  I compared  myself  to  my  friend  Venture  on  his  arrival  atAnnecy.  I was  so  heated  with  this  idea  that,  without  reflecting  thatI possessed  neither  his  charm  of  manner  nor  his  accomplishments,I took  it into  my  head  to  play the  little  Venture  at  Lausanne,  to  givelessons  in music,  which  I did  not  understand,  and  to  say  that  I camefrom  Paris,  where  I had  never  been.  As  there  was  no  choir-school,.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU152in  which  I could  have  offered  to  assist,  and  as,  besides,  I was  notsuch  a  fool  as  to  venture  amongst  those  who  were  acquainted  withthe  art,  I commenced  to  carry  out  my  fine  project  by making  in-quiries  for  a  small  inn  where  I could  live  well  and  cheaply.  I wasrecommended  to  a  certain  M.  Perrotet,  who  took  boarders.  ThisPerrotet  proved  to  be  the  best  fellow  in  the  world,  and  gave  me  amost  hearty  reception.  I told  him  my  petty  lies,  as  I had  preparedthem.  He  promised  to  speak  about  me,  and  to  try  to  get  me  somepupils,  and  said  that  he  would  not  ask  me  for  any  money  until  Ihad  earned  some.  His  charge  for  board  was  five  “white  crowns,”little  enough,  everything  considered,  for  the  accommodation,  buta  great  deal  for  me.  He  advised  me  only to  put  myself  on  half-boardat  first;  this  meant  some  good  soup,  and  nothing  else,  for  dinner,but  a  good  supper  later.  I agreed.  Poor  Perrotet  let  me  have  all  thiswithout  payment,  and  with  the  best  heart  in the  world,  and  sparedno  pains  to  be  of use  to  me.Why  is it that,  having  found  so  many  good  people  in  my  youth,I find  so  few  in  my  later  years?  Is their  race  extinct?  No;  but  theclass  in which  I am  obliged  to  look  for  them  now,  is no  longer  thesame  as  that  in  which  I found  them.  Among  the  people,  wheregreat  passions  only  speak  at  intervals,  the  sentiments  of  naturemake  themselves  more  frequently  heard;  in  the  higher  ranks  theyare  absolutely  stifled,  and,  under  the  mask  of  sentiment,  it is  onlyinterest  or  vanity  that  speaks.I wrote  from  Lausanne  to  my  father,  who  forwarded  my  bundle,and  gave  me  some  excellent  advice—of  which  I ought to  have  madebetter  use.  I have  already  noted  moments  of  incomprehensible  de-lirium,  during  which  I was  no  longer  myself.  Here,  again,  is one  ofthe  most  striking  instances.  In  order  to  understand  to  what  an  ex-tent  I had  lost  my  head,  to  what  an  extent  I had,  so  to  speak,  Ven-turised  myself,  it is only  necessary  to  consider  how  many  extrava-gances  I committed  at  one  and  the  same  time.  Behold  me a teacherof singing,  without  knowing  how  to  decipher  an  air;  for  even  hadI profited  by the  six months  spent  with  Le Maitre,  they would  neverhave  been  sufficient;  besides,  I had  been  taught  by a  master,  andthat  was  enough  to  make  me  learn  indifferently.  A Parisian  fromGeneva,  and  a  Catholic  in a Protestant  country,  I considered  I oughtHIS  COMPOSITION:  PERFORMED153to change  my  name  as  well  as  my  religion  and  my  country.  I alwaysadhered  as  closely  as  possile  to  my great  model.  He  had  called  him-self  Venture  de  Villeneuve;  out  of  the  name  Rousseau  I made  theanagram  Vaussore,  and  called  myself  Vaussore  de  Villeneuve.Venture  knew  how  to  compose,  although  he had  said  nothing  aboutit; I, without  any  knowledge  of this,  boasted  of my  skill  before  allthe  world;  and,  without  being  able  to  score  the  most  trifling  vaude-ville,  I gave  myself  out  as  a  composer.  This  was  not  all; having  beenpresented  to  M.  de  Treytorens,  a  professor  of  law,  who  was  veryfond  of music  and  gave  concerts  at  his house,  I must  needs  give hima  sample  of my  talents,  and  began  to  compose a piece  for his concertwith  as  much  effrontery  as  if I knew  how  to  set  about  it. I had  theperseverance  to  work  for  a  fortnight  at  this  beautiful  composition,to  make a fair  copy  of it, to  write  out  the  parts,  and  distribute  themwith  as  much  assurance  as  if it had  been  a  masterpiece  of harmony.Lastly,  a  thing which  will  hardly  be believed  although  it is perfectlytrue,  to  crown  this  lofty  production  in  a  befitting  manner,  I addedat  the  end  a  pretty  minuet,  which  was  sung  in  every  street,  andwhich,  perhaps,  everybody  still  recollects,  the  words  of  which  wereas  follows:Quelle  caprice!Quelle  injustice!Quoi!  ta  ClariceTrahirait  tes  feux!  etc.Venture  had  taught  me  this  air,  with  a  bass  accompaniment  an4other  disgusting  words,  which  had  helped  me  to  remember  it.  }accordingly  added  at  the  end  of  my  composition  this minuet  andhis bass,  suppressing  the  words,  and  gave  the  whole  out  as  my  own,as  fearlessly  as  if I had  been  talking  to  the  inhabitants  of the  moon.The  company  assembled  to  perform  my  piece.  I explained  to  eachhow  the  time  was  to  be  taken,  the  manner  of  execution,  and  thesigns  of  repetition  of  the  parts.  I was  extremely  busy.  They  spentfive  or  six  minutes  in  trying  their  voices  and  instruments,  whichseemed  five  or  six  centuries.  At  last  all  was  ready;  I gave  five  or  sixbeats  of  “Attention!”  with  a  beautiful  roll  of  paper  upon  my  con-ductor’s  desk.  Silence  having  been  obtained,  I solemnly  began  to.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU154.  No,  since  the  daysbeat  time,  the  performance  commenced.  .of French  opera,  never  has  such  a  caterwauling  been  heard!  What-ever  they  might  have  thought  of  my  pretended  talent,  the  effectwas  worse  than  anything  that  seemed  to  be expected.  The  musicianswere  ready  to  choke  with  laughter;  the  audience  opened  their  eyeswide,  and  would  gladly  have  stopped  their  ears,  but  did  not  knowhow.  The  musicians,  who  played  the  part  of my  executioners,  wish-ing to  amuse  themselves,  scraped  horribly  enough  to  split the drumof a  deaf  man’s®  ear.  I had  the  hardihood  to  keep  on  without  stop-ping,  my  forehead  covered  with  large  drops  of sweat,  but  preventedby shame  from  running  away  and  leaving  them  all in the  lurch.  Byway  of consolation,  I heard  those  who  were  present  whispering  tothemselves,  or  rather  to  me,  “Intolerable!  What  mad  music!  What  awitches’  Sabbath!”  Poor  Jean  Jacques!  in  this  cruel  moment,  littledid  you  think  that  one  day,  in  the  presence  of the  King  of  Franceand  all his Court,  your  music  would  excite  murmurs  of applause  andastonishment,  and  that, in all the boxes  round  you,  charming  womenwould  whisper  to  themselves,  “What  enchanting  music!  Whatcharming  notes!  All  these  airs  go  straight  to  the  heart!”But  what  put  everyone  in  good  humour  was  the  minuet.  Nosooner  had  a  few  notes  been  played,  than  I heard  on  all  sides  burstsof laughter.  Everybody  congratulated  me  on  my  refined  taste;  theyassured  me  that  this  minuet  would  make  a  name  for  me,  and  thatmy  composition  deserved  to  be sung  everywhere.  I need  not  describemy  anguish,  nor  confess  that  I well  deserved  it.Next  day, one  of  the  musicians,  named  Lutold,  came  to  see  me,and  was  honest  enough  not  to  congratulate  me  on  my  success.  Thedeep feeling  of  folly,  shame  and  regret,  despair  at  the  position  towhich I was  reduced,  the  impossibility  of keeping  my  heart  shut  inmy  distress,  made  me  open  it to  him.  I let my  tears  flow  freely;  and,not  content  with  confessing  my  ignorance,  I told  him  everything,begging  him  to  keep  it  a  secret;  he  promised  to  do  so,  and  kepthis  word  in  the  manner  that  may  be  imagined.  The  same  eveningthe whole  of Lausanne  knew  who  I was;  and, what  was  remarkable,no  one  showed  that  he knew  it, not  even  the  good  Perrotet,  who  inUn quinze-vingt:  properly  an  inmate  of  the  hospital  at  Paris,  established  for6::.<300  blind  men.MEMORIES  OF  MADAME  DE  WARENS155,spite  of  everything,  was  not deterred  from  giving  me  board  andlodging.I lived,  but  my  life  was gens melancholy.  The  results  of my  firstappearance  did  not  make  Lausanne  a  very  agreeable  place  for  meto  stay  in. Pupils  did  not  come  in crowds;  I did  not  even  get a  singlegirl to  teach,  and  no  one  belonging  to  the  town.  I had  in all two  orthree  fat  “Deutschers,”  whose  stupidity  was  only  equalled  by myignorance,  who  wearied  me  to  death,  and,  in  my  hands,  did  notturn  out  very  accomplished  strummers.  I was  sent  for  to  one  houseonly,  where a little  serpent  of  a  girl  amused  herself  with  showingme  a  quantity  of music  of which  I could  not  read  a  note,  and  whichshe  was  spiteful  enough  afterwards  to  sing  in  the  music-master’sface,  to  show  him  how  it ought  to  be  executed.  I was  so  little  ableto  read  an  air  at  sight,  that  at  the  brilliant  concert  of which  I havespoken,  I was  utterly  unable  to  follow  the  performance  even  for  amoment  to  find  out  whether  the  musicians  were  playing  what  I hadbefore  my  eyes—the  music  which  I had  composed  myself.In the midst  of these  great  humiliations  I found  sweet  consolationin  the  news  I received  from  time  to  time  from  my  two  charmingfriends.  I have  always  found  great  power  of consolation  in their  sex;and  nothing  soothes  my  dejection  in times  of affliction  more  than  thefeeling  that  an  amiable  person  sympathizes  with  me.  The  corres-pondence,  however,  came  to  an  end  soon  afterwards,  and  was  neverrenewed;  but  it was  my  fault.  When  I changed  my  place  of  abode,I forgot  to  give them  my  address;  and,  being’compelled  by necessityto  think  of nothing  but  myself,  I soon  forgot  them  altogether.I have  not  spoken  of poor  mamma  for  some  time;  but  it wouldbe  a  mistake  to  think  that  I also  forgot  her.  I never  ceased  to  thinkof her  and  to  long  to  find  her  again,  not  only  to  satisfy  the  needs  ofexistence,  but  still  more  those  of  my  heart.  My  devotion  to  her,lively  and  tender  as  it was,  did  not  prevent  me  from  loving  others,but  not  in  the  same  way.  All  alike  owed  my  tenderness  to  theircharms;  but,  whereas  in  the  case  of others  these  were  the  only causeof it, and  it would  have  disappeared  with  them,  mamma  might  havegrown  old  and  ugly,  and  I should  have  loved  her  as  fondly  as  ever.My  heart  had  completely  transferred  to  her  person  the  homagewhich  it at  frst  rendered  to  her  beauty;  and,  whatever  change  sheTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU156might  have  suffered,  my  feelings  towards  her  could  never  havechanged,  provided  that  she  had  still  remained  herself.  I knew  verywell  that  I owed  her  my  gratitude;  but  in reality  I did  not  think  ofthat.  Whatever  she  might  have  done  for  me  or  not,  it would  alwayshave  been  the  same.  I loved  her  neither  from  a  feeling  of  duty  orself-interest,  nor  from  motives  of convenience;  I loved  her  because  Iwas  born  to  love  her.  When I fell  in  love  with  any  other  woman,  Iadmit  that  it distracted  my  attention,  and  I thought  of her  less  fre-quently;  but I thought  of her  with  the same  feelings  of pleasure,  and,whether  in  love  or  not,  I  never  occupied  my  thoughts  with  herwithout  feeling  that  there  could  never  be  any  real  happiness  for  mein life  as  long  as  I was  separated  from  her.Although  I had  not  heard  of her  for  so  long, I never  believed  thatI had  lost  her  altogether,  or  thought  it possible  that  she  could  haveforgotten  me.  I said  to  myself:  Sooner  or  later  she  will  learn  that  Iam  a  lonely  wanderer,  and  will  give  me  some  sign  of  life;  I shallfind  her  again,  of that  I am  certain.  Meanwhile,  it was  a  delight  tome  to  live  in her  native  country,  to  walk  through  the  streets  throughwhich  she  had  walked,  past  the  houses  in  which  she  had  lived—allby guess,  for it was  one  of my  foolish  oddities  that  I could  not  bringmyself  to  make  inquiries  about  her,  or  even  to  mention  her  name,unless  it was  absolutely  necessary.  It seemed  to  me  that  I could  notspeak  of her  without  betraying  the  feelings  with  which  she  inspiredme,  without  my mouth  revealing  the  secret  of my  heart,  without  insome  way  compromising  her.  I even  believe  that  with  this  wasmingled  a  certain  feeling  of  alarm  that  someone  might  say  some-thing  bad  about  her.  The  step  she  had  taken  had  been  freely  com-mented  upon,  and  her  conduct  discussed.  For  fear  that  they  mightnot  speak  of her  as  I should  have  liked,  I preferred  to  hear  nothingat  all  said  about  her.As  my  pupils  did  not  take  up  much  of my  time,  and  her  birth-place  was  only  twelve  miles  from  Lausanne,  I spent  three  or  fourdays in walking  there,  during  which  a  feeling  of most  tender  emo-tion  never  left me.  The view  of the Lake  of Geneva  and  its delightfulshores  always  possessed  a  special  charm  in my  eyes  which  I cannotexplain, and  which  consists  not  only  in the  beauty  of the  view,  butin  something  still  more  attractive,  which  moves  and  touches  me.=VEVAY¥157Whenever  I approach  the  Canton  of  Vaud,  I am  conscious  of  animpression  in which  the  remembrance  of Madame  de Warens,  whowas  born  there,  of my  father  who  lived  there,  of  Mademoiselle  deVulson  who  enjoyed  the  first  fruits  of my  youthful  love,  of severalpleasure  trips  which  I made  there  when a child  and,  I believe,  someother  exciting  cause,  more  mysterious  and  more  powerful  than  all  —this, is combined.  When  the  burning  desire  of this  happy  and  peace-ful life, which  flees  from  me  and  for  which  I was  born,  inflames  myimagination,  it is always  the  Canton  of Vaud,  near  the  lake,  in themidst  of enchanting  scenery,  to  which  it draws  me.  I feel  that  I musthave  an  orchard  on  the  shore  of this  lake  and  no  other,  that  I musthave  a  loyal  friend,  a  loving  wife,  a  cow,  and a little  boat.  I shallnever  enjoy  perfect  happiness  on  earth  until  I have  all  that.  I laughat  the  simplicity  with  which  I have  several  times  visited  this  countrymerely  in  search  of  this  imaginary  happiness.  I was  always  sur-prised  to  find  its  inhabitants,  especially  the  women,  of  quite  a  dif-ferent  character  from  that  which  I expected.  How  contradictory  itappeared  to  me!  The  country  and  its inhabitants  have  never  seemedto  me  made  for  each  other.During  this  journey  to  Vévay,  walking  along  the  beautiful  shore,I abandoned  myself  to  the  sweetest  melancholy.  My  heart  eagerlyflung  itself  into  a  thousand  innocent  raptures;  I was  filled  withemotion,  I sighed  and  wept  like  a  child.  How  often  have  I stoppedto  weep  to  my  heart’s  content,  and,  sitting  on  a  large  stone,  amusedmyself  with  looking  at  my  tears  falling  into  the  water!At  Vévay  I lodged  at  La  Clef,  and,  during  the  two  days that I re-mained  there  without  seeing  anyone,  I conceived  an  affection  forthis  town  which  has  followed  me  on  all  my  journeys,  and  which,finally,  made  me  fix  the  abode  of the  heroes  of my  romance  there.I would  say  to  all persons  of taste  and  feeling:  Go  to  Vévay,  explorethe  country,  contemplate  the  scenery,  row  on  the  lake,  and  then  sayif Nature  has not  made  this beautiful  country  for a Julie, a Claire  anda  St.  Preux;  but  do  not  expect  to  find  them  there!I return  to  my  history.As  I was  a  Catholic  and  professed  to  be  one,  I followed  openlyand  without  hesitation  the  faith  which  I had  embraced.  On  Sun-days,  when  it was  fine,  I went  to  mass  at  Assens,  two  leagues  from158THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAULausanne.  I usually  went  in the company  of other  Catholics,  particu-larly  a  Parisian  embroiderer  whose  name  I have  forgotten.  He  wasnot  a  Parisian  like  myself,  but  a  true  Parisian  from  Paris,  an  arch-Parisian  of  the  bon  Dieu,  good-natured  as  a  child  of  Champagne.His love  for his country  was  so  great that  he would  not  allow  himselfto  have  any  doubts  about  my  being  a  Parisian  as  well,  for  fear  oflosing  the  opportunity  of  talking  about  it.  M.  de  Crouzas,  thelieutenant-governor,  had  a  gardener—who  was  also  a  Parisian,  butnot  so  good-natured—who  considered  the  honour  of  his  countrycompromised  if anyone  dared  to  claim  it for  his  own  when  he  hadno  right  to  do  so.  He  questioned  me  with  the  air  of  a man  who  feltsure  of catching  me  in  a  mistake,  and  then  smiled  maliciously.  Heonce  asked  me  what  there  was  remarkable  in  the  Marché-neuf.  Asmay  be imagined,  I answered  at  random.  Having  lived  twenty  yearsin  Paris,  I ought  by this  time  to  know  the  city;  and  yet,  if  anyonewere  to  ask  me  a  similar  question  to-day,  I should  be  equally  ata  loss  for  an  answer,  and  my  embarrassment  might  lead  anyoneto  conclude  that  I have  never  been  there.  To  such  an  extent  is  aperson  liable,  even  when  he  meets  with  the  truth,  to  put  his  trustin  misleading  arguments.{|I cannot  say  exactly  how  long  I remained  at  Lausanne;  I did  notcarry  away  from  it very  lively recollections.  I only know  that, findingmyself  unable  to  gain a livelihood,  I went  from  there  to  Neufchâtel,where  I spent  the  winter.  I was  more  successful  in  the  latter  town;I got  some  pupils,  and  earned  enough  to  settle  with  my  good  friendPerrotet,  who  had  faithfully  sent  on  my  little  bundle,  although I stillowed  him a considerable  sum.I insensibly  learned  music  by teaching  it.  My  life  was  tolerablypleasant;  a  sensible  man  would  have  been  content  with  it, but  myrestless  heart  wanted  something  more.  On  Sundays  and  other  dayswhen  I was  at liberty,  I roamed  the country  and  forests  in the  neigh-bourhood,  ever  wandering,  musing,  and  sighing;  and,  when  onceout  of the  city,  I never  returned  till  the  evening.  One  day, being  atBoudry,  I went  into  an  inn  to  dine;  I saw  there  a  man  with  a  longbeard,  a violet-coloured  coat  after  the Greek  style, a  fur cap,  of some-what noble appearance  and  presence,  who  often  had  great  difficultyin  making  himself  understood,  since  he  spoke  an  almost  unintelli-THK  AKCHIMANDRITE  OF  JERUSALEM159gible jargon,  which  resembled  Italian  more  than  any  other  language.I understood  nearly  evergthing  he  said,  and  I was  the  only  personwho  did.  He could  only express  his meaning  by making  signs  to  thelandlord  and  the  country  people.  I said  a  few  words  to  him  in  Ital-ian, which  he understood  perfectly;  he got up and  embraced  me  with  .delight.  The  acquaintance  was  soon  made,  and  from  that  momentI acted  as  his  interpreter.  His  dinner  was  a  good  one,  mine  wasbarely  tolerable;  he invited  me  to  share  his,  and  I accepted  withoutceremony.  Drinking  and  chattering,  we  became  quite  intimate,  andat  the  end  of the  meal  we  were  inseparable.  He  told  me  that  he wasa  Greek  prelate  and  Archimandrite  of  Jerusalem,  and  that  he  hadbeen  commissioned  to  make a collection  in  Europe  for  the  restora-tion  of the  Holy  Sepulchre.  He  showed  me  beautiful  patents  fromthe  Czarina  and  the  Emperor;  he  had  several  more  from  othersovereigns.  He  was  well  satisfied  with  the  amount  he  had  alreadycollected,  but  he had  found  incredible  difficulties  in  Germany,  sincehe  did  not  understand  a  word  of  German,  Latin,  or  French,  andwas  reduced  to  his  Greek,  Turkish,  and  the  lingua  franca,  as  hissole  resource,  which  had  not  helped  him  much  in  the  country  inwhich  he  had  made  so  bad  a  beginning.  He  proposed  that  I shouldaccompany  him  as  secretary  and  interpreter.  Although  I had  justbought  a  new  violet  coat,  which  was  not  ill-suited  to  my  new  em-ployment,  I looked  anything  but  smart,  so  that  he thought  it wouldbe an  easy  matter  to  secure  my  services,  and  in this  he  was  not  mis-taken.  Our  agreement  was  soon  made;  I  asked  nothing,  and  hepromised  much.  Without  security,  without  bond,  without  knowinganything  about  him,  I submitted  myself  to  his  guidance,  and  thenext  morning  behold  me  on  my  way  to  Jerusalem!We  commenced  our  journey  with  the  Canton  of Fribourg,  wherehe  did  not  do  much.  His  episcopal  rank  did  not  allow  him  to  playthe  beggar  and  collect  money  from  private  persons;  but  we  pre:sented  his  commission  to  the  senate,  who  gave  him  a  small!  sum.From  there  we  went  to  Berne.  We  put  up  at  the  Falcon,  at  that  timea  good inn,  where  good  company  was  to  be found.  The  guests  werenumerous  and  the table  well  served.  I had  so  long had  to put up withbad  fare,  that  I needed  to  recruit  myself;  I had  the  opportunity  andmade  use  of it.  The  worthy  Archimandrite  was  himself  very  goodTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU160company,  lively,  fond  of  the  table,  and  conversed  well  with  thosewho  understood  him.  He  was  not  without  a  certain  amount  ofknowledge,  and  employed  his  Greek  erudition  with  considerabletaste.  One  day, while  cracking  nuts  at  dessert,  he cut  his  finger  verydeeply;  and  as  the  blood  poured  forth  in  streams,  he  showed  hisfinger  to  the  company,  and  said,  with  a  laugh,  Mirate,  Signori;questo  è sangue  pelasgo."At  Berne  my  services  were  of  some  use  to  him,  and  I did  notcome  off  as  badly  as  I had  expected.  I was  more  courageous  andeloquent  than  I should  have  been  on  behalf  of myself.  But  it was  notso  simple  a  matter  as  at  Fribourg;  lengthy  and  frequent  conferenceswith  the  chief  men  of the  State  were  necessary,  and  the  examinationof his  papers  was  not  the  work  of a  day. At length,  when  everythingwas  in order,  he  was  admitted  to  an  audience  by the  Senate.  I wentwith  him  as  his  interpreter,  and  was  ordered  to  speak.  This  was  thelast  thing  I had  expected;  it had  never  entered  my  head  that,  afterlong conferences  with  the individual  members,  it would  be necessaryto  address  the  assembly  in a  body  as  if nothing  had  been  said.  Judgeof my  embarrassment!  For  a  man  as  bashful  as  myself,  to  speak,  notonly  in  public  but  before  the  Senate  of Berne,  and  to  speak  extem-pore,  without  having  a  single  minute  for  preparation,  was  enoughto  annihilate  me.  And  yet  I did  not  even  feel  nervous.  Briefly  andclearly  I explained  the  Archimandrite’s  commission.  I praised  thepiety  cf those  princes  who  had  contributed  to  the  collection  he  hadcome  to  make.  In  order  to  stir  their  excellencies  to  emulation,  I saidthat  no  less  was  to  be expected  from  their  accustomed  munificence;and  then,  having  tried  to  prove  that  this  good  work  was  equallymeritorious  for  all  Christians  without  distinction  of  sect  or  creed,I ended  by promising  the blessings  of Heaven  to  all those  who  shouldtake part in it. I will not  say  that my  speech made  a great  impression,but  it was  certainly  to  the  taste  of the  audience,  and,  on  leaving,  theArchimandrite  received  a  considerable  donation,  and,  in  addition,tompliments  upon  the  intelligence  of his  secretary,  which  I had  thepleasing  task  of  interpreting,  although  I did  not  venture  to  renderthem  word  for  word.  This  is the  only  time  in  my  life  that  I haveever  spoken  in  public  and  in  the  presence  of a  sovereign,  and  per-Admire,  gentlemen;  this  is Pelasgian  blood!ARRIVES  AT  SOLEURE161haps,  also  the  only time  that  I have  spoken  well  and  boldly.  What  adifference  in  the  temperdfent  of  the  same  man!  Three  years  ago,I went  to  Yverdun  to  see  my  old  friend  M.  Roguin,  and  received  adeputation,  which  came  to  thank  me  for  some  books  which  I hadpresented  to  the  town  library.  The  Swiss  are  great  orators;  they  .harangued  me. I felt obliged  to reply;  but I was  so  embarrassed  whenI began  to  do  so,  and  my  head  became  so  confused,  that  I stoppedshort  and  made  myself  ridiculous,  Although  naturally  shy,  I havesometimes  shown  confidence  in  my  youth,  never  in  my  riper  years.The  more  I have  seen  of the  world,  the  less  I have  been  able  to  con-form  to  its  manner.On  leaving  Berne,  we  went  to  Soleure;  for  the  Archimandriteintended  to  pass  through  Germany  again  and  to  return  by way  ofHungary  or  Poland,  which  was  an  enormously  long  round;  butas  his purse  filled  rather  than  emptied  on  the  road,  he had  little  fearof  a  roundabout  way.  As  for  me,  it  was  a  matter  of  indifferencewhether  I was  on  horseback  or  on  foot;  and  I should  have  desirednothing  better  than  to  travel  in  the  same  manner  my  whole  life-time;  but  it was  written  that  I should  not  go  so  far.The  first  thing  we  did:on  our  arrival  at  Soleure,  was  to  go  andpay  our  respects  to  the  French  ambassador.  Unfortunately  for  myBishop,  this  ambassador  was  the  Marquis  de  Bonac,  who  had  beenambassador  at  the  Sublime  Porte,  and  was  bound  to  be  well  ac-quainted  with  everything  concerning  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  TheArchimandrite  had  a  quarter  of an  hour’s  audience,  to  which  I wasnot  admitted,  as  the  ambassador  was  acquainted  with  the  linguafranca  and  spoke  Italian  at  least  as  well  as  myself.  When  my  Greekwent  out,  I was  going  to  follow  him,  but  was  detained;  it was  myturn  next.  Having  given  myself  out  as  a  Parisian,  I was,  as  such,under  his  Excellency’s  jurisdiction.  He  asked  me  who  I was,  andexhorted  me  to  tell  the  truth.  I promised  to  do  so,  and  asked  himfor a  private  audience,  which  was  granted.  He  took  me  to  his  study,and  shut  the  door.  I threw  myself  at  his  feet  and  kept  my  word.  Ishould  not  have  confessed  less,  even  if I had  made  no  promise;  fora  continual  need  of  opening  my  heart  brings  it  every  moment  tomy  lips, and,  having  disclosed  myself  unreservedly  to  the  musicianLutold,  I was  not  likely  to  play the  mysterious  with  the  Marquis  deTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU162Bonac.  He  was  so  satisfied  with  my  little  story,  and  the  franknesswith  which  I had  unbosomed  myself,  that  he  took  me  by the  hand,conducted  me  to  his  wife,  and  introduced  me  to  her,  at  the  sametime  giving  her  an  outline  of my  story.  Madame  de  Bonac  receivedme  kindly,  and  said  that  I must  not  be allowed  to  go  with  the  Greekmonk.  It was  decided  that  I should  stay  at  the  hotel,  until  they  sawwhat  could  be done  with  me.  I wished  to  go  and  say  good-bye  to  mypoor  Archimandrite,  for  whom  I had  conceived  a liking,  but  theywould  not  allow  me.  He  was  informed  that  I had  been  detained,and,  a  quarter  of an  hour  afterwards,  I saw  my  little  bundle  arrive.M.  de  la Martinière,  secretary  to  the  embassy,  was,  in  a  manner,  in-trusted  with  the  care  of me.  While  showing  me  to  the  room  whichwas  intended  for  me,  he said:  “This  room,  in the  time  of the  Comtedu  Luc,  was  occupied  by a  celebrated  man  of  the  same  name  asyourself;®  it rests  with  yourself  to  supply  his  place  in  every  respect,so  that  it  may  one  day  be  said,  Rousseau  the  first,  Rousseau  thesecond.”  This  similarity,  of  which  at  that  time  I had little  hopes,would  have  flattered  my  ambition  less,  if  I had  been  able  to  foreseehow  heavy  would  be  the  price  I should  one  day  have  to  pay  for  it.M. de la Martiniére’s  words  excited  my  curiosity.  I read  the  worksof  the  writer  whose  room  I occupied;  and,  having  regard  to  thecompliment  which  had  been  paid  me,  and  believing  that  I had  ataste  for poetry,  I composed  a  cantata  in praise  of Madame  de Bonacas  a  first  attempt.  This  fancy  did  not  last.  From  time  to  time  I havewritten  indifferent  verses;  it is a  fairly  good  exercise,  for  practisingoneself  in elegant  turns  and  improving  one’s  prose;  but  I have  neverê This  was  Jean  Baptiste  Rousseau  (1671-1741),  a  French  lyric  poet.  PierreRousseau  (1725-1785)  was  a  writer  of  plays.  The  following  lines  are  quoted  byMr.  John  Morley,  in  his  “Life  of  Rousseau”:“Trois  auteurs  que  Rousseau  l’on  nomme,Connus  de  Paris  jusqu’  A Rome,Sont  différens:  voici  par  ot:Rousseau  de  Paris  fut  grand  homme;Rousseau  de  Genéve  est  un  fou:Rousseau  de  Toulouse  un  atome.”A  fourth,  Théodore  (1808-1867),  was  a  celebrated  landscape  painter.LEAVES  FOR  PARIS163found  sufficient  attraction  in  French  poetry  to  devote  myself  to  itentirely.eM.  de  la Martinière  wanted  to  see  how  I could  write,  and  askedme  to  give  him  in  writing  the  same  details  as  I had  given  to  theambassador.  I wrote  him  a  long  letter,  which  I hear  has  been  pre-served  by M.  de Marianne,  who  was  for  a  long time  attached  to  theembassy under  the Marquis  de Bonac,  and  has  since  succeeded  M. dela  Martinière  during  the  ambassadorship  of  M.  de  Courteilles.  Ihave  asked  M.  de Malesherbes  to  try and  get me  a  copy  of this  letter.If I can  procure  it through  him  or  others,  it will  be found  in the col-lection  which  is  intended  to  accompany  my  Confessions.The  experience  which  I began  to  acquire  by degrees  moderatedmy  romantic  plans;  for  instance,  I not  only  did  not  fall  in love  withMadame  de Bonac,  but  I immediately  saw  that  I had  little  chance  ofadvancement  in  her  husband’s  house.  M.  de  la Martinière  in  office,and  M.  de  Marianne  waiting  as  it were  to  step  into  his  shoes,  leftme  nothing  higher  to  hope  for  than  the  post  of  under-secretary,which  was  not  excessively  tempting  to  me.  For  this  reason,  when  Iwas  consulted  as  to  what  I should  like  to  do, I showed  a  great  desireto  go  to  Paris.  The  ambassador  liked  the idea,  which  at  least  seemedlikely  to  relieve  him  of me.  M.  de  Merveilleux,  secretary  and  inter-preter  to  the  embassy,  said  that  his  friend,  M.  Godard,  a  Swisscolonel  in  the  service  of France,  was  looking  for  a  companion  forhis  nephew,  who  was  entering  the  service  very  early,  and  thoughtthat  I might  suit  him.  With  this  idea,  which  was  adopted  withoutmuch  consideration,  my  departure  was  settled;  and  I, who  saw  be-fore  me  a  journey,  with  Paris  at  the  end  of it, was  highly  delighted.They  gave  me  some  letters,  a  hundred  francs  for  my  travelling  ex-penses,  together  with  some  very  good  advice,  and  I set  out.The journey  took  me  a fortnight,  which  I may  reckon  amongst  thehappy  days of my  life.  I was  young,  and  in good  health;  I had  suff-cient  money  and  abundant  hopes;  I travelled  on  foot  and I travelledalone.  That  I should  consider  this  an  advantage  would  appear  sur-prising,  if the  reader  were  not  by this  time  familiar  with  my  disposi-tion.  My  pleasing  chimeras  kept  me  company,  and  never  did  myheated  imagination  give  birth  to  any  that  were  more  magnificent,THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU164When  anyone  offered  me  an  empty  seat  in a carriage,  or  accosted  meon  the road,  I made  a  wry  face  when  I saw  that  fortune  overthrown,the  edifice  of which  I reared  during  my  walk.  This  time  my  ideaswere  warlike.  I was  going  to  be  attached  to  a  military  man  and  tobecome  a  soldier  myself;  for it had  been  arranged  that  I should  beginby being  a  cadet.  I already  saw  myself  in  an  officer’s  uniform,  witha  beautiful  white  plume.  My  breast  swelled  at  this  noble  thought.I had  a  smattering  of geometry  and  fortification;  I had  an  uncle  anengineer;  I was,  in  a  manner,  a  soldier  born.  My  short  sight  was  aslight  obstacle,  which,  however,  did  not  trouble  me  much;  and  Ihoped,  by dint  of coolness  and  intrepidity,  to  supply  this defect.  I hadread  that  Marshal  Schomberg  was  very  short-sighted;  why  shouldnot  Marshal  Rousseau  be  the  same?  I grew  so  warm  in  pursuit  ofthese  foolish  ideas,  that  I saw  nothing  but  troops,  ramparts,  gabions,batteries,  and  myself,  in the  midst  of fire  and  smoke,  calmly  givingmy  orders  with  my  field-glass  in my  hand.  However,  when  I passedthrough  beautiful  scenery,  when  I  saw  groves  and  rivulets,  thistouching  sight  made  me  sigh regretfully;  in  the  midst  of my  glory,I felt  that  my  heart  was  not  made  for  such  din  and  noise;  and  soon,without  knowing  how,  I found  myself  in  the  midst  of  my  belovedsheepfolds,  renouncing  for  ever  the  toils  of Mars.How  greatly  did  the  entrance  into  Paris  belie  the  idea  I hadformed  of  it!  The  external  decorations  of  Turin,  the  beauty  of  itsstreets,  the  symmetry  and  regularity  of  the  houses,  had  made  melook  for  something  quite  different  in  Paris.  I had  imagined  to  my-self a city of most  imposing  aspect,  as  beautiful  as  it was  large, wherenothing  was  to  be  seen  but  splendid  streets  and  palaces  of gold andmarble.  Entering  by the  suburb  of St.  Marceau,  I saw  nothing  butdirty  and  stinking  little  streets,  ugly  black  houses,  a  general  air  ofslovenliness  and  poverty,  beggars,  carters,  menders  of  old  clothes,criers  of decoctions  and  old  hats.  All  this, from  the  outset,  struck  meso  forcibly,  that  all  the  real  magnificence  I have  since  seen  in  Parishas  been unable  to  destroy  this  first  impression,  and  I have  alwaysretained  a  secret  dislike  against  residence  in  this  capital.  I may  saythat  the  whole  time,  during  which  I afterwards  lived  there,  wasemployed  solely  in trying  to  find  means  to  enable  me  to  live  awayfrom  it.PARISIAN  ACQUAINTANCES165Such  is the  fruit  of a  too  lively  imagination,  which  exaggeratesbeyond  human  exaggeratfon,  and  is always  ready  to  see  more  thanit has  been  told  to  expect.  I had  heard  Paris  so  much  praised,  that  Ihad  represented  it to  myself  as  the  ancient  Babylon,  where,  if  I hadever  visited  it,  I should,  perhaps,  have  found  as  much  to  take  offfrom  the picture  which  I had  drawn  of it. The  same  thing happened  —to  me  at  the  Opera,  whither  I hastened  to  go  the  day  after  my  ar-rival.  The  same  thing happened  to  me  later  at  Versailles;  and  again,when I saw  the  sea  for the first  time;  and  the  same  thing will  alwayshappen  to  me,  when I see  anything  which  has  been  too  loudly  an-nounced;  for  it is impossible  for  men,  and  difficult  for  Nature  her-self,  to  surpass  the  exuberance  of my  imagination.To  judge  from  the  manner  in  which  I was  received  by all  thoseto  whom I had  letters,  I thought  my  fortune  was  made.  The  personto  whom I was  specially  recommended,  and  who  received  me  withthe  least  enthusiasm,  was  M.  de  Surbeck,  who  had  left  the  serviceand  was  living  in philosophic  retirement  at  Bagneux,  where  I wentto  see  him  several  times,  and  where  he never  offered  me  so  much  asa  glass  of water.  I was  better  received  by Madame  de  Merveilleux,the  interpreter’s  sister-in-law,  and  by his  nephew,  an  officer  in  theguards;  mother  and  son  not  only received  me  kindly,  but  they gaveme a standing  invitation  to  their  table,  of which  I often  availed  my-self  during  my  stay  at  Paris.  Madame  de Merveilleux  seemed  to  meto  have  been  handsome  once;  her  hair  was  a  beautiful  black,  andworn  in ringlets  on  her  forehead  in the  old-fashioned  style.  She  stillretained  what  does  not  perish with  personal  attractions:  an  agreeablemind.  She  appeared  satisfied  with  mine,  and  did  all  she  could  tohelp  me;  but  no  one  supported  her,  and  I was  soon  undeceived  inregard  to  the  great  interest  which  was  apparently  taken  in  me.  Imust,  however,  do justice  to  the  French;  they  do not  exhaust  them-selves  so  much  in  protestations  as  is said,  and  those  they  make  arenearly  always  sincere;  but  they  have  a  way  of appearing  to  be  in-terested  in  you,  which  is  more  deceptive  than  words.  The  coarsecompliments  of the  Swiss  can  only impose  upon  fools.  The  mannersof the  French  are  more  seductive,  for  the  very  reason  that  they  aresimpler;  one  would  think  that  they are  not  telling  you  all they meanto  do for you,  in order  to  give you  a  more  agreeable  surprise.  I willTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU166say  more:  they  are  not  false  in  their  professions;  they  are  naturallyobliging,  kindly,  benevolent,  and  even,  whatever  one  may  say,  moresincere  than  any  other  nation;  but  they  are  fickle  and  flighty.  Thefeelings  which  they express  towards  you  are  genuine;  but  these  feel-ings  are  no  sooner  come  than  they  are  gone.  When  you  conversewith  them,  they are  full  of you;  as  soon  as  you  are  out  of their  sight,they  forget  you.  Nothing  is permanent  in  their  hearts;  with  themeverything  is the  work  of che  moment.Thus  I was  greatly  flattered,  but  little  benefited.  This  ColonelGodard,  to  whose  nephew  I had  been  sent,  turned  out  to  be a  fright-ful  old  miser,  who,  although  rolling  in  riches,  wanted  my  servicesfor  nothing,  when  he  saw  the  distress  I was  in.  He  wanted  me  tobe  a  sort  of valet  to  his  nephew,  without  wages,  rather  than a realtutor.  As  I was  permanently  attached  to  him,  and  thereby  exemptfrom  service,  he said  that  I ought  to  live  on  my  pay  as  a  cadet—thatis, as  a  soldier.  He  would  scarcely  consent  to  give me  a  uniform;  hewould  have  liked  me  to  content  myself  with  that  of  the  regiment..Madame  de  Merveilleux,  indignant  at  his  proposals,  herself  per-suaded  me  not  to  accept  them;  her  son  was  of  the  same  opinion..They  looked  for  something  else  for  me,  but  found  nothing.  In  themeantime,  I began  to  be  pressed  for  money;  a  hundred  francs,  outof which  I had  paid the  expenses  of my  journey,  could  not  carry  mevery  far.  Fortunately,  I received  from  the  ambassador  a  small  addi-tional  remittance  which  was  very  useful  to  me,  and  I think  that  hewould  not  have  abandoned  me  if I had  had  more  patience;  but  I am.unable  to  wait  long  for  what  I desire,  or  to  solicit  it.  I lost  heart,  Iappeared  no  more,  and  all  was  at  an  end.  I had  not  forgotten  mypoor  mamma;  but  how  was  I to  find  her?  where  was  I to  look  forher?  Madame  de  Merveilleux,  who  was  acquainted  with  my  story,had  assisted  me  in my  inquiries  for  a  long time  without  success.  Atlast,  she  informed  me  that  Madame  de Warens  had  left  Paris  morethan  two  months  ago,  but  that  no  one  knew  whether  she  had  goneto  Savoy  or  Turin,  and  that  some  said  she  had  returned  to  Switzer-land.  This  was  enough  to  decide  me  to  follow  her, as  I was  sure  that,wherever  she  was,  I should  find  her  in the country  more  easily  thanI had  been.  able  to  do  in  Paris.Before  setting  out,  I exercised  my  new  poetical  talent  in  a  letterWRITES  TO  COLONEL  GODARD167to  Colonel  Godard,  in which  I abused  him  to  the best  of my  power.I showed  this  scrawl  to  Madame  de  Merveilleux,  who,  instead  ofreproving  me,  as  she  ought  to  have  done,  was  highly  amused  at  mysarcasms;  and  so  was  her  son,  who,  I fancy,  had  no  great  affectionfor M.  Godard,  and, indeed,  I must  confess  that  he was  by no  means  _an  amiable  person.  I felt  tempted  to  send  him  my  verses;  they  en-couraged  me  to  do  so.  I made  them  up  into  a  parcel  addressed  tohim,  and,  as  there  was  no  city post  in Paris  at  that  time,  I put  it inmy  pocket  and  sent  it to  him  from  Auxerre  as  I passed  through.  Istill  sometimes  laugh  when  I think  of  the  wry  face  he  must  havemade  when  he  read  this  panegyric,  in  which  he  was  described  tothe  life.  It began  as  follows:—“Tu  croyais,  vieux  pénard,  qu’une  folle  manieD’élever  ton  neveu  m’inspirerait  l’envie.”  °This  trifle—in  truth,  a  poor  production,  but  which  was  not  want-ing in wit,  and  showed a talent  for  satire—is,  nevertheless,  the  onlysatirical  composition  which  has  proceeded  from  my  pen.  I have  toolittle  malice  in  my  heart  to  make  use  of  such a talent;  but  I thinkone  may  judge,  from  those  polemics  which  I have  written  fromtime  to  time  in my  own  defence,  that, if  I had  been  of a  quarrelsomedisposition,  my  aggressors  would  seldom  have  had  the  laugh  ontheir  side.What  I most  regret  in  regard  to  the  details  of  my  life  whichhave  escaped  my  memory,  is that  I never  kept a  diary  of my  travels.I have  never  thought  so  much,  existed  so  much,  lived  so  much,  beenso  much  myself,  if  I may  venture  to  use  the  phrase,  as  in  the  jour-neys  which  I have  made  alone  and  on  foot.  There  is something  inwalking  which  animates  and  enlivens  my  ideas.  I can  scarcely  thinkwhen  I remain  still;  my  body  must  be in motion  to  make  my  mindactive.  The  sight  of the  country,  a  succession  of pleasant  views,  theopen  air, a  good appetite,  the  sound  health  which  walking  gives  me,the  free  life  of the  inns,  the  absence  of all  that  makes  me  consciousof my  dependent  position,  of all  that  reminds  me  of my  condition—all  this  sets  my  soul  free,  gives  me  greater  boldness  of  thought,® You  thought,  you  old  sinner,  that  a  mad  folly  would  inspire  me  with  a  long-ing to  bring  up  your  nephew.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU168throws  me,  so  to  speak,  into  the  immensity  of things,  so  that  I cancombine,  select,  and  appropriate  them  at  pleasure,  without  fear  orrestraint.  I dispose  of Nature  in  its  entirety  as  its  lord  and  master;my  heart,  roaming  from  object  to  object,  mingles  and  identifiesitself  with  those  which  soothe  it, wraps  itself  up  in charming  fancies,and  is  intoxicated  with  delicious  sensations.  If,  in  order  to  renderthem  permanent,  I amuse  myself  by  describing  them  by  myself,what  vigorous  outlines,  what  fresh  colouring,  what  power  of  ex-pression  I give them!  All  this, it is said,  has been  found  in my  works,although  written  in my  declining  years.  Ah!  if only one  had  seen  thecompositions  of  my  early  youth,  those  which  I  wrote  during  mytravels,  those  which  I sketched  and  have  never  written  down!  Then,why  not  write  them?  you  will  say.  Why  should  I?  I answer.  Whydeprive  myself  of  the  actual  charms  of  enjoyment,  in  order  to  tellothers  that  I did  enjoy  them?  What  did  I care  for  readers,  the  pub-lic, or  the  whole  world,  while  I was  mounting  to  the  skies?  Besides,did  I carry  pens  and  paper  with  me?  If I had  thought  of  all  that,nothing  would  have  occurred  to  me.  I did  not  foresee  that  I shouldhave  ideas;  they  come  to  me  when  it  pleases  them,  not  when  itpleases  me.  They  either  do  not  come  at  all, or  they  come  in crowds,and  overwhelm  me  with  their  force  and  number.  Ten  volumes  a  daywould  not  have  been  sufficient.  When  could  I find  time  to  writethem?  When J arrived  at  any  town,  I thought  of nothing  but  a  gooddinner;  when I left  it, of nothing  but  a  good  walk.  I felt  that  a  newparadise  was  waiting  for  me  at  the  door.  I thought  only  of going  tofind  it.I have  never  felt  this  so  strongly  as  during  the  return  journey  ofwhich  I am  speaking.  On  my  way  to  Paris,  my  ideas  were  limitedto  what  I was  going  to  do there.  I had  thrown  myself  into  the careerwhich  I thought  lay before  me,  and  should  have  gone  through  itwith  sufficient  honour;  but  this  career  was  not  the  one  to  which  myheart summoned  me,  and  the  beings  of reality  injured  the  beings  ofimagination.  Colonel  Godard  and  his  nephew  ill  suited  a  hero  likemyself.  Thank  Heaven!  I was  now  freed  from  al!  these  obstacles;  Icould plunge  at  will  into  the  land  of  chimeras,  for  that  alone  laybefore  me.  I went  astray  in it so  completely,  that  several  times  I reallylost my  way;  but I should  have  been  very  sorry  to  have  taken  a  moreON  THE  WAY  TO  LYONS169direct  route;  for, having  a  presentiment  that  at  Lyons  I should  againfind  myself  on  earth,  I should  have  liked  never  to  arrive  there.One  day, amongst  others,  having  purposely  turned  out  of my  wayto  get  a  nearer  view  of  a  spot  which  appeared  worthy  of  admira-tion,  I was  so  delighted  with  it, and  went  round  it so  often  that,  atlast,  I completely  lost  myself.  After  several  hours  of  useless  walk-ing, tired,  and  dying  of hunger  and  thirst,  I entered  a  peasant’s  hut,not  much  to  look  at,  but  the  only  dwelling  I saw  in  the  neighbour-hood.  I expected  to  find  it the  same  as  in  Geneva,  or  Switzerland,where  all  the  well-to-do  inhabitants  are  in a  position  to  show  hospi-tality.  I begged  him  to  give me  dinner,  and  offered  to  pay  for  it. Heoffered  me  some  skimmed  milk  and  coarse  barley  bread,  saying  thatthat  was  all he had.  I drank  the milk  with  delight,  and  ate  the bread,husks  and  all;  but  it was  not  very  invigorating  fare  for  a  man  ex-hausted  by fatigue.  The  peasant,  who  examined  me  closely,  esti-mated  the  truth  of my  story  by my  appetite,  and  immediately  after-wards  declared  that  he could  see  that  I was  a  good  and  honourableyoung  man,’  who  had  not  come  there  to  betray  him  for  money.  Heopened a little  trapdoor  near  the  kitchen,  went  down,  and  came  upa  minute  afterwards  with  a  nice  brown  wheaten  loaf,  a  verytempting-looking  ham,  although  considerably  cut  down,  and a bot-tle  of wine,  the  sight  of which  rejoiced  my  heart  more  than  all  therest;  to  this  he  added  a  substantial  omelette,  and  I made  a  dinnersuch  as  none  but  a  pedestrian  ever  enjoyed.  When  it came  to  thequestion  of payment,  his  uneasiness  and  alarm  returned;  he  wouldtake  none  of my  money,  and  refused  it with  singular  anxiety;  andthe  amusing  thing  was  that  I could  not  imagine  what  he was  afraidof. At last, with  a  shudder,  he uttered  the  terrible  words,  “Revenue-officers  and  excisemen.”  11  He  gave  me  to  understand  that  he  hidhis  wine  on  account  of the  excise,  that  he  hid  his  bread  on  accountof the  tax,  and  that  he  was  a  lost  man,  if anyone  had  a  suspicionthat  he  was  not  starving.  All  that  he  said  to  me  on  this  subject,  ofwhich  I had  not  the  least  idea,  made  an  impression  upon  me  which10  At  that  time,  apparently,  my  features  did  not  as  yet  resemble  those  of  mylater  portraits.1  Literally,  “cellar-rats,”  rats  de  cave.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU170will  never  be  forgotten.  It  was  the  germ  of  the  inextinguishablehatred  which  subsequently  grew  up  in my  heart  against  the  oppres-sion  to  which  these  unhappy  people  are  subject,  and  against  theiroppressors.  This  man,  although  in good circumstances,  did  not  dareto  eat  the  bread  which  he  had  obtained  by the  sweat of his  brow,and  could  only  escape  utter  ruin  by displaying  the  same  poverty  asprevailed  around  him.  I  left  his  house,  equally  indignant  andtouched,  lamenting  the  lot  of these  beautiful  countries,  upon  whichNature  has  only  lavished  her  gifts  to  make  them  the  prey  of  bar-barous  farmers  of taxes.This  is the  only distinct  recollection  I have  of the  incidents  of thisjourney.  The  only other  thing  I remember  is that,  when  near  Lyons,I was  tempted  to  prolong  my  journey  in  order  to  visit  the  banks  ofthe  Lignon,  for,  amongst  the  romances  which  I had  read  with  myfather,  “Astraea”  had  not  been  forgotten,  and  returned  most  frequently  to  my  mind.  I asked  the  way  to  Forez;  and,  while  talkingwith  the  landlady  of an  inn, was  informed  by her  that  it was  a  goodcountry  for  workmen,  that  there  were  many  forges  in it, and  a  con-siderable  amount  of  work  done  in  iron.  This  panegyric  cooled  myromantic  curiosity  at  once,  and  it  seemed  incongruous  to  look  forDianas  and  Sylvanders  amongst  a  tribe  of  blacksmiths.  The  goodwoman,  who  encouraged  me  in  this  manner,  must  have  taken  mefor  a  journeyman  locksmith.I did  not  go  to  Lyons  entirely  without  an  object.  As  soon  as  I ar-rived,  I went  to  the  Chasottes  to  see  Mademoiselle  du  Châtelet,  afriend  of  Madame  de  Warens,  to  whom  she  had  given  me a letterwhen  I went  there  with  M.  le Maitre,  so  that  it was  an  acquaintancealready  made.  She  informed  me  that  her  friend  had,  in  fact,  passedthrough  Lyons,  but  that  she  did  not  know  whether  she  had  gone  onas  far  as  Piedmont;  and  that  Madame  de  Warens  herself,  when  sheleft,  had  been  uncertain  whether  she  would  not  have  to  stop  inSavoy;  that,  if I desired,  she  would  write  for  information,  and  thatthe best  thing I could  do would  be to wait  at Lyons  till she had  heardfrom  her.  I accepted  her  offer,  but  I did  not  venture  to  tell  her  thatI was  in  a  hurry  for  the  answer,  and  that,  as  my  small  means  wereexhausted,  I was  not  in a position  to  wait  long for it. What  restrainedme  was  not  any  unfriendliness  in her  reception;  on  the contrary,  sheADVENTURE  WITH  A  WORKMANI7Ihad  been  very  cordial  to  me,  and  had  treated  me  on  a  footing  ofequality,  which  deprived#me  of the  courage  to  disclose  my  circum-stances  to  her, and  to  come  down  from  the  róle  of an  agreeable  com-panion  to  that  of a  miserable  beggar.I seem  to  have a tolerably  clear  view  of  the  sequence  of  events  |which  I have  described  in  this  book.  Nevertheless,  I think  that  Irecollect  another  voyage  to  Lyons  belonging  to  this  period,  which  Icannot  fix, and  during  which  I found  myself  in great  straits.  A  littleincident,  which  I find  some  difficulty  in  relating,  will  never  allowme  to  forget  it. One  evening,  I was  sitting  in Bellecour,  after  havingpartaken  of a  very  light supper,  musing  how I should  get out  of mydifficulties,  when  a man  in a cap  came  and  sat  by my  side.  He lookedlike  one  of those  silk-workers  who,  at  Lyons,  are  called  taffetatiers.He  spoke  to  me;  I answered  him.  After  we  had  talked  for  about  aquarter  of an  hour,  with  the  same  coolness  and  without  any  altera-tion  in the  tone  of his  voice,  he proposed  that  we  should  amuse  our-selves  together.  I waited  for  him  to  explain  what  amusement  hemeant,  but, without  another  word,  he made  ready  to  give me  a prac-tical  illustration.  We  were  almost  touching  each  other,  and  the nightwas  not  too  dark  to  prevent  me  from  seeing  what  he  was  going  todo.  He  had  no  designs  upon  my  person;  at  least,  nothing  seemed  toshow  that  he  meditated  anything  of the  kind,  and  the  place  wouldnot  have  been  adapted  for  it; just as  he had  told  me,  he only wantedeach  of  us  to  amuse  himself  separately.  This  appeared  to  him  sosimple  a  matter,  that  it never  occurred  to  him  that  I should  not  lookupon  it in  the  same  light.  I was  so  terrified  at  this  disgraceful  pro-posal,  that,  without  replying,  I got  up  in  a  hurry,  and  ran  away  asfast  as  I could,  fancying  the  wretch  was  at  my  heels.  I was  so  con-fused  that,  instead  of making  for my  lodging,  I ran  in the  directionof the  quay,  and  did  not  stop  till  I had  crossed  the  wooden  bridge,trembling  as  if I had  just committed  a  crime.  I was  addicted  to  thesame  vice;  the  recollection  of this  incident  cured  me  of it for  a  longtime.`During  this  journey  I met  with  an  adventure  of an  almost  similarkind,  but  which  exposed  me  to  greater  danger.  Finding  that  myfunds  were  nearly  exhausted,  1 economised  the  miserable  sum  thatremained.  At first  I took  my  meals  less  frequently  at  my  inn;  soon  I172THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUgave  up  taking  them  there  altogether,  since,  for  five  or  six  sous,  Icould  satisfy  myself  quite  as  well  at  the  tavern,  as  for  twenty-fivesous  at  the  inn.  As  I no  longer  took  my  meals  there,  I did  not  feeljustified  in  sleeping  there,  not  that  I was  much  in  debt,  but  I wasashamed  to  occupy  a  bedroom  without  putting  any  profit  into  mylandlady’s  pocket.  It  was  beautiful  weather.  One  very  hot  eveningI decided  to pass  the  night in the  public  square.  I had  already  settledmyself  upon  a  bench,  when  an  Abbé,  who  was  passing  by, saw  melying  down,  came  up  to  me,  and  asked  me  if  I had  anywhere  tosleep. I confessed  the  state  of my  affairs,  and  he  seemed  touched.  Hesat  down  by my  side  and  we  conversed.  He  was  an  agreeable  talker;all  he  said  gave  me  the  highest  possible  opinion  of  him.  When  hesaw  that  I was  favourably  inclined,  he told  me  that  he  had  not  veryextensive  quarters  himself;  that  he  had  only  one  room,  but  that  hecertainly  would  not  leave  me  to  sleep  in  the  square;  that  it was  toolate  to  find  a  lodging,  and  he  offered  me  half  his  bed  for  the  night.I accepted  his  offer,  for  I already  had  hopes  of  finding  in  him  afriend  who  might  be useful  to  me.  We  went.  He  struck a light.  Hisroom  seemed  neat  and  clean,  and  he  did  the  honours  with  great  po-liteness.  He  took  some  cherries  steeped  in  brandy  out  of a  glass  jar;we  each  ate  two,  and  went  to  bed.This  man  had  the  same  tastes  as  my  Jew  of  the  hospice,  but  didnot  show  thein  so  brutally.  Either  because  he  knew  that  I shouldbe heard  and  was  afraid  to  force  me  to  defend  myself,  or  because  hewas  really  less  determined  in his  designs,  he  did  not  venture  to  pro-pose  their  accomplishment  openly,  and  tried  to  excite  without  alarm-ing me.  Taught  by my  former  experience,  I soon  understood  whathe wanted,  and  shuddered.  Not  knowing  in what  kind  of house  orin whose  hands  I was,  I was  afraid  to  make  a  noise  for  fear  of beingmurdered.  I pretended  not  to  know  what  he  wanted  of  me;  but,appearing  greatly  annoyed  at  his  caresses,  and  quite  decided  not  tolet them  go  on,  I managed  so  well  that  he  was  obliged  to  restrainhimself. Then  I spoke to  him  with  all the  gentleness  and  firmness  ofwhich  I was  capable;  and,  without  appearing  to  suspect  anything,  Iexcused  my  uneasiness  on  the  score  of my  recent  adventure,  which  Imade  a  show  of relating  to  him  in  terms  so  full  of  horror  and  dis-gust,  that  I believe  I disgusted  him,  and  he  altogether  abandoned.DISGUST  WITH  PEOPLE  OF  LYONS173his  filthy  designs.  We  spent  the  rest  of  the  night  quietly;  he  evengave  me  some  good  an@sensible  information;  certainly  he  was  aman  of some  intelligence,  although a great  rascal.In  the  morning,  the  Abbé,  not  wishing  to  appear  dissatisfied,spoke  of breakfast,  and  asked  one  of his  landlady’s  daughters,  whowas  a  pretty  girl,  to  send  some  to  him.  She  answered  that  she  hadno  time.  He  turned  to  her  sister,  who  did  not  deign  to  give him  ananswer.  We  still  waited;  no  breakfast.  At  last,  we  went  into  theseyoung  ladies’  room.  They  received  the  Abbé  in  a  manner  that  wasanything  but  cordial.  I had  still  less  reason  to  congratulate  myselfon  my  reception.  The  elder,  turning  round,  stepped  upon  my  toeswith  the  pointed  heel  of  her  boot,  where  a  very  painful  corn  hadobliged  me  to  cut  a  hole  in my  shoe;  the  other  abruptly  pulled  awayfrom  behind  me  a  chair  on  which  I was  just going  to  sit down;  theirmother,  while  throwing  water  out  of the  window,  splashed  my  face;wherever  I sat  down,  they  made  me  move  that  they  might  look  forsomething.  I had  never  in my  life  been  so  entertained.  In  their  jeer-ing and  insulting  looks  I saw  concealed  rage,  which  I was  so  stupidas  to  fail  to  understand.  Astounded,  stupefied,  and  inclined  to  thinkthey were  all bewitched,  I began  to  feel  seriously  alarmed,  when  theAbbé,  who  pretended  to  see  and  hear  nothing,  judging  correctlythat  no  breakfast  was  to  be  expected,  decided  to  leave  the  house.  Ihastened  to  follow  him,  thinking  myself  lucky  to  escape  from  thethree  furies.  As  we  were  walking  along,  he proposed  that  we  shouldgo and  have  breakfast  at  the  café.  Although  I was  very  hungry,  I de-clined  his  offer,  which  he  did  not  press  me  to  accept,  and  we  separated  at  the  third  or  fourth  turning.  I was  delighted  to  get  out  ofsight  of  everything  connected  with  that  accursed  house;  and  I be-lieve  that  he  was  very  glad  to  have  taken  me  so  far  frora  it that  Ishould  have  found  great  difficulty  in  recognising  it.  No  simiiar  ad-ventures  have  ever  happened  to  me  either  in Paris  or  any  other  city.They  have  given  me  so  disagreeable  an  impression  of the  people  ofLyons,  that  I have  always  looked  upon  this  city  as  the  most  fright-fully  corrupt  in  all  Europe.The  remembrance  of the extremities  to  which  I was  there  reduced,does  not  help  to  give  me  pleasant  recollections  of  it.  If I had  beenlike  anyone  else,  if I had  possessed  the  art  of borrowing  and  gettingTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU174into  debt  at  my  inn,  I should  easily  have  got  out  of my  difficulties;but  in  such  matters  my  incapacity  was  equalled  by my  repugnance.To  give  an  idea  of the  extent  of both,  it is enough  to  mention  that,although  I have  spent  nearly  all  my  life  in  distressed  circumstances,and  have  often  been  almost  entirely  without  bread,  I have  neveronce  been  asked  for  money  by  a  creditor  without  paying  him  atonce.  I have  never  been  able  to  incur  petty  debts,  and  have  alwayspreferred  to  suffer  than  to  owe  money.It was  certainly  suffering,  to  be reduced  to  spend  the  night  in thestreets,  which  was  frequently  my  lot  at  Lyons.  I preferred  to  spendthe  few  sous  I had  left in buying  bread  than  in paying  for  a  ledging,because,  after  all,  I ran  less  risk  of  dying  of  want  of  sleep  than  ofhunger.  The  remarkable  thing  is that,  in  my  miserable  condition,  Iwas  neither  melancholy  nor  uneasy.  I did  not  feel  the  least  anxietyabout  the  future,  and  waited  patiently  for  the  answer  which  Made-moiselle  du  Chatelet  was  sure  to  receive.  At  night  I lay in  the  openair,  and,  stretched  on  the  ground  or  on  a bench,  slept  as  calmly  asupon  a  bed  of roses.  I remember,  especially,  that  I spent  a  delightfulnight  outside  the  city, on  a  road  which  ran  by the  side  of the  Rhôneor  Saône,  I do  not  remember  which.  Raised  gardens,  with  terraces,bordered  the  other  side  of the  road.  It had  been  very  hot  during  theday;  the  evening  was  delightful;  the  dew  moistened  the  parchedgrass;  the  night  was  calm,  without  a  breath  of  wind;  the  air  wasfresh,  without  being  cold;  the  sun,  having  gone  down,  had  left  inthe  sky red  vapours,  the  reflection  of which  cast  a  rose-red  tint  uponthe water;  the  trees  on  the  terraces  were  full  of nightingales  answer-ing  one  another.  I walked  on  in  a  kind  of ecstasy,  abandoning  myheart  and  senses  to  the  enjoyment  of all, only regretting,  with  a  sigh,that I was  obliged to  enjoy  it alone.  Absorbed  in my  delightful  rev-erie,  I continued  my  walk  late  into  the  night,  without  noticing  thatI was  tired.  At last, I noticed  it. I threw  myself  with  a  feeling  of de-light  upon  the  shelf  of a  sort  of niche  or  false  door  let into  a  terracewall; the canopy  of my  bed  was  formed  by the  tops  of trees;  a night-ingale was  perched  just  over  my  head,  and  lulled  me  to  sleep  withhis  song;  my  slumbers  were  sweet,  my  awaking  was  still  sweeter.  Itwas  br oad day;  my  eyes,  on  opening,  beheld  the  water,  the  verdure,a  charming  landscape.  I got  up  and  shook  myself;  and, feeling  hun-M.  ROLICHON175gry,  set  out  gaily  on  my  way  to  the  city,  resolved  to  spend  the  twosmall  silver  pieces  I still  had  left  on  a  good  breakfast.  I was  in  such`  good spirits,  that  I sang  the whole  way:  I even  remember  that  I sangone  of  Batistin’s  cantatas,  called  Les  Bains  de  Thomery,  which  Iknew  by heart.  Blessed  be  the  good  Batistin  and  his  good  cantata,which  procured  me a better  breakfast  than  I had  reckoned  upon,  and’a  still  better  dinner,  upon  which  I had  not  reckoned  at  all!  Whilewalking  and  singing  my  best,  I heard  someone  behind  me;  I turnedround,  and  saw  an  Antonine,!”  who  was  following  me,  and  seemedto  be listening  with  pleasure  to  my  singing.  He  accosted  me,  greetedme,  and  asked  me  whether  I knew  music.  I replied,  “A  little,”  bywhich  I meant  him  to  understand,  A  great  deal.  He  continued  hisquestions.  I told  him  part  of my  history.  He  asked  me  if I had  evercopied  music.  “Often,”  I replied,  which  was  true,  for  I had  learnedmost  by copying.  “Well,”  said  he,  “come  with  me;  I can  give  yousomething  to  do for a few  days; in the meanwhile  you  shall  want  fornothing,  but you  must  agree  not  to  leave  the room.”  I readily  agreed,and  followed  him.His  name  was  Rolichon;  he  was  very  fond  of  music,  which  heknew  well,  and  sang  at  some  little  concerts  which  he  used  to  givewith  his  friends.  This  was  innocent  and  honourable  enough;  buthis  hobby  was  certainly  degenerating  into  a  mania,  which  he  waspartly  obliged  to  conceal.  He  showed  me  to a little  room,  where  Ifound  a  quantity  of music  which  he  had  copied.  He  gave  me  somemore  to  copy,  particularly  the  cantata  which  I had  sung,  and  whichhe was  to  sing himself  in a  few  days.  I remained  there  three  or  fourdays,  copying  all the  time  that  I was  not  eating,  for  never  in my  lifewas  I so  hungry  or  better  fed.  He  brought  my  meals  himself  fromtheir  kitchen,  which  must  have  been  a  good  one,  if  the  ordinarymeals  were  as  good  as  my  own.  In  all  my  life  I had  never  enjoyedmy  food  so  much;  and  I must  also  confess  that  these  snacks  camevery  opportunely,  for  I was  as  dry as  a  piece  of wood.  I worked  al-most  as  heartily  as  I ate,  and  that  is  saying  a  good  deal.  It  is truethat  my  accuracy  did  not  equal  my  diligence.  Some  days afterwards,M.  Rolichon  met  me in the  street  and  told  me  that  my  score  had  ren-dered  the  music  altogether  impracticable,  being  so  full  of omissions,2  The  “Antonines”  were  a  community  of  secularised  monks.176THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUrepetitions,  and  transpositions.  I cannot  deny  that  I chose  the  oneprofession  for  which  I was  least  fitted.  My  notation  was  good  and  Icopied  very  neatly;  but  the  fatigue  of  a  long  task  so  bewilders  me,that  I spend  more  time  in  erasing  than  writing,  and  unless  I com-pare  the  parts  with  the  greatest  carefulness,  they  always  spoil  theexecution.  Thus,  in  my  endeavour  to  perform  my  task  well,  I per-formed  it  very  badly;  and,  in  my  efforts  at  rapidity,  I  went  allwrong.  This,  however,  did  not  prevent  M.  Rolichon  from  treatingme  handsomely  to  the  last;  and,  when I left  him,  he  gave  me  acrown,  which  I by no  means  deserved,  and  which  completely  set  meon  my  legs again;  for, a  few  days afterwards,  I heard  of Madame  deWarens,  who  was  at  Chambéri,  and  sent  me  some  money  to  rejoinher,  which  I was  only  too  delighted  to  do.  Since  then  my  financeshave  often  been  very  low,  but  never  to  such  an  extent  that  I havebeen  obliged  to  fast.  I note  this  period  of my  life  with  a  heart  sensi-ble  of the  care  of Providence;  it was  the  last  time  in  my  life  that  Iever  suffered  hunger  and  wretchedness.I remained  a  week  or  so  longer  at  Lyons,  while  Mademoiselle  duChâtelet  executed  some  trifling  commissions  for  mamma.  Duringthis  time  I visited  her  more  frequently  than  before,  delighted  to  talkwith  her  about  her  friend,  and  no  longer  distracted  by the  painfulthoughts  of my  situation,  or  obliged  to  conceal  it.  Mademoiselle  duChatelet  was  neither  young  nor  pretty,  but was  not  wanting  in come-liness;  she was  affable  and  familiar,  and  her  mental  endowments  en-hanced  the  value  of  this  familiarity.  She  possessed  that  liking  formoral  observation  which  leads  to  the  study  of character;  and  it is toher  that  I originally  owe  the  first  impulse  in this  direction.  She  wasfond  of the romances  of Le Sage,  especially  “Gil  Glas”;  she  talked  tome  about it, and  lent  it to  me;  I read  it with  pleasure,  but  was  notyet  ripe  for  such  literature;  I wanted  high-flown  romances.  In  thismanner  I passed  my  time  in  her  parlour  with  equal  pleasure  andprofit; and  it is certain  that  interesting  and  intelligent  conversationwith  a  woman  of  education  and  character  are  better  calculated  toform  the  understanding  of a  young  man  than  all  the  pedantic  phi-losophy  than  can  be  acquired  from  books.  At  the  Chasottes  I be-came  acquainted  with  other  boarders  and  their  friends,  amongstothers  Mademoiselle  Serre,  a  young  girl of fourteen,  to  whom I didtDEPARTURE  FROM  LYONS177not  pay  particular  attention  at  the  time,  but  with  whom I fell  vio-lently  in love  eight or  nime'years  later,  and  no  wonder,  for  she  was  acharming  girl.Full  of the  expectation  of soon  seeing  my  good  mamma  again,  Iabandoned  my  dreams  for  awhile,  and  the  real  happiness  which-awaited  me  relieved  me  of the  trouble  of seeking  for  it in what  wasmerely  visionary.  I not  only  found  her  again,  but  also,  near  her  andby her  assistance,  a  pleasant  situation;  for  she  informed  me  that  shehad  found  an  occupation  for  me  which  she  hoped  would  suit  me,and one  which  would  not  take  me  far away  from  her.  I exhausted  myconjectures  in  trying  to  guess  what  this  occupation  might  be, but  itwould  ħave  needed  the  gift  of  prophecy  to  guess  aright.  I  hadenough  money  to  make  the  journey  comfortably.  Mademoiselle  duChâtelet  wanted  me  to  take  a  horse;  to  this  I would  not  agree,  andI was  right;  I should  have  lost  the  enjoyment  of  the  last  journey  Iever  made  on  foot;  for the excursions  which  I frequently  made  in theneighbourhood  of  Motiers,  while  I lived  there,  do  not  deserve  thename.It is a  very  remarkable  fact,  that  my  imagination  is never  moreagreeably  excited,  than  when  my  situation  is  the  very  reverse  ofagreeable,  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  less  cheerful  ‘when  allaround  me  is cheerful.  My obstinate  nature  is unable  to bow  to  facts.It cannot  beautify,  it must  create.  Realities  appear  to  it nothing  morethan  they  are;  it can  only  embellish  the  objects  of imagination.  If Iwish  to  depict  the  spring,  it must  be in  winter;  if I wish  to  describea  beautiful  landscape,  I must  be  surrounded  by walls;  and  I havesaid  a  hundred  times  that,  if  I were  ever  imprisoned  in  the  Bastille,I should  draw  the  picture  of Liberty.  When  setting  out  from  Lyons,I saw  only a  pleasant  future  before  me;  I was—and  I had  every  rea-son  to  be—as  happy  as  I had  been  the  reverse,  when  I set  out  fromParis.  Nevertheless,  during  this  journey,  I did  not  enjoy  those  de-lightful  reveries  which  had  accompanied  me  before.  My  heart  waslight,  and  that  was  all.  I drew  near  with  emotion  to  the  excellentfriend  whom  I was  going  to  see  again,  I tasted  in advance,  but  with-out  any  feeling  of intoxication,  the  happiness  of living  near  her;  Ihad  always  expected  it; it seemed  to  me  that  there  was  nothing  newfor  me  in that.  I felt  anxious  about  my  future  occupation,  as  if thatTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU178had  been a great  source  of anxiety.  My ideas  were  calm  and  gentle,instead  of heavenly  and  enchanting.  All  material  objects  claimed  myattention;  I observed  the  surounding  country;  I remarked  the  trees,the houses,  the brooks;  I took  counsel  with  myself  at  the  cross-roads;I was  afraid  of losing  myself  and  did  not  do  so.  In  a  word,  I was  nolonger  in the  clouds,  I was  just where  I was,  just where  I was  going,nowhere  else.In relating  my  journeys,  as  in  making  them,  I do  not  know  howto  stop.  My  heart  beat  with  joy  when  I  drew  near  to  my  dearmamma,  but  I walked  no  faster.  I like  to  walk  at  my  ease,  and  tostop  when I like.  A wandering  life  is what  I want.  To  walk  througha  beautiful  country  in fine  weather,  without  being  obliged  to  hurry,and  with  a  pleasant  prospect  at  the end,  is of all kinds  of life  the  onemost  suited  to  my  taste.  My  idea  of  a  beautiful  country  is  alreadyknown.  No  flat  country,  however  beautiful,  has  ever  seemed  so  tomy  eyes.  I must  have  mountain  torrents,  rocks,  firs,  dark  forests,mountains,  steep  roads  to  climb  or  descend,  precipices  at  my  side  tofrighten  me.  I had  this  pleasure,  and  enjoyed  it in  all  its  charm,  asI approached  Chambéri.  Not  far  from  a  precipitous  mountain  wall,called  Le  Pas  de  l’Echelle,  below  the  military  road  cut  out  of  therocks,  at  the  place  called  Chailles,  a  little  stream  rushes  and  foamsin some  fearful  precipices,  which  it seems  to  have  spent  millions  ofages  in hollowing  out.  Along  the  side  of the  road  is a  parapet  to  pre-vent  accidents,  which  enabled  me  to  look  down  and  be  as  giddy  asI pleased;  for  the  amusing  thing  about  my  taste  tor  steep  places  is,that  I am  very  fond  of the  feeling  of giddiness  which  they  give  riseto,  provided  I am  in a safe  position.  Leaning  securely  over  the  para-pet,  I stretched  forward,  and  remained  there  for  hours  together,from  time  to  time  catching  a  glimpse  of  the  foam  and  dark  water,the  roaring  of  which  I heard  in  the  midst  of  the  screams  of  theravens  and  birds  of  prey  which  flew  from  rock  to  rock,  and  frombush  to  bush,  a  hundred  fathoms  below  me.  In  places  where  theslope was  fairly  even,  and  the brushwood  was  not  too  thick  to  allowstones  to  pass  through,  I collected  from  a  distance  a  large  number,as big as  I could  carry,  and  piled  them  up  on  the  parapet;  then,  hurl-ing  them  down,  one  after  the  other,  I amused  myself  with  watch-KING,  VICTOR  AMADEUS179ing  them  roll,  rebound,  and  shiver  into  a  thousand  pieces,  beforereaching  the bottom  of tHe abyss,Nearer  Chambéri,  I saw  a  similar  sight,  of a  different  kind.  Theroad  passes  at  the  foot  of  the  most  beautiful  cascade  I have  everseen.  The  mountain  is  so  steep,  that  the  water  falls  away  clear,  in.the shape of an  arch, at  a  sufficient  distance  to  allow  a ‘person  to  walkbetween  it and  the  rock,  sometimes  even  without  being  wetted;  but,unless  one  is careful,  it is easy  to  be deceived,  as  I was;  for, owing  tothe  immense  height,  the  water  divides  and  falls  in  a  spray,  and, ifone  goes  only a little  too  near  to  this  cloud,  without  at  first  noticingthat  he is getting  wet,  he is drenched  in a  moment.At  length  I arrived;  I saw  her  again.  She  was  not  alone.  TheIntendant-General  was  with  her  when  I entered.  Without  a  word,she  took  me  by the  hand  and  introduced  me  to  him  with  that  grace-ful  manner  which  gained  her  the  affection  of  all,  saying:  “Here  isthe poor  young  man,  sir;  deign  to  protect  him  as  long as  he deservesit, and  I shall  feel  no  further  anxiety  about  him  for  the  rest  of  hislife.”  Then  she  turned  to  me;  “My  child,”  she  said,  “you  belong  tothe  King;  thank  Monsieur  |’Intendant,  who  offers  you  the  meansto  live.”  I opened  my  eyes  wide  and  said  nothing,  without  knowingexactly  what  to  think  of it; my  growing  ambition  nearly  turned  myhead,  and  already  I saw  myself  a  young  Intendant.  My  fortune  cer-tainly  did  not  prove  as  brilliant  as  I had  expected  from  such a start;but,  for  the  moment,  it was  enough  to  keep  me,  and  that,  for  me,was  a  good  deal.  The  state  of the  case  was  as  follows:King  Victor  Amadeus,  judging,  from  the  issue  of preceding  warsand  the  state  of his  ancestral  inheritance,  that  it would  one  day slipfrom  his hands,  did  his  utmost  to  exhaust  it beforehand.  A few  yearsago,  having  resolved  to  tax  the  Savoyard  nobility,  he  had  ordered  ageneral  land-register  of the  country  to  be  made,  in  order  to  imposetaxation  on  landed  property  and  distribute  it more  fairly.  The  work,commenced  in  the  father’s  time,  was  completed  by the  son.  Two  orthree  hundred  persons,  land-surveyors  who  were  called  geometri-cians,  and  writers  who  were  called  secretaries,  were  employed  in thetask,  and  mamma  had  secured  me  an  appointment  amongst  the  lat-ter.  The  post,  although  not  very  lucrative,  afforded  me  ample  meansTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU180to  live  upon  in  that  country;  the  misfortune  was,  that  the  employ-ment  was  only  temporary,  but  it put  me  in  a  position  to  wait  andlook  about  me,  and  mamma  had  purposely  endeavoured  to  securefor  me  the  special  protection  of the  Intendant,  that  I might  be  ableto  proceed  to  some  more  permanent  employment,  when  my  presentwork  was  finished.I entered  upon  my  duties  a  few  days  after  my  arrival.  The  workwas  not  difficult  and  I soon  became  familiar  with  it. Thus  it came  topass,  that,  after  four  or  five  years  of vagabondage,  of folly,  and  suf-fering,  since  I had  left  Geneva,  I began  for  the  first  time  to  earn  arespectable  living.These  lengthy  details  of my  early youth will naturally  have  seemedpuerile,  and  I regret  it; although  born  a  man  in  certain  respects,  Ilong  remained  a  child,  and  in  many  respects  I am  one  still.  I havenever  promised  to  introduce  a  great  character  to  the  public;  I havepromised  to  describe  myself  as  I am;  and,  in  order  to  know  me  inmy  riper  years,  it is necessary  to  have  known  me  well  in my  youth.Since,  as  a  rule,  objects  make  less  impression  upon  me  than  the  re-membrance  of them,  and  since  all  my  ideas  assume  the  form  of therepresentations  of  objects  in  my  mind,  the  first  traits  which  havestamped  themselves  upon  my  mind  have  remained,  and  those  whichhave  since  imprinted  themfelves  there  have  rather  combined  withthem  than  obliterated  them.  There  is a  certain  sequence  of mentalconditions  and  ideas,  which  exercises  an  influence  upon  those  whichfollow  them,  with  which  it is necessary  to  be acquainted,  in order  topass  a  correct  judgment  upon  the  latter.  I endeavour  in  all  cases  todevelop  the  first  causes,  in order  to  make  the  concatenation  of effectsfelt.  I should  like  to  be  able  to  make  my  soul  to  a  certain  extenttransparent  to  the  eyes  of  the  reader;  and,  with  this  object,  I en-deavour  to  show  it to  him  from  all  points  of  view,  to  exhibit  it tohim  in  every  aspect,  and  to  contrive  that  none  of its movements  shallescape his  notice,  so  that  he  may  be  able  by himself  to  judge  of theprinciples  that  produce  them.i:If I made  myself  responsible  for  the  result,  and  said  to  him,  Suchis  my  character,  he  might  think  that,  if  I am  not  deceiving  him,  Iam at  least  deceiving  myself.  But,  in simply  detailing  to  him  every-thing  that  has  happened  to  me,  all  my  acts,  thoughts,  and  feelings,IMPORTANCE  OF.  CHILDHOOD  RECOLLECTIONS181I cannot  mislead  him,  except  wilfully,  and  even  if I wished  to  do so,I should  not  find  it easy/ It is his  business  to  collect  these  scatteredelements,  and  to  determine  the  being  which  is composed  of  them;  `the  result  must  be his  work;  and  if he is mistaken,  all the  fault  willbe  his.  But  for  this  purpose  it  is  not  sufficient  that  my  narrative  -should  be true;  it must  also  be exact.  It is not  for  me  to  judge  of theimportance  of facts;  it is my  duty  to  mention  them  all, and  to  leavehim  to  select  them.  This  is what  I have  hitherto  aimed  at  with  allmy  best  endeavours,  and  in the  sequel  I will  not  depart  from  it. Butthe  recollections  of  middle-age  are  always  less  vivid  than  those  ofearly  youth.  I have  begun by making  the  best possible  use  of the  lat-ter.  If the  former  return  to  me  with  the  same  freshness,  impatientreaders  will,  perhaps,  grow  tired;  but  I myself  shall  not  be  dissatis-fied  with  my  work.  I have  only one  thing to  fear in this undertaking;not  that  I may  say  too  much  or  what  is not  true,  but  that  I may  notsay  all, and  may  conceal  the  truth.BOOK  V[1732-1736]I ran  it was  in  1732  that, as  I have  just related,  I arrived  at  Cham-béri,  and  commenced  land-surveying  in  the  King’s  service.  I wasFor  my  age,  my  mind  was  sufficientlynearly  twenty-one  years  of age.well  formed;  not  so  my  powers  of  judgment,  and  F sorely  neededinstruction  from  those  into  whose  hands  I fell, in order  to  learn  howto  conduct  myself  sensibly;  for  my  few  years  of experience  had  notbeen  sufficient  to  cure  me  completely  of  my  romantic  fancies;  and,in  spite  of  all  the  sufferings  I had  endured,  I knew  as  little  of  theworld  and  mankind,  as  if I had  never  paid dearly  for  my  knowledgeof them.I lived  at  home,  that  is to  say,  with  mamma;  but  I never  foundmy  room  at  Annecy  again.  No  garden,  no  brook,  no  landscape!  Thehouse  which  she  occupied  was  dark  and  gloomy,  and  my  room  wasthe  darkest  aid  gloomiest  in  the  house.  A wall  to  look  out  upon,  ablind  alley instead  of a  street,  very  little  air, light,  or  room;  crickets,rats,  rotten  boards—all  combined  to  make  a  by no  means  pleasantabode.  But  I was  in  her  house,  I was  near  her;  always  at  my  desk,or  in  her  room,  I did  not  notice  the  ugliness  of my  own;  I had  notime  to  think  of it. It will  appear  singular  that  she  should  have  set-tled  at  Chambéri  on  purpose  to  live  in  this  wretched  house;  but  itwas  a  piece  of cleverness  on  her  part,  which  I must  not  omit  to  ex-plain.  She  very  much  disliked  the  idea  of going  to  Turin,  as  she  feltthat, after  the  recent  changes  that  had  taken  place there,  and  duringthe  present  excitement  at  the  Court,  it was  not  the  right  moment  topresent  herself.  However,  her  affairs  required  her  presence;  she  wasafraid  of being  forgotten  or  slandered,  especially  as  she  knew  thatthe  Comte  de Saint-Laurent,  Intendant-General  of Finance,  was  notfavourably  disposed  towards  her.  He  had  an  old  house  at  Chambéri,182CLAUDE  ANET183badly  built,  and  so  disagreeably  situated,  that  it was  always  empty;she  took  it,  and  settledethere.  This  plan  succeeded  better  than  ajourney  to  Turin;  her  pension  was  not  discontinued,  and  from  thattime  the Comte  de Saint-Laurent  was  always  one  of her  best  friends.I found  her  household  arrangements  much  the  same  as  before,and  the  faithful  Claude  Anet  still  with  her.  I believe  I have  alreadystated  that  he  was  a  peasant  from  Moutru,  who,  in  his  childhood,used  to  gather  herbs  in Jura  to  make  Swiss  tea,  and  whom  she  hadtaken  into  her  service  on  account  of his  knowledge  of drugs,  findingit convenient  to  have  a  lackey  who  understood  them.  He  was  so  pas-sionately  fond  of the  study  of plants,  and  she  encouraged  his  taste  sostrongly,  that  he  became  a real  botanist,  and,  if  he  had  not  diedyoung,  might  have  made  himself  a  name  in  this  department  of sci-ence,  equal  to  that  which  he  deserved  as  an  honest  man.  Being  seri-ous,  even  grave,  and  older  than  myself,  he  became  to  me  a  kind  ofmentor,  who  kept  me  from  many  follies;  for  he  inspired  me  withrespect,  and  I never  ventured  to  forget  myself  in  his  presence.  Hemade  the  same  impression  on  his mistress,  who  knew  his good  sense,uprightness,  and  unshaken  devotion  to  herself,  and  repaid  it in kind.Claude  Anet  was,  undoubtedly,  no  ordinary  man  and  the  only  manof his  kind  that  I have  ever  seen.  Slow,  sedate,  thoughtful,  prudentin his  behaviour,  cold  in  manner,  laconic  and  sententious  in  his  ut-terances,  when  under  the  influence  of his  passions  he  was a prey  toa  violent  impetuosity,  which  he never  showed,  but  which  inwardlydevoured  him,  and  never  caused  him  to  commit  a folly  in  his  life,except  one,  and  that  a  terrible  one—he  took  a  dose  of poison.  Thistragic  event  took  place  shortly  after  my  arrival;  nothing  but  thismade  me  aware  of the  intimacy  between  him  and  his  mistress;  for,unless  she  had  told  me  herself,  I should  never  have  suspected  it.  Ifdevotion,  zeal,  and  loyalty  can  deserve  such  a  recompense,  it  wascertainly  due  to  him;  and  the  fact  that  he  never  abused  her  confi-dence  proves  that  he  was  worthy  of it.  Their  disputes,  which  wererare,  always  ended  amicably,  with  the  exception  of  one,  which  didnot  terminate  so  happily.  His  mistress,  in a  passion,  said  somethinginsulting  to  him;  unable  to  endure  the  affront,  he took  counsel  withhis despair,  and  finding  a bottle  of laudanum  ready to  hand, he swal-lowed  it, and  then  went  quietly  to  bed,  never  expecting  to  wakeTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU184again.  Luckily  Madame  de  Warens,  uneasy  and  agitated  herself,while  wandering  about  the  house,  found  the  empty  bottle,  andguessed  the rest.  She  flew  to  his assistance,  with  shrieks  that  attractedmy  attention.  She  confessed  everything,  implored  my  assistance,  andwith  much  difficulty  succeeded  in making  him  bring  up  the  opium.Witnessing  this  scene,  I marvelled  at  my  stupidity  in  never  havingentertained  the  least  suspicion  of  the  connection  of  which  she  in-formed  me.  But  Claude  Anet  was  so  discreet,  that  keener  observersthan  myself  might  well  have  been  deceived.  The  reconciliation  wasof such  a nature  that  I was  greatly  affected  by it; and, from  that  time,my  esteem  for  him  being  increased  by a feeling  of respect,  I becamein a  manner  his  pupil,  which  was  by no  means  to  my  disadvantage.However,  it was  not  without  pain  that  I discovered  that  anothercould  live  with  her  on  terms  of greater  intimacy  than  myself.  I hadnever  even  thought  of  desiring  such  a  position  for  myself;  but  itwas  hard  for me  to  see  it filled  by another,  and  my  feeling  was  a verynatural  one.  Notwithstanding,  instead  of conceiving  an  aversion  tohim  who had  robbed  me  of her, I actually  found  that  my  attachmentto  her  extended  itself  to  him.  Before  all  things  I desired  her  happi-ness;  and,  since  he  was  necessary  to  it,  I was  content  that  he  shouldbe happy  likewise.  On  his  part,  he  entered  completely  into  his  mis-tress’s  views,  and  conceived  a  sincere  friendship  for the friend  whomshe had chosen.  Without  claiming  the authority  over  me  to which  hispositicn  entitled  him,  he naturally  exercised  that  which  his  superiorintelligence  gave  him  over  mine.  I never  ventured  to  do anything  ofwhich  he appeared  to  disapprove,  and  he only  disapproved  of whatwas  bad.  Thus  we  lived  in  a’ union  which  made  us  all  happy,  andwhich  could  only be dissolved  by death.  One  of the  proofs  of the  ex-cellent  character  of  this  admirable  woman  is,  that  all  those  wholoved  her loved  one  another.  Jealousy,  even  rivalry,  submitted  to  thepredominant  feeling  which  she  inspired,  and  I have  never  seen  anyof those  who  surrounded  her  ill-disposed  towards  one  another.  Letmy  readers  pause  a  moment  at  this  panegyric,  and  if they can  thinkof any  other  woman  of whom  they can  say  the  same,  I advise  themto  attach  themselves  to  her, if they value  their  repose.Here  commences,  from  the time  of my  arrival  at  Chambéri  to  mydeparture  from  Paris  in 1741,  a  period  of eight or nine years,  duringDUTIES  OF  THE  LAND-SURVEY185which I shall  have  few  events  to  relate,  because  my  life  was  as  sim-ple  as  it  was  pleasant.  Fhis  uniformity  was  exactly  what  I mostwanted  to  complete  the formation  of my  character,  which  continualtroubles  had  prevented  from  becoming  settled.  During  this  preciousinterval,  my  miscellaneous  and  disconnected  education  acquiredconsistency,  and  made  me  what  I have  never  ceased  to  be,  amidstall  the  storms  which  awaited  me.  This  development  was  impercep-tible  and  slow,  accompanied  by few  events  worth  recording;  but,nevertheless,  it deserves  to  be followed  out  and  described.At  first,  I was  almost  entirely  occupied  with  my  work;  the  ties  ofthe  desk  left  me  scarcely  any  time  to  think  of  anything  else.  Thelittle  time  I had  free  was  spent  with  my  good mamma;  and, not  hav-ing even  sufficient  leisure  to  read,  I felt  no  inclination  to  do  so.  Butwhen  my  duties,  having  become  a  kind  of  routine,  occupied  mymind  less, the feeling  of restlessness  returned.  Reading  again becamenecessary,  and,  as  if  the  desire  for  it  had  always  been  heightenedwhen  it was  difficult  to  satisfy,  it would  have  again  become a passionwith  me,  as  at  my  master’s,  had  not  other  inclinations  interferedand  diverted  my  attention  from  it.Although  we  did  not  require  a very  profound  knowledge  of arith-metic  for  our  calculations,  we  required  enough  to  sometimes  causeme  some  trouble.  To  overcome  this  difficulty,  I bought  some  bookson  arithmetic,  and  learned  the  subject  well,  for  I learned  it alone.Practical  arithmetic  is  of  wider  extent  than  one  imagines,  whenstrict  accuracy  is aimed  at.  There  are  calculations  of  extraordinarylength,  in  which  I have  sometimes  seen  skilled  geometricians  gowrong.  Reflection,  combined  with  practice,  gives  clear  ideas,  andthen  one  discovers  short  methods,  the  invention  of which  is flatter-ing  to  one’s  self-complacency,  while  their  accuracy  satisfies  themind,  and  which  lend  a  charm  to  a  task  thankless  in itself.  I threwmyself into  it with  such  success  that  no  problem,  which  was  capableof being  solved  by figures  alone,  gave  me  any  difficulty;  and  evennow,  when  all that  I have  known  daily  fades  from  my  memory,  thisaccomplishment  in part  still  remains,  after  an  interval  of thirty years.A few days ago,  when  I made  a journey  to  Davenport,  being presentat  my  host’s  house  when  his  children  were  having  their  arithmeticlesson,  I worked  out,  without  a mistake  and  with  incredible  pleasure,THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU186an  extremely  complicated  calculation.  It  seemed  to  me,  as  I  setdown  my  figures,  that  I was  still  at  Chambéri  in  my  happy  days.What  a  distant  recollection!The  colouring  of  the  maps  of  our  geometricians  had  also  givenme  a  taste  for  drawing.  I bought  some  colours,  and  began  to  paintflowers  and  landscapes.  It  was  a  pity  that  I found  I possessed  butlittle  talent  for  this  art,  for  I was  entirely  devoted  to  it. I could  havespent  whole  months  in the  midst  of my crayons  and  pencils  withoutgoing  out.  As  this  occupation  occupied  too  much  of  my  attention,they  were  compelled  to  drag  me  away  from  it. It is always  the  samewith  all  the  pursuits  to  which  I begin  to  devote  myself;  they  growupon  me,  become  a  passion,  and  soon  I see  nothing  else  in the  worldbut  my  favourite  amusement.  Age  has  not  cured  me  of  this  fault,it has not  even  diminished  it; even  while  I write  this,  I sit like  an  oldtwaddler,  infatuated  with  anether  study,  which  is useless  to  me  andof which  I understand  nothing,  which  even  those  who  have  devotedthemselves  to  it during  their  youth,  are  obliged  to  give up  at  the  agewhen  I want  to  begin  it.At  that  time,  it  would  have  been  in  its  right  place.  The  oppor-tunity  was  favourable,  and  I had  some  temptation  to  make  use  of it.The  satisfaction  that  I saw  in  Anet’s  eyes,  when  he  came  homeloaded  with  new  plants,  two  or  three  times  nearly  made  me  go  outbotanising  with  him.  I am  almost  certain  that,  if I had  only  goneonce,  I should  have  been  captivated  by it, and  I should,  perhaps,now  be a  famous  botanist;  for  I know  no  study  in  the  world  bettersuited  to  my  natural  tastes  than  that  of plants;  and  the  life  which  Ihave  now  been  leading  for  ten  years  in  the  country  is  hardly  any-thing  but  a  continual  botanising,  although  certainly  without  pur-pose,  or  progress;  but,  at  that  time,  having  no  idea  of the  science  ofbotany,  I conceived  a  kind  of  contempt—even  of  aversion—for  it,and  only considered  it an  occupation  fit for  an  apothecary.  Mamma,whe  was  very  fond  of it, made  no  other  use  of  it herself;  she  onlylooked  for  common  plants,  such  as  she  could  make  use  of  in  herremedies.  In  this  manner,  botany,  chemistry,  and  anatomy,  con-fused  in  my  mind  under  the  general  term  medicine,  only  served  toprovide  me  throughout  the  day  with  a  subject  for  humorous  sar-casms,  and,  from  time  to  time,  brought  upon  me  a  box  on  the  ears..STUDY  OF  MUSIC187Besides,  a  different  and  most  opposite  taste  gradually  developed  itself  in me,  and  soon  supplanted  all the  others,  I mean  music.  I must.certainly  have  been  born  for  this  art,  since  I began  to  love  it frommy  earliest  childhood,  and  it is the  only  one  that  I have  loved  con-stantly  at  all  times.  The  remarkable  thing  is, that  an  art,  for  whichI was  intended  by Nature,  has  nevertheless  cost  me  so  much  troubleto  learn,  and  that  my  progress  in it has  been  so  slow,  that,  althoughI have  practised  it all  my  life,  I have  never  been  able  to  sing  withany  certainty  at  sight.  What  at  that  time  made  this  study  particu-larly  a  pleasure,  was  that  I could  pursue  it together  with  mamma.With  very  different  tastes  in  other  respects,  we  found  in  music  abond  of union,  which  I gladly  made  use  of.  She  made  no  objection;I was  at  that  time  almost  as  advanced  as  she  was;  after  two  or  threeattempts  we  could  decipher  an  air.  Sometimes,  when  I saw  her  busyround  a  furnace,  I used  to  say:  “Mamma,  here  is a  charming  duet,which  seems  to  me  just the  thing  to  make  your  drugs  smell  of burn-ing.”  “On  my  honour,”  she  would  reply,  “if  you  make  me  burnthem,  I will  make  you  eat  them.”  While  the  dispute  was  going  on,  Ipulled  her  to  her  piano,  where  we  soon  forgot  everything  else;  theextract  of juniper  or  absinthe  was  reduced  to  powder;  she  smearedmy  face  with  it—and  how  delightful  it all was!It will  be seen  that,  with  little  time  to  spare,  I had  many  things  toemploy  it. One  amusement,  however,  was  worth  all  the  rest.We  lived  in a dungeon  so  stifling,  that  we  were  sometimes  obligedto  go and  get  some  fresh  air in the country.  Anet  persuaded  mammato  rent  a  garden  in  one  of the  suburbs,  to  rear  plants.  Attached  tothis  garden  was a pretty  little  rustic  house,  which  was  decently  fur-nished,  and  a  bed  put  up  in  it.  We  often  had  dinner,  and  I some-times  slept  there.  Imperceptibly,  I became  infatuated  with  this  littleretreat.  I took  a  few  books  there  and  a  number  of prints;  I spent  partof my  time  in  decorating  it, and  preparing  an  agreeable  surprise  formamma  when  she  walked  out  there.  I sometimes  left  her,  that  Imight  busy  my  mind  with  her,  and  think  of her  with  greater  pleas-ure;  this  was  another  whim,  which  I can  neither  excuse  nor  explain,but  which  I acknowledge,  since  it was  really  the  case.  I rememberthat  Madame  de  Luxembourg  once  spoke  jestingly  to  me  of a  man,who  used  to  leave  his  mistress  in  order  to  write  to  her.  I told  herTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU188that  I might  very  well  have  been  that  man,  and  I might  have  addedthat  I had  sometimes  acted  like  him.  However,  when  I was  withmamma,  I never  felt  it necessary  to  leave  her,  in  order  to  love  hermore;  for,  #éte-a-téte  with  her,  I felt  as  completely  at  my  ease  as  if Ihad  been  alone,  which  I have  never  felt  in  the  presence  of  anyoneelse,  man  or  woman,  however  much  attached  to  them  I may  havebeen.  But  she  was  so  often  surrounded  by people  who  were  by nomeans  congenial  to  me,  that  a  feeling  of  annoyance  and  wearinessdrove  me  to  my  refuge,  where  I could  enjoy  her  as  I wanted  her,without  fear  of being  followed  by troublesome  visitors.In  this  manner,  my  time  being  divided  between  work,  pleasure,and  instruction,  I led  a life  of sweetest  repose.  Europe,  however,  wasnot  so  calm  as  myself.  France  and  the  Emperor  had  just  declaredwar;  the  King  of  Sardinia  had  taken  part  in  the  quarrel,  and  theFrench  army  was  marching  through  Piedmont  to  invade  Milaneseterritory.  One  column  passed  through  Chambéri,  amongst  othersthe  regiment  of  Champagne,  the  colonel  of  which  was  the  Duc  dela Trémouille,  to  whom  I was  presented.  He  was  lavish  in his prom-ises,  and  I am  quite  certain  that  he never  once  thought  of me  again.Our  little  garden  was  situated  just at  the  end  of the  suburb  throughwhich  the troops  entered,  so  that  I could  enjoy  to  my  heart’s  contentthe pleasure  of seeing  them  pass,  and  I was  as  eager  for the  success  ofthis  war  as  if I had  had  the  greatest  interests  at  stake  in it. Hithertoit had  not  entered  my  head  to  think  about  public  affairs;  and  I beganto  read  the newspapers  for  the  first  time  but  with  such  partiality  forFrance  that  my  heart  beat  with  joy when  it gained  the  least  success,while  its  reverses  afflicted  me  as  much  as  if they  had  overtaken  my-self.  If this  folly  had  only  been  transitory,  I should  not  consider  itworth  speaking  of; but  it has  become  so  rooted  in my  heart  withoutany  sufficient  reason,  that  when,  later,  at  Paris,  I played  the  part  ofthe  enemy  of  tyrants  and  the  proud  republican,  I felt,  in  spite  ofmyself,  a  secret  predilection  for  this  very  nation  I found  servile,  andfor the  government  which  I pretended  to  condemn.  The  amusingthing was  that,  being  ashamed  of  an  inclination  so  opposed  to  myprinciples,  I never  dared  to  confess  it to  anyone,  and I rallied  theFrench  on  their  defeats,  while  my  heart  bled  for  them  more  thantheir  own.  I am  certainly  the  only man  who,  living  in the  midst  of aLOVE  OF  THE  FRENCH189people  who  treated  him  well  and  whom  he worshipped,  has assumedamongst  them  an  air  of é6ntempt.  On  my  part,  this  inclination  is sodisinterested,  so  powerful,  so  lasting,  and  so  invincible,  that,  evenafter  my  departure  from  France,  after  the  storm  which  its  govern-ment,  magistrates,  and  writers  have  vied  with  one  another  in  stir-ring  up  against  me,  and  since  it  has  become  the  fashion  to  over-whelm  me  with  undeserved  abuse,  I have  been  unable  to  cure  my-self  of my  folly.  I love  them  in  spite  of myself,  in  spite  of  their  illtreatment  of me.I have  long endeavoured  to  discover  the  reason  of this  partiality,and  have  been  unable  to  find  it anywhere  except  in the  occasion  thatproduced  it.  A  growing  taste  for  literature  gave  me  a  fondness  forFrench  books,  their  authors,  and  the  country  of  these  authors.  Atthe moment  when  the French  army  was  marching  past,  I read  Bran-tôme’s  “Great  Captains.”  My head  was  full  of the  Clissons,  Bayards,Lautrecs,  Colignys,  Montmorencys,  and  Trimouilles,  and  I lovedtheir  descendants  as  the  inheritors  of their  virtues  and  their  courage.In  each  regiment  that  passed  I thought  I beheld  again  those  famousblack  bands  which  had  formerly  performed  such  heroic  deeds  inPiedmont.  In  short,  I connected  with  what  I saw  the  ideas  which  Idrew  from  my  books;  my  continuous  reading,  still  confined  toFrench  authors,  nourished  my  affection  for their  country,  and  finallyconverted  it into  a  blind  infatuation,  which  nothing  has  been  able  toovercome.  I have  later  had  occasion  to  remark  in  the  course  of myjourneys  that  this  impression  was  not  peculiar  to  myself,  and  that,exercising  more  or  less  influence  in  all  countries  upon  that  part  ofthe  nation  which  loves  reading  and  cultivates  literature,  it counter-balanced  the general  hatred  inspired  by the conceited  manners  of theFrench.  Their  romances,  more  than  their  men,  win  the  hearts  of thewomen  of  all  countries,  their  dramatic  masterpieces  attract  theyoung  to  their  theatres.  The  fame  of  the  theatres  of  Paris  drawscrowds  of  strangers,  who  return  home  their  enthusiastic  admirers.In short,  the excellent  taste  displayed  in their  literature  captivates  theminds  of all  those  who  have  any  mind:  and,  during  the  war  whichended  so  disastrously  for  them,  I have  seen  their  authors  and  phi-losophers  uphold  the honour  of the  French  name,  so  tarnished  by itswarriors.190THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUI was,  then,  an  ardent  Frenchman,  and  this  made  me  a  news-monger.  I went  with  the  crowd  of  gapers  to  the  market-place,  towait  for  the  post;  and,  sillier  than  the  ass  in  the  fable,  I was  veryanxious  to  know  what  master’s  saddle  I should  have  the  honour  tocarry;  for  at  that  time  it  was  declared  that  we  should  belong  toFrance,  and  that  Savoy  would  be  exchanged  for  the  territory  ofMilan.  However,  it  must  be  admitted  that  I had  some  reason  foranxiety;  for, if this  war  had  turned  out  badly  for  the  allies,  mamma'spension  would  have  been  in danger.  But  I had  full  confidence  in mygood friends;  and,  this  time,  in spite of the  surprise  of M.  de Broglie,my  confidence  was  not  deceived,  thanks  to  the  King  of  Sardinia,whom  I had  never  thought  of.While  there  was  fighting  in  Italy,  there  was  singing  in  France.Rameau’s  operas  began  to  make a stir,  and  gave a lift to  his  theoreti-cal works,  which,  by reason  of their  obscurity,  were  within  the reachof only a  few  capacities.  Having  accidentally  heard  his  “Treatise  onHarmony”  mentioned,  I had  no  rest  till  I had  procured  the  book.By  another  accident  I fell  ill.  The  malady  was  an  inflammation,which  was  very  violent  during  the  short  time  it lasted,  but  my  res-toration  to  health  was  tedious,  and  I was  unable  to  go  out  for  amonth,  During  this  period,  I worked  at, I devoured  my  “Treatise  onHarmony”;  but  it was  so  long,  so  diffuse,  and  so  badly  arranged,that  I felt  it would  take  me  a  considerable  time  to  study  and  disen-tangle  it.  I suspended  my  efforts,  and  refreshed  my  eyes  with  music.The  cantatas  of  Bernier,  which  I practised,  were  never  out  of  mymind.  [ learned  four  or  five  of them  by heart,  amongst  others,  TheSleeping  Cupids,  which  I have  never  seen  again  since  then,  andwhich I still  remember  almost  perfectly,  and  also  Cupid  Stung  by aBee,  a  very  pretty  cantata  by Clérambault,  which  I learned  almostat  the  same  time.To confirm  my  passion,  a  young  organist,  called  the  Abbé  Palais,arrived  from  Val-d’Aost,  a  good musician,  a  good  fellow,  and  an  ex-cellent  accompanist.  I made  his  acquaintance,  and  we  immediatelybecame  inseparable,  He  had  been  the  pupil  of  an  Italian  monk,  afine organist.  He  spoke  to  me  of  his  principles  of  music,  which  Icompared with those  of my  Rameau;  I filled  my  head  with  harmony,accompaniments,  and  chords.  My ear  required  training  for  all  that,PERE  CATONIQIand  I proposed  to  mamma  to  give a little  concert  every  month,  towhich  she  agreed.  I was  sofull  of this  concert,  that,  day and  night,  Ithought  of nothing  else;  and  it really  occupied  a  considerable  part  ofmy  time  to  arrange  the music,  the  accompanists,  and  instruments,  towrite  out  the  parts,  and  so  forth.  Mamma  sang;  Pére  Caton—ofwhom  I have  already  spoken,  and  of whom  I shall  have  occasion  tospeak  again—sang  also;  M.  Roche,  a  dancing-master,  and  his  sonplayed  the  violin;  M.  Canavas,  a  Piedmontese  musician,  who  wasemployed  in  the  Survey,  and  has  since  married  and  settled  at  Paris,played  the  violoncello;  the  Abbé  Palais  accompanied  on  the  piano,and  I had  the  honour  of conducting  with  my  baton.  It may  be imag-ined  how  delightful  it  was!  Not  quite  like  the  concerts  at  M.  deTreytorens’s,  but nearly  so.This  little  concert  given  by Madame  de  Warens,  a  new  convert,who  lived,  as  was  reported,  on  the  King’s  charity,  gave  offence  tothe  band  of devotees;  but  for  many  worthy  people  it was  an  agree-able  amusement.  It would  not  easily be guessed  whom I placed  at  thehead  of these  on  this  occasion.  It was  a monk,  but  a  monk,  talentedand  even  amiable,  whose  later  misfortunes  keenly  affected  me,  andwhose  memory,  connected  as  it is with  that  of my  happy  days, is stilldear  to  me.  The  monk  in  question  was  Pére  Caton,  a  Franciscan,who,  conjointly  with  Comte  Dortan,  had  caused  the  music  of  thepoor  “Kitten”  to  be  confiscated  at  Lyons,  which  was  not  the  mostworthy  incident  in his  life.  He  was  a  Bachelor  of Sorbonne;  he  hadlived  a  long time  in the  highest  circles  in Paris,  and  was  an  especialfavourite  with  the  Marquis  d’Antremont,  at  that  time  Sardinian  am-bassador.  He  was  tall, well  built,  with  a  full  face  and  prominent  eyes,black  hair,  which  curled  naturally  over  his  forehead,  and  a  mannerat  once  noble,  frank,  and  modest;  his  appearance  was  simple  andpleasing,  without  the  hypocritical  or  impudent  attitude  of  a  monk,or  the  haughty  demeanour  of  a  man  of  fashion,  although  he  wasone;  he  displayed  only  the  assurance  of  an  honourable  man,  who,without  blushing  for his cloth,  respects  himself  and  always  feels  him-self  in  his  proper  place  in  honourable  company.  Although  he  wasnot  very  learned  for  a  doctor,  he  was  very  accomplished  for  a  manof the  world;  and,  never  eager  to  display  his  knowledge,  he  madeuse  of it so  opportunely,  that  he  was  credited  with  more  than  heí192THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUreally  possessed.  Having  lived  much  in  society,  he had  paid more  at-tention  to  agreeable  accomplishments  than  to  solid  learning.  He  waswitty,  wrote  verses,  talked  well,  sang  better,  had  a  fine  voice,  andplayed  the  organ  and  piano.  This  was  more  than  enough  to  makehim  sought  after,  as  indeed  he was;  but  so  little  did  this  cause  him  toneglect  the  duties  of  his  position,  that,  in  spite  of jealous  rivals,  hewas  chosen  Définiteur'  of  his  province,  in  other  words,  one  of thehighest  dignitaries  of the  order.Pére  Caton  made  mamma’s  acquaintance  at  the  Marquis  d’Antre-mont’s.  He  heard  our  concerts  spoken  of, and  expressed  a  desire  totake  part  in them;  he did  so,  and  made  them  delightful.  We  soon  be-came  attached  by our  mutual  taste  for music,  which,  with  both  of us,was  a lively  passion,  the  only  difference  being  that  he  was  really  amusician,  while  I was  only  a  bungler.  We  used  to  go and  play in hisroom  together  with  Canavas  and  the Abbé  Palais,  and  sometimes,  onfeast  days,  we  had  music  on  his  organ.  We  often  shared  his  littletable  at  dinner;  for—a  thing  surprising  in  a monk—he  was  liberal,profuse,  and  fond  of the  pleasures  of the  table  without  being a glut-ton.  On  our  contert  days,  he  stayed  to  supper  with  mamma.  Thesesuppers  were  very  gay  and  very  pleasant.  We  spoke  as  we  thought,and  sang  duets;  I was  in my  element,  and  displayed  my  wit  and  hu-mour;  Pére  Caton  was  delightful,  mamma  was  adorable;  the  AbbéPalais,  with  his  deep  voice,  was  the  butt  of  all.  Sweet  moments  ofyouthful  folly,  how  long  is it since  you  have  departed?As  I shall  have  no  further  occasion  to  speak  of  this  poor  PéreCaton,  let me  finish  his  melancholy  story  in a  few  words.  The  othermonks,  jealous,  or  rather,  furious,  at  seeing  in  him  good  qualitiesand a refinement  of manners  which  had  nothing  in  common  withmonastic  debauchery,  conceived  a  violent  hatred  for  him,  since  hewas  not  as  hateful  as  themselves.  Their  leaders  combined  againsthim,  and  stirred up  the inferior  monks  who  envied  his position,  andwho had  hitherto  not  dared  to  look  at  him.  They  heaped  a thousandinsults upon  him,  deprived  him  of  his  office,  took  away  his  room,which he had  furnished  with  taste,  although  quite  simply,  and  ban-ished  him  I know  not  whither;  at  last,  these  wretches  so  over-whelmed  him  with  insults,  that  his honourable  and  justly proud  soul1Ep;iDéfiniteur:  assessor  to  the  head  of  his  order.HIS  PASSION  FOR  MUSIC19%,was  unable  to  withstand  them;  and  he who  had  been  the  delight  ofthe most  agreeable  society  died  of grief on  a  miserable  bed, in somecell  or  dungeon,  regretted  and  lamented  by all  the  worthy  peoplewho  had  known  him  and  found  no  other  fault  in him, except  that ofbeing a  monk.;Living  in this  manner,  I soon  became  entirely  absorbed  by music,and  found  it impossible  to  think  of anything  else.  I never  went  to  mydesk  willingly;  the  restraint  and  constant  hard  work  made  it an  un-endurable  torture,  and  at  last  I expressed  a  wish  to  throw  up  my  em-ployment,  in  order  to  devote  myself  entirely  to  music.  It  may  beimagined  that  this  folly  on  my  part  did  not  escape  opposition.  Toleave  a  respectable  situation  and a certain  salary  in order  to  run  afteruncertain  pupils,  was  too  foolish  a  plan  to  meet  with  mamma’s  ap-proval.  Even  if my  future  success  should  prove  as  great  as  I imag:ined,  it  was  fixing  very  humble  limits  to  my  ambition,  to  confinemyself  for  life  to  the  position  of a  musician.  She, whose  plans for mewere  all ambitious,  and  who  no  longer judged  me  entirely  in accord-ance  with  M.  d’Aubonne’s  verdict,  was  sorry  to  see  me  seriously  oc-cupied  with  a  talent  which  she  regarded  as  unprofitable,  and  oftenrepeated  to  me  the  provincial  saying,  which  is  less  applicable  inParis,  “He  who  sings  and  dances  well,  has  a  profession  which  doesnot  lead  to  much.”  On  the  other  hand,  she  saw  me  carried  away  byan  irresistible  inclination;  my  passion  for  music  was  becoming  aregular  madness,  and  there  was  reason  to  fear  that  my  work  mightsuffer  from  my  distractions,  and  that  this  might  cause  me  to  be dis-missed,  which  would  be far worse  than  voluntary  resignation.  Again,I pointed  out  to  her  that  my  employment  was  only  temporary,  thatI should  be obliged  to  do  something  for a livelihood,  and  that  it wasfar  safer  to  acquire  by practice  a  thorough  knowledge  of the  art  towhich  my  tastes  inclined  me  and  which  she had  chosen  for  me,  thanto  put  myself  at  the  mercy  of  patrons,  or  to  try  something  freshwhich  might not  succeed,  and  might leave  me,  when  I was  too  old  tolearn,  without  the  means  of  earning  my  bread.  At  last,  I extortedher  consent  more  by dint  of importunities  and  caresses  than  argu-ments  which  she  considered  satisfactory.  I immediately  ran  to  M,Coccelli,  general  manager  of the  Survey,  to  resign  my  appointment.as  proudly  as  if I had  performed  a  most  heroic  action;  and  I volun-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU£94tarily  resigned  my  situation,  without  cause,  reason,  or  excuse,  withas  much  and  even  greater  joy  than  I had  accepted  it less  than  twoyears  before.This  step,  utterly  foolish  as  it was,  procured  for  me  in  the  coun-try  a  certain  consideration  which  was  useful  to  me.  Some  imaginedthat  I possessed  means  which  I did  not  possess;  others,  seeing  meentirely  devoted  to  music,  estimated  my  talents  by the  sacrifice  thatI had  made,  and  believed  that,  with  so  much  passion  for  this  art,  Imust  really  possess  a  superior  knowledge  of  it.  In  the  country  ofthe  blind  the  one-eyed  are  kings;  I passed  for  a  good  master,  sinceall  the  rest  were  bad.  Besides,  since  I really  possessed  a  certain  tastefor  singing,  and  was  also  favoured  by my  age  and  personal  appear-ance,  I soon  had  more  lady  pupils  than  were  necessary  to  make  upthe  pay  I had  received  as a clerk.It is certain  that,  as  far  as  a  pleasant  life  was  concerned,  it wouldnot  have  been  possible  for  anyone  to  pass  more  rapidly  from  oneextreme  to  the  other.  At  the  Survey,  occupied  for  eight  hours  dailywith  the  most  disagreeable  employment,  amongst  people  still  moredisagreeable,  shut  up  in a  gloomy  office,  poisoned  by the breath  andperspiration  of a number  of clods,  most  of them  dirty  and  unkempt,I was  sometimes  so  overcome  by the  exertion,  smell,  restraint  andweariness,  that  I felt  quite  giddy.  In  place  of  this,  I was  suddenlylaunched  into  the  fashionable  world,  admitted  and  sought  after  inthe best  houses,  everywhere  graciously  received,  caressed,  and  féted;amiable  young  ladies,  gaily  dressed,  awaited  my  arrival,  and  re-ceived  me  with  eagerness;  I saw  nothing  but  enchanting  objects,  Ismelt  nothing  but  the  perfume  of  roses  and  orange-flowers,  foundnothing  but singing,  gossip,  laughter  and  amusement;  I only left onehouse  to  find  the  same  in  another.  It  will  be  agreed  that,  the  otheradvantages  being  equal,  there  could  be no  hesitation  in the choice.  Iwas  so  satisfied  with  mine,  that  I never  once  repented  it, and  I donot  regret  it even  now,  when  I weigh  in  the  scale  of reason  the  ac-tions  of  my  life,  and  am  free  from  the  not  very  sensible  motiveswhich  led  me  to  make  it.This  was  almost  the  only  time  that  I was  not  deceived  in my  ex-pectations,  when  I only  obeyed  my  inclinations.  The  affable  andsociable  disposition,  the  easy-going  temperament  of the  inhabitantsHIS  MUSIC  PUPILS195of this  country  rendered  my  intercourse  with  the  world  agreeable,and  the  liking  I then  conceived  for it has  clearly  proved  to  me  that,if I do net  like  society,  it is society’s  fault  rather  than  mine.It is to  be regretted  that  the  Savoyards  are  not  rich,  or,  perhaps,  itwould  be still  more  to  be regretted  if they were;  for, such  as  they are,they are  the  best  and  most  sociable  people  that  I know.  If there  is alittle  city  in  the  world  where  it is possible  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  oflife  in  agreeable  and  safe  intercourse,  it  is  Chambéri.  The  noblefamilies  of  the  province,  who  assemble  there,  have  only  enough  tolive  on,  not  enough  to  advance  themselves;  and,  being  unable  to  in-dulge  in  ambitious  projects,  are  obliged  to  follow  the  counsel  ofCineas.?  In  youth,  they  devote  themselves  to  military  service,  andreturn  to  spend  their  old  age  in  peace  at  home.  Honour  and  reasonhave  an  equal  share  in  this  distribution  of  their  lives.  The  womenare  beautiful,  without  having  any  need  to  be so;  they possess  all thosequalities  which  can  give  beauty  its value,  and  even  supply  its  place.It  is  remarkable  that  I, whose  profession  brought  me  into  contactwith  so  many  young  girls, do not  remember  to  have  ever  seen  one  inChambéri  who  was  not  charming.  It will  be said  that  I was  inclinedto  find  them  so,  and  there  may  be  some  truth  in  that;  but  I had  noneed  to  add  anything  of  my  own.  In  truth,  I cannot  think  of  myyoung  pupils  without  pleasure.  Why,  when  I mention  here  the  mostamiable  of  them,  can  I not  reinstate  them  and  myself  together  in.those  happy  times  which  we  then  enjoyed,  those  sweet  and  innocentmoments,  which  we  spent  together?  The  first  was  Mademoiselle  de.Mellaréde,  my  neighbour,  the  sister  of M.  Gaime’s  pupil.  She  was  alively  brunette,  full  of  tender  vivacity  and  grace,  and  free  fromthoughtlessness.  Like  most  girls of her  age,  she  was  rather  thin;,buther bright eyes,  her slender  figure,  and  her attractive  manner  neededno  fulness  to  add  to  her  charm.  I used  to  go  to  her  in  the  morning,when  she  was  generally  in  deshabille,  without  any  headdress  except`  her  hair, carelessly  pinned  up  and  set  off by a  few  flowers  which  sheplaced  there  on  my  arrival,  and  which  were  taken  off  when I left,_  for her hair  to  be dressed.  I am  more  afraid  of a pretty  young  womanin  deshabille  than  of anything  else  in  the  world;  I should  fear  thema  hundred  times  less  in  full  dress,  as  Mademoiselle  de Menthon,  to2 The  minister  of Pyrrhus,  King  of Epirus,THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU196whose  house  I went  in the afternoon,  always  was.  She made  upon  mean  equally  pleasing  but  entirely  different  impression.  Her  hair  wasvery  light;  she  was  very  slight,  very  shy, and  very  fair;  her voice  wasclear,  correct,  and  melodious,  but  she  was  afraid  of  employing  itsfull  compass.  She  had  a  scar  on  her  bosom  where she  had  beenscalded  by some  boiling  water,  which  was  only  partly  hidden  by aneckerchief  of blue  chenille.  This  mark  sometimes  drew  my  atten-tion  to  the  place,  and,  in  a  short  time,  no  longer  on  account  of thescar.  Mademoiselle  de  Challes,  another  of my  neighbours,  was  fullydeveloped,  tall,  well  made,  and  rather  stout.  She  had  been  verypretty,  but  was  no  longer  a  beauty;  but  she  deserves  notice  on  ac-count  of her  graceful  manners,  even  temper,  and  good  disposition.Her  sister,  Madame  de Charly,  the  prettiest  woman  in Chambéri,  nolonger  learned  music,  but  I gave  lessons  to  her  daughter,  who  wasstill  quite  young,  and  whose  growing  beauty  gave  promise  of equal-ling  that  of her  mother,  had  she  not  unfortunately  been  somewhatred-haired.  At the  Convent  of the Visitation  I gave  lessons  to  a youngFrench  lady, whose  name  I have  forgotten,  but  who  deserves  a  placein  the  list  of  my  favourite  pupils.  She  had  adopted  the  slow  anddrawling  tones  of  the  nuns,  and  in  this  drawling  tone  made  somevery  witty  remarks,  which  seemed  quite  out  of  harmony  with  hermanner.  For  the  rest,  she  was  idle,  not  caring  to  take  pains  to  showher  wit,  which  was  a  favour  she  did  not  grant  to  everyone.  It  wasonly after  a  month  or  two,  during  which  I had  given  her lessons  andshe  had  been  very  idle,  that  she  bethought  herself  of this  expedientto  make  me  more  punctual,  a  thing  which  I have  never  been  able  topersuade  myself  to  be.  I liked  my  lessons  while  I was  giving  them;but I did  not  like  the  idea  of being  obliged  to  attend,  or  being  tied  totime;  restraint  and  subjection  of any  kind  are  to  me  at  all  times  un-‘bearable;  they  would  make  me  hate  even  pleasure  itself.  It  is  saidthat,  amongst  the  Mohammedans,  a  man  goes  through  the  streets  atdaybreak,  ordering  husbands  to  do their  duty to  their  wives.  I shouldbe  a  poor  Turk  at  that  hour.I also  had  some  pupils  among  the  middle  classes,  amongst  others,one  who  was  the indirect  cause  of a change  in my  relations,  of whichI have  to  speak,  since  I must  tell  everything.  She  was  a  grocer’sdaughter,  named  Mademoiselle  Lard;  a perfect  model  for  a  GreekMADAME  LARDa197statue,  and  whom  I should  quote  as  the  most  beautiful  girl  I haveever  seen,  if true  beauty  cguld  exist  without  life  and  soul.  Her  in-difference,  coldness,  and  want  of feeling  were  almost  incredible.  Itwas  as  impossible  to  please  as  it was  to  annoy  her;  and  I am  con-vinced  that,  if any  man  had  made  an  attempt  upon  her  virtue,  shewould  have  allowed  him  to  succeed,  not  from  inclination,  but  fromsheer  stupidity.  Her  mother,  who  did  not  wish  to  run  the  risk, neverleft  her  for  a  moment.  In  having  her  taught  singing,  in  providingher with  a  young  master,  she did  all she could  to  rouse  her, but with-out  success.  While  the  master  tried  to  fascinate  the  daughter,  themother  tried  to  fascinate  the  master,  with  equally  bad  success.  Ma-dame  Lard  united  with  her  natural  vivacity  all  the  sprightlinesswhich  her  daughter  should  have  possessed.  She  was a lively;  prettylittle  woman,  although  her  features  were  somewhat  irregular  andmarked  with  the  small-pox.  She  had  small,  fiery  eyes,  which  wererather  red,  and  nearly  always  sore.  Every  morning,  on  my  arrival,  Ifound  my  coffee  and  cream  ready;  the  mother  never  failed  to  saluteme  with  a  hearty  kiss  on  the  lips,  which  I should  have  liked  to  re-turn  to  the  daughter,  merely  out  of curiosity  to  see  how  she  wouldhave  taken  it.  All  this  was  done  so  simply  and  naturally,  that,  evenwhen  M. Lard  was  there,  the kissing  and  caressing  went  on  as  usual,He  was  a  good  fellow,  the  true  father  of  his  daughter,  whom  hiswife  never  deceived,  since  she  had  no  need  to  do  so.I submitted  to  all  these  caresses  with  my  usual  stupidity,  treatingthem  simply  as  tokens  of  friendship.  Sometimes  they  became  trou-blesome,  for  lively  Madame  Lard  always  exacted  her  rights,  and  if,in  the  course  of the  day,  I had  passed  the  shop  without  stopping,  itwould  have  created  a  disturbance.  When  I was  in  a  hurry,  I wasobliged  to go round  by another  street;  for I well  knew  that it was  notso  easy  a  matter  to  get out  of her  house  as  to  enter  it.,Madame  Lard  showed  me  too  much  attention  for  me  to  shownone  to  her.  These  attentions  touched  me  greatly.  I  spoke  aboutthem  to  mamma,  as  something  which  was  no  secret;  and,  even  ifthere  had  been  any  mystery,  I should  have  spoken  to  her  all  thesame,  for  it would  have  been  impossible  for  me  to  keep a secret  ofany  kind  from  her;  my  heart  was  as  open  before  her  as  in the  sightof  heaven.  She  did  not  consider  the  matter  quite  as  harmless  asTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU198I  did.  She  saw  advances  where  I  had  only  seen  friendship;  shethought  that,  if Madame  Lard  made  it a  point  of honour  not  to  leaveme  as  great  a  fool  as  she  had  found  me,  she  would  somehow  or  othersucceed  in making  herself  understood,  and, apart  from  the consider-ation  that  it was  not  fair  that  another  woman  should  undertake  theinstruction  of her  pupil,  she  had  motives,  which  were  more  worthyof her, in a  desire  to  protect  me  from  the  snares  to  which  my  age  andcalling  exposed  me.  At  the  same  time,  a  more  dangerous  snare  wasset  for  me,  which  I indeed  escaped,  but  which  showed  her  that  thedangers,  which  continually  threatened  me,  rendered  necessary  all themeasures  of protection  which  she  could  employ.'  The  Comtesse  de  Menthon,  the  mother  of one  of my  pupils,  wasa  woman  of great  wit, and  had  the  reputation  of being  equally  mali-cious.  It was  reported  that  she  had  caused  several  quarrels,  amongstothers,  one  which  had  had  fatal  consequences  for  the  house  of An-tremont.  Mamma  was  sufficiently  intimate  with  her to  be acquaintedwith  her character;  having  quite innocently  taken  the  fancy of some-one  upon  whom  Madame  de  Menthon  had  designs,  mamma  wascharged  by her  with  the  offence  of  the  preference  shown  towardsher, although  she  had neither  sought  nor  accepted  it; and,  from  thattime,  Madame  de  Menthon  sought  to  do  her  rival  several  ill  turns,none  of which  succeeded.  By way  of sample,  I will  relate  one  of themost  laughable.  They  were  together  in  the  country,  with  severalgentlemen  of the  neighbourhood,  amongst  whom  was  the  suitor  inquestion.  Madame  de Menthon  one  day told  one  of these  gentlementhat  Madame  de  Warens  was  very  affected,  and  she  had  no  taste,dressed  badly,  and  kept her  bosom  covered  like  a  tradesman’s  wife.“As  for  the  last  point,”  answered  the  gentleman,  who  was  fond  of ajoke, “she  has  her  reasons  for  it;  I know  she  has  a  scar  on  her breast,just  like  an  ugly  rat,  so  perfectly  natural  that  it looks  as  if it wasmoving.”  Hatred,  like  love,  causes  credulity.  Madame  de  Menthonresolved  to  make  capital  out  of this  discovery;  and  one  day,  whenmamma  was  playing  cards  with  the  lady’s  ungrateful  favourite,  sheseized  the opportunity  to  step behind  her rival,  and, almost  upsettingher  chair,  cleverly  turned  back  her  neckerchief;  but,  instead  of thelarge rat,  the gentleman  saw  something  very  different,  which  it wasMADAME  DE  MENTHON199easier  to  see  than  to  forget,  and  this  was  certainly  not  what  the  ladyhad  intended.<)I was  not  calculated  to  attract  Madame  de  Menthon,  who  onlyliked  to  see  brilliant  company  around  her;  nevertheless,  she  paid  mesome  attention,  not  on  account  of  my  personal  appearance,  about  |which  she  certainly  did  not  trouble  herself,  but  because  of  my  sup-posed  wit,  which  might  have  made  me  serviceable  to  her.  She  had  4lively  taste  for  satire,  and  was  fond  of composing  songs  and  versesupon  those  who  displeased  her.  If  she  had  found  me  sufficientlygifted  to  assist  her  in composing  her  verses,  and  sufficiently  obligingto  write  them,  between  us  we  should  soon  have  turned  Chambériupside  down.  These  lampoons  would  have  been  traced  back  to  theirsource;  Madame  de Menthon  would  have  got  out  of it by sacrificingme,  and  I should,  perhaps,  have  been  imprisoned  for  the  rest  of mylife,  as  a  reward  for  playing  the  Apollo  of  the  ladies.Happily,  nothing  of  the  kind  happened.  Madame  de  Menthonkept  me  to  dinner  two  or  three  times,  to  make  me  talk,  and  foundthat  I was  only a  fool.  I was  conscious  of this  myself,  and  sighed  overit, envying  the  accomplishments  of  my  friend  Venture,  whereas  ]ought to  have  been  grateful  to  my  stupidity  for  saving  me  from  dan.ger.  I continued  her  daughter’s  singing-master,  and  nothing  more;but  I lived  peacefully,  and  was  always  welcome  in Chambéri,  whichwas  far  better  than  being  considered  a  wit  by her,  and  a  serpent  byeverybody  else.Be  that  as  it may,  mamma  saw  that,  in  order  to  rescue  me  fronthe  perils  of my  youth,  she  must  treat  me  as  a  man,  which  she  im-mediately  proceeded  to  do,  but  in  the  most  singular  manner  thatever  occurred  to  a  woman  in similar  circumstances.  I found  her  man:ner  more  serious,  and  her  utterances  more  moral  than  usual.  Theplayful  gaiety,  which  was  usually  mingled  with  her advice,  was  all atonce  succeeded  by a  sustained  gravity,  neither  familiar  nor  severe,which  seemed  to  pave  the  way  for  an  explanation.  After  having  invain  asked  myself  the  reason  of this  change,  I asked  her,  which  wasjust what  she  expected.  She  proposed  a  walk  in  the  little  garden  onthe  following  day;  the  next  morning  found  us  there.  She  had  takenprecautions  that  we  should  be  left  undisturbed  all  day,  and  em-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU200ployed  the  time  in preparing  me  for  the  kindness  which  she  wishedto  show  me,  not,  as  another  woman  would  have  done,  by artificesand  coquetry,  but  by language  full  of feeling  and  good  sense,  bettercalculated  to  instruct  than  to  seduce  me,  which  appealed  rather  tomy  heart  than  my  senses.  But,  however  admirable  and  useful  thewords  she  addressed  to  me  may  have  been,  although  they  were  any-thing  but  cold  and  mournful,  I did  not  listen  to  them  with  all  theattention  they  deserved,  and  did  not  impress  them  on  my  memory,as  I should  have  done  at  any  other  time.  The  manner  in  which  shebegan,  the  appearance  of  careful  preparation  had  disquieted  me;while  she  was  speaking,  I was  dreamy  and  distracted,  thinking  lessof what  she  was  saying  than  of what  she  wanted;  and,  as  soon  as  Iunderstood,  which  was  by no  means  easy,  the  novelty  of  the  idea,which  had  never  once  entered  my  head  all the  time  I had  been  livingwith  her, it so  completely  took  possession  of me,  that  I was  no  longerin a  state  to  pay  attention  to  what  she  said  to  me.  I only  thought  ofher,  and  did  not  listen  to  her.Most  instructors  are  liable  to  the  perverse  idea,  which  I have  notavoided  myself  in my  “Emile,”  of making  young  people  attentive  tothat  which  they  desire  to  impress  upon  them,  by revealing  to  themthe  prospect  of  something  in  the  highest  degree  attractive.  Struckby the  object  held  before  him,  a  young  man  devotes  his  attention  tothat  exclusively,  and,  leaping  lightly  over  your  introductory  dis-courses,  makes  straight  for  the  goal  towards  which  you  are  leadinghim  too  slowly  for  his liking.  If it be desired  to  make  him  attentive,he  must  not  be  allowed  to  go  too  far  ahead;  and  it was  just in  thisparticular  that  mamma  showed  her  want  of judgment.  With  char-acteristic  singularity,  which  accorded  with  her  systematic  mind,  shetook  the  superfluous  precaution  of attaching  conditions;  but, as  soonas  I saw  their  reward,  I no  longer  listened  to  them,  and  hastened  toagree  to  everything.  I even  doubt  whether  there  is  a  man  in  theworld  sufficiently  honest  and  courageous  to  make  a  bargain  in  asimilar  case,  or  a woman  capable  of pardoning  him,  if he venturedto  do  so.  In consequence  of the  same  singularity,  she  attached  to  theagreement  the  most  solemn  formalities,  and  gave  me  eight  days tothink  over  them,  which,  like  a  hypocrite,  I assured  her  I did  not  re-quire;  for, to  crown  the  singularity  of the  whole  affair,  I was  reallyMADAME  DE  WARENS’  PROPOSAL201glad  of the  respite,  so  greatly  had  the  novelty  of these  ideas  struckme,  and  so  disordered  dfd  I feel  the  state  of  my  own  to  be, that  Iwanted  time  to  set  them  in  order.It  will  be  imagined  that  those  eight  days  seemed  eight  centuriesto  me;  on  the  contrary,  I could  have  wished  that  they  had  reallylasted  as  long. I do not  know  how  to  describe  my  condition;  it was  akind  of  fright  mingled  with  impatience,  during  which  I was  soafraid  of what  I longed  for,  that  I sometimes  seriously  endeavouredto  think  of  some  decent  way  of  avoiding  the  promised  happiness.Consider  my  ardent  and  lascivious  temperament,  my  heated  blood,my heart  intoxicated  with  love, my  vigorous  health,  my  age.  Remem-ber  that,  in  this  condition,  thirsting  after  women,  I had  never  yettouched  one;  that  imagination,  need,  vanity,  and  curiosity,  all  com-bined  to  devour  me  with  the  burning  desire  of  being  a  man  andshowing  myself  one.  Add  to  this,  above  all—for  it must  never  beforgotten—that  my  tender  and  lively  attachment  to  her,  far  from.  diminishing,  had  only  become  warmer  every  day,  that  I was  neverhappy  except  with  her;  that  J never  left  her  except  to  think  of her;that  my  heart  was  full, not  only  of her  goodness  and  amiability,  butof her  sex,  her  form,  her  person;  in  a  word,  of her,  under  every  as-pect  in  which  she  could  be  dear  to  me.  Do  not  imagine,  that,  be-cause  she  was  ten  or  twelve  years  older  than  myself,  she  had  eithergrown  old,  or  appeared  so  to  me.  During  the  five  or  six  years  sincethe first  sight of her  had  so  enchanted  me,  she had  really  altered  verylittle,  and,  in my  eyes,  not  at  all.  She  had  always  appeared  charmingto  me,  and,  at  that  time,  everyone  still  considered  her  so.  Her  figurealone  had  become a little  stouter.  In  other  respects,  it was  the  sameeye,  the  same  complexion,  the  same  bosom,  the  same  features,  thesame  beautiful  fair  hair,  the  same  cheerfulness,  even  the  voice  wasthe  same,  the  silvery  voice  of youth,  which  always  made  so  deep animpression  upon  me,  that,  even  now,  I cannot  hear  without  emo-tion  the tones  of a  pretty  girlish  voice.What  I had  to  fear  in  the  expectation  of possessing  one  who  wasso  dear  to  me,  was  naturally  the anticipation  of it, and  the inability  tocontrol  my  desires  and  imagination  sufficiently  to  remain  master  ofmyself,  It will  be seen  that,  at  an  advanced  age,  the  mere  idea  of cet-tain  trifling  favours  which  awaited  me  in the company  of the  personTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU202I loved,  heated  my  blood  to  such  a  degree  that  it was  impossible  forme  to  make  with  impunity  the  short  journey  which  separated  mefrom  her.  How  then  was  it that,  in the  flower  of my  youth, I felt  solittle  eagerness  for  the  first  enjoyment?  How  was  it that  I could  seethe  hour  approach  with  more  pain  than  pleasure?  How  was  it that,instead  of  the  rapture  which  should  have  intoxicated  me,  I almostfelt  repugnance  and  fear?  Thére  is no  doubt  that,  if I had  been  ableto  escape  my  happiness  with  decency,  I should  have  done  so  with  allmy  heart.  I have  promised  singularities  in  the  history  of my  attach-ment  to  her;  this  is  surely  one  which  would  never  have  been  ex-pected.The  reader,  already  disgusted,  is doubtless  of  opinion  that,  beingalready  possessed  by another  man,  she  degraded  herself  in  my  eyesby distributing  her  favours,  and  that  a  feeling  of dis-esteem  cooledthose  with  which  she had  inspired  me.  He  is mistaken.  This  distribu-tion  was  certainly  very  painful  to  me,  as  much  in  consequence  of avery  natural  feeling  of delicacy  as  because  I really  considered  it un-worthy  of her  and  myself;  but  it never  altered  my  feelings  towardsher, and  I can  swear  that I never  loved  her  more  tenderly  than  whenI had  so  little  desire  to  possess  her.  I knew  too  well  her  modest  heartand  her  cold  temperament  to  think  for  a moment  that  sensual  pleas-ure  had  anything  to  do with  this  abandonment  of herself;  I was  per-fectly  convinced  that  nothing  but  anxiety  to  save  me  from  dangersthat  were  otherwise  almost  inevitable  and  to  preserve  me  entirelyfor myself  and  my  duties,  caused  her  to  violate  a  duty  which  she  didnot  regard  in the  same  light as  other  women,  as  will  be shown  later.I pitied  her  and  pitied  myself.  I should  have  liked  to  say  to  her:  “No,mamma,  it is not  necessary;  I will  answer  for  myself  without  that.”But  I did  not  dare  to  do  so—first,  because  it was  not  a  thing  to  say,and,  in  the  second  place,  because  in  the  main I felt  that  it was  nottrue,  and  that,  in reality,  there  was  only one  woman  who  could  pro-tect  me  against  other  women  and  secure  me  against  temptations.Without  desiring  to  possess  her,  I was  very  glad  that  she  preventedme  from  desiring  the  possession  of other  women,  to  such  an  extentdid  I look  upon  everything  as  a  misfortune  which  would  draw  meaway  from  her.  Our  long-continued  and  innocent  intercourse,  farfrom  weakening  my  feelings  for  her,  had  strengthened  them,  but,REFLECTIONS  ON  HIS  ATTACHMENT203at the same  time, had  given them a different  turn,  which  made  themmore  affectionate,  more  tender  perhaps,  but  also  less  sensual.  Havingso  long called  her  mamma,  having  enjoyed  with  her  the  intimacy  ofa  son,  I had  become  accustomed  to  look  upon  myself  as  one.  I believethat  this  was  really  the  cause  of the  little  eagerness  I felt  to  possessher, although  she  was  so  dear  to  me.  I well  remember  that  my  earlyfeelings,  without  being livelier,  were  more  sensual.  At Annecy,  I wasintoxicated;  at  Chambéri,  I was  no  longer  so.  I still  loved  her  as  pas-sionately  as  possible;  but  I loved  her  more  for her  own  sake  than  formy  own,  or,  at  least,  I sought  happiness  with  her, rather  than  enjoy-~  ment;  she  was  for  me  more  than a sister,  more  than  a  mother,  morethan  a  friend,  even  more  than  a  mistress;  and  for  that  very  reasonshe  was  not  a  mistress  for  me.  In  short,  I loved  her  too  well  to  desireto  possess  her;  that  is most  clearly  prominent  in my  ideas.The  day, more  dreaded  than  wished  for, at length  arrived.  [ prom-ised  everything,  and  kept  my  word.  My  heart  sealed  all  my  vows,without  desiring  their  reward.  However,  I obtained  it.  For  the  firsttime  I found  myself  in  the  arms  of  a  woman,  a  woman  whom  Iadored.  Was  I happy?  No; I tasted  pleasure.  A certain  unconquer-able  feeling  of melancholy  poisoned  its charm;  I felt  as  if I had  beenguilty  of incest.  Two  or  three  times,  while  pressing  her  in ecstasy  tomy  arms,  I wetted  her  bosom  with  my  tears.  She,  on  the  other  hand,was  neither  sad  nor  excited;  she  was  tender  and  calm.  As  she  was  byno  means  sensual  and  had  not  looked  for  enjoyment,  she  felt  nogratification,  and  never  experienced  remorse.I repeat  it:  all  her  faults  were  due  to  her  errors,  none  to  her  pas-sions.  She  was  well  born,  her  heart  was  pure,  she  loved  propriety;her inclinations  were  upright and  virtuous,  her taste  was  refined;  shewas  formed  for  an  elegance  of manners  which  she  always  loved  butnever  followed,  because,  instead  of listening  to  her  heart,  which  al-ways  guided  her  aright,  she listened  to  her  reason,  which  guided  hetwrongly;  for  when  the  latter  is led  astray  by false  principles,  theseare  always  belied  by its  real  feelings;  but,  unfortunately,  she  ratherprided  herself  on  her  philosophy,  and  the  morals  which  she  drewfrom  it corrupted  those  which  her  heart  dictated.M.  de Tavel,  her  first  lover,  was  her  instructor  in philosophy,  andthe principles  which  he taught  her were  those  which  he found  neces-204THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsary,  in  order  to  seduce  her.  Finding  her  attached  to  her  husband,devoted  to  her  duties,  always  cold,  calculating,  and  inaccessible  tosensual  feelings,  he endeavoured  to  reach  her  by sophistries,  and  suc-ceeded  in  convincing  her  that  the  duties,  to  which  she  was  so  at-tached,  were  so  much  catechism-nonsense,  intended  solely  for  theamusement  of children;  that  the  union  of  the  sexes  was  in  itself  amatter  of the greatest  indifference;  that  conjugal  fidelity  was  merelyan  apparent  obligation,  the  inner  morality  of which  only  had  refer-ence  to  public  opinion;  that  the husband’s  repose  was  the only rule  ofduty  which  the  wife  need  respect,  so  that  secret  acts  of  unfaithful-ness,  being  nothing  to  him  against  whom  they  were  committed,were  equally  nothing  to  the  conscience;  in  short,  he  persuaded  herthat  the  thing  was  nothing  in  itself,  that  only  scandal  called  it intoexistence,  and  that  every  woman  who  appeared  virtuous  owed  it tothat  alone.  In this  manner  the wretch  attained, his object,  by corrupt-ing the  mind  of a  child  whose  heart  he  had  been  unable  to  corrupt.He  was  punished  for  it  by  an  all-devouring  jealousy,  being  con-vinced  that  she  treated  him  as  he had  persuaded  her  to  treat  her hus-band.  I do not  know  whether  he was  mistaken  in this.  The  ministerPerret  was  supposed  to  have  been  his  successor.  All  I know  is, thatthe  cold  temperament  of  this  young  woman,  which  ought  to  haveprotected  her  against  this  system,  was  just  what  subsequently  pre-vented  her  froin  abandoning  it.  She  could  not  conceive  that  anyoneshould  attach  such  importance  to  that  which  possessed  no  impor-tance  for  her.  She  never  honoured  by the  name  of  virtue  an  absti-vence  which  cost  her  so  little.She  hardly  ever  misused  these  false  principles  for  her  own  sake;but she misused  them  for the sake  of others,  and  that  in consequenceof another  maxim  almost  equally  false,  but  more  in  harmony  withthe goodness  of her heart.  She  always  believed  that  nothing  attacheda  man  so  strongly  to  a woman  as  possession;  and,  although  her  lovefor  her  friends  was  only  friendship,  it was  a  friendship  so  tender,that  she  employed  all  possible  means  at  her  disposal  to  attach  themmore  strongly  to  her. The remarkable  thing is, that she nearly  alwayssucceeded.  She  was  so  truly  amiable,  that,  the  greater  the  intimacyin  which  one  lived  with  her, the  more  one  found  fresh  reasons  farMADAME  DE  WARENS’  CHARACTER205loving  her.  Another  thing  worthy  of  notice  is  that,  after  her  firstweakness,  she  rarely  bestowed  her  favours  except  upon  the  unfor-tunate;  persons  of  distinction  spent  their  labour  upon  her  in  vain;but, if she once  began to  feel  sympathy  for  a man,  he must  have  beenlittle  deserving  of  love  if  she  did  not  end  by loving  him.  If  shesometimes  chose  those  who  were  unworthy  of her, the blame  rested,not  on  any  low  inclinations,  which  were  far removed  from  her  nobleheart,  but  only  on  her  too  generous,  too  kindly,  too  compassionate,and  too  feeling  disposition,  which  she  did  not  always  control  withsufficient  judgment.If some  false  principles  led  her  astray,  how  many  admirable  onesdid  she  possess,  to  which  she  always  remained  constant!  By  howmany  virtues  did  she make  up for her weaknesses,  if those  errors  canbe so  called,  with  which  the senses  had  so  little  to  do!  The  same  man,who  deceived  her  in  one  point,  instructed  her  admirably  in a  thou-sand  others;  and, as  her passions  were  not  so  unruly as  to  prevent  herfrom  following  her  reason,  she  took  the  right  path  when  her  soph-isms  did  not  mislead  her.  Her  motives,  even  in  her  errors,  werepraiseworthy;  owing  to  her  mistaken  ideas,  she might do wrong,  butshe was  incapable  of doing  so  wilfully.  She abhorred  duplicity  and  ly-ing;  she  was  just,  fair,  humane,  disinterested,  faithful  to  her  word,her  friends,  and  the  duties  which  she  regarded  as  such,  incapable  ofrevenge  or  hatred,  without  the  least  idea  that  there  was  any  merit  inforgiveness.  Finally,  to  return  to  those  qualities  which  less  admit  ofexcuse,  without  knowing  how  to  estimate  the  value  of her  favours,she never  made  a common  trade  of them;  she was  lavish  of them, butshe  never  sold  them,  although  she  was  always  at  her  wit’s  end  howto  live;  and  I venture  to  assert,  that  if Socrates  could  esteem  Aspasia,he would  have  respected  Madame  de Warens.  |I know  beforehand,  that,  when I ascribe  to  her  a  sensitive  disposi-tion  and  a  cold  temperament,  I shall,  as  usual,  be accused  of contra-diction,  and  with  as  much  reason.  It may  be that  Nature  was  wrong,and  that  this  combination  ought  not  to  have  existed;  I only  knowthat  it did exist.  All  who  have  known  Madame  de Warens,  many  ofwhom  are  still  alive,  know  well  that  this  was  the  case.  I will  evenventure  to  add,  that  she  never  knew  but  one  real  pleasure  in life—THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU206to  procure  enjoyment  for  those  whom  she  loved.  Anyone  is at  libertyto  judge  of that  as  he pleases,  and  learnedly  prove  that  it is not  true.My duty  is to  state  the  truth,  not  to  make  people  believe  it.By  degrees  I became  acquainted  with  all  I have  just  said  in  thecourse  of  the  conversations  which  succeeded  our  union,  and  whichalone  rendered  it delightful.  She  had  been  right  in  hoping  that  hercomplaisance  would  be  useful  to  me;  I derived  great  advantagesfrom  it as  regards  my  instruction.  Hitherto,  she  had  only  spoken  tome  of myself  alone  as  if she  had  been  talking  to  a  child.  She  nowbegan  to  treat  me  as  a  man,  and  spoke  to  me  of herself.  All  that  shesaid  to  me  was  so  interesting,  and I felt  so  touched  by it, that,  whenI reflected,  I derived  greater  advantage  from  these  confidences  thanfrom  her  instructions.  When  we  truly  feel  that  the heart  speaks,  ourown  opens  to  receive  its  confidences,  and  all  the  morality  of a  peda-gogue  will  never  be  worth  the  tender  and  loving  chatter  of a  cleverwoman,  who  has  gained  our  affection.The  intimate  terms  on  which  I lived  with  her  afforded  her  theopportunity  of forming  a  more  favourable  estimate  of me  than  be-fore;  she was  of opinion  that,  in spite of my  awkward  manner,  I wasworth  being trained  for  the world,  and  that, if  I one  day appeared  ona  certain  footing,  I should  be  in  a  position  to  make  my  way.  Withthis idea,  she devoted  herself,  not  only to  forming  my  judgment,  butalso  my  appearance  and  manners,  in  order  to  make  me  amiable  aswell  as  estimable;  and, if it is true  that  worldly  success  is compatiblewith  virtue—which  for  my  part  I do not  believe—I  am  at  least  con-vinced,  that there  is no  other  way  to  such  an  end  than  that which  shehad  taken  and  wished  to  teach  me.  For  Madame  de Warens  under-stood  mankind,  and  understood,  in a  high  degree,  the  art  of dealingwith  them  without  falsehood  and  without  indiscretion,  without  de-ceiving  or  offending  them.  But  she  taught  this  art  rather  by  hercharacter  than  by her  lessons;  she  knew  better  how  to  practise  thanexplain  it, and  I was  of  all  men  in  the  world  the  least  capable  oflearning  it. Thus  her  efforts  in this  direction  were  nearly  all  labourlost,  as  well  as  the  trouble  she  took  to  provide  me  with  fencing  anddancing-masters.  Although  supple  and  of  a  good  figure,  I couldnever  learn  to  dance  a  minuet.  Owing  to  my  corns,  I had  contractedthe  habit  of walking  on  my  heels,  of which  Roche  could  never  cureILL-SUCCESS  AT  FENCING207me;  and,  in spite  of my  active  appearance,  I have  never  been  able  tojump  an  ordinary  ditch.  If was  worse  at  the  fencing-school.  Afterthree  months’  instruction  I was  still  obliged  to  confine  myself  toparrying,  without  being  able  to  deliver  an  attack;  my  wrist  was  notsupple  enough,  or  my  arm  sufficiently  firm,  to  hold  my  foil,  when-ever  my  master  chose  to  make  it fly out  of my  hand.  In addition  tothis,  I had  a  mortal  aversion  to  this  exercise,  and  to  the  master  whoattempted  to  teach  me.  I could  never  have  believed  that  a  man  couldbe so  proud  of being  able  to  kill  another.  In  order  to  bring  his  com-manding  genius  within  my  reach,  he  always  explained  himself  bycomparisons  drawn  from  music,  about  which  he knew  nothing.  Hediscovered  striking  analogies  between  a  thrust  in  tierce  and  carteand  the  musical  intervals  of  the  same  name.  When  he  intended  tomake  a  feint,  he told  me  to  look  out  for  a  dièse,’  because  a  dièse  wasformerly  called  a  feinte;  when  he  had  knocked  the  foil  out  of myhand,  he used  to  say,  with  a  grin,  that  it was  a  pause.  In short,  I havenever  in  my  life  beheld  a  more  insufferable  pedant  than  thiswretched  fellow  with  his  plumes  and  his  leather  stomacher.I consequently  made  little  progress  in these  exercises,  which  I soongave  up  from  sheer  disgust;  but  I succeeded  far better  in a  more  use-ful  art—that  of  being  content  with  my  lot,  and  not  desiring  onemore  brilliant,  for  which  I began  to  feel  that  I was  not  born.  En-tirely  devoted  to  the  desire  of making  mamma’s  life  happy,  I alwaysfelt  greater  pleasure  in  her  company;  and,  when  I was  obliged  toleave  her  and  hurry  into  the  town,  in spite  of my  passion  for  music,I began  to  feel  the  restraint  imposed  upon  me  by my  lessons.I do not  know  whether  Claude  Anet  was  aware  of the  intimacy  ofour  relations.  I have  reason  to  believe  that  it  did  not  escape  hisnotice.  He  was  very  quick-witted,  but  very  discreet;  he  never  saidwhat  he did  not  think,  but  he  did  not  always  say  what  he  thought.Without  giving  me  the  least  hint  that  he  knew  about  it, he  seemedto  show  by his  conduct  that  he  did.  This  conduct  was  certainly  notdue  to  any  lowness  of  disposition,  but  to  the  fact  that,  havingadopted  his  mistress’s  principles,  he  could  not  disapprove  if  sheacted  in accordance  with  them.  Although  no  older  than  she  was,  hewas  so  mature  and  serious,  that  he  looked  upon  us  almost  as  two3 Mus.,  sharp.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU208children,  who  deserved  to  be  indulged,  and  both  of  us  regardedhim  as  a  man  worthy  of respect,  whose  esteem  we  had  to  conciliate.It was  not  until  she  had  been  unfaithful  to  him,  that  I understoodthe  extent  of the  attachment  that  she  felt  for  him.  Since  she  knewthat  I only  felt,  thought  and  breathed  through  her,  she  showed  mehow  much  she  loved  him,  in order  that  I might  feel  the  same  affec-tion  for  him,  and  she  laid  less  stress  upon  her  friendship  than  uponher  esteem  for  him,  since  this  was  the  feeling  which  I was  capableof  sharing  most  fully.  How  often  did  she  move  our  hearts,  andmake  us  embrace  with  tears,  at  the  same  time  telling  us  that  wewere  both  necessary  to  her  happiness  in  life!  Let  not  those  womenwho  read  this  laugh  maliciously.  With  her  peculiar  temperament,there  was  nothing  suspicious  about  this  necessity;  it was  solely  thenecessity  of  her  heart.Thus  a  companionship  was  established  between  us,  of  whichthere  is, perhaps,  no  other  example  upon  earth.  All our  wishes,  cares,and  inclinations  were  in  common;  none  of them  went  beyond  ourlittle  circle.  The  habit  of living  together,  to  the  exclusion  of the  restof  the  world,  became  so  strong,  that  if, during  the  course  of  ourmeals,  one  of  the  three  was  absent,  or  a  fourth  came  in, everythingwas  upset,  and,  in  spite  of  our  special  bonds  of  attachments,  ourtéte-a-tétes  were  not  so  sweet  as  our  party  of three.  What  preventedall  restraint  between  us  was  an  extreme  mutual  confidence,  andwhat  prevented  weariness  was  the  fact  that  we  were  all  constantlyemployed.  Mamma,  always  planning  and  always  active,  allowedneither  of us  to  be  idle;  and,  besides,  we  each  of us  had  enough  todo on  our  own  account,  to  keep our  time  fully occupied.  In my  opin-ion, want  of occupation  is equally  the scourge  of society  and  solitude.Nothing  narrows  the  mind  more,  nothing  begets  more  nothings—gossip,  tittle-tattle,  bickering,  and  lies—than  for  people  to  be  eter-nally  shut  up,  opposite  one  another,  in the  same  room,  reduced,  forthe  want  of anything  else  to  do, to  the  necessity  of chattering  inces-santly.  When  everyone  is busy,  people  only  speak  when  they  havesomething  to  say;  but,  when  doing  nothing,  they  are  absolutelyobliged  to  keep  talking,  which  is the  most  wearisome  and  the  mostdangerous  kind  of constraint.  I even  venture  to  go further  and  main-tain  that,  in order  to  make  company  really  agreeable,  not  only  must2MADAME  DE  WARENS’  VISIONARY  PROJECTS209everybody  be  doing  something,  but  something  that  requires  a  cer-tain  amount  of attentione  Knitting  is as  bad  as  doing  nothing;  andit takes  as  much  trouble  to  amuse  a  woman  who  is knitting,  as  onewho  is sitting  with  her  arms  folded.  Embroidering  is different;  sheis sufficiently  occupied  to  fill  up  the intervals  of silence.  What  is dis-gusting  and  ridiculous,  is  to  see,  in  the  meantime,  a  dozen  over-grown  hobble-de-hoys  get  up,  sit  down  again,  walk  backwards  andforwards,  turn  round  on  their  heels,  move  the  porcelain  chimney-ornaments  about,  and  rack  their  brains  in  order  to  keep  up  an  in-exhaustible  flow  of words—a  charming  occupation  truly!  Such  peo-ple, whatever  they  may  do,  will  always  be  a  burden  to  themselvesand  others.  When  I was  at  Motiers,  I used  to  go  to  my  neighbours’houses  to  make  stay-laces;  if  I went  back  into  the  world,  I shouldalways  carry  a  cup  and  ball  in my  pocket,  and  amuse  myself  with  itall day, to  avoid  being  obliged  to  speak  when  I have  nothing  to  say.If everyone  did  the  same,  men  would  become  less  spiteful,  their  in-tercourse  would  become  safer,  and,  in  my  opinion,  more  agreeable.In  short,  let  wits  laugh  if they  please,  but  I maintain  that  the  onlylesson  of morality  within  the  reach  of the  present  generation  is themorality  of  the  cup  and  ball.Besides,  we  were  not  allowed  much  time  for  taking  precautionsagainst  ennui  when  by ourselves;  the  crowds  of troublesome  visitorscaused  us  too  much  weariness  to  allow  us  to  feel  any  when  we  wereleft  to  ourselves.  The  feeling  of  impatience,  with  which  they  hadformerly  inspired  me,  had  not  diminished,  and  the  only  differencewas,  that  I had  less  time  to  abandon  myself  to  it. Poor  mamma  hadnot  lost  her  old  fancy  for  schemes  and  systems;  on  the  contrary,  themore  pressing  her  domestic  embarrassments  became,  the  more  sheabandoned  herself  to  visionary  projects,  in order  to  meet  them;  thesmaller  her  present  resources,  the  greater  she  imagined  them  in  thefuture.  Advancing  years  only  strengthened  her  in this  folly;  and,  inproportion  as  she  lost  the  taste  for  the  pleasures  of  the  world  andyouth,  she supplied  its place by a mania  for  secrets  and  schemes.  Thehouse  was  never  free  from  quacks,  manufacturers,  alchemists,  andpromoters  of all  kinds,  who  flung  millions  about  them,  and  endedby being  in  want  of  a  crown-piece.  None  of  them  left  her  empty-handed;  and  it has  always  amazed  me,  how  she  was  able  to  supportTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU‘210such  extravagant  expenditure  without  exhausting  her means  and  thepatience  of her  creditors.The  scheme  with  which  she  was  most  occupied  at  the  time  ofwhich  I am  speaking,  and  which  was  not  the  most  unreasonablethat  she  had  formed,  was  to  establish  at  Chambéri  a  royal  botanicalgarden  with  a  paid  demonstrator;  it will  be  guessed  for  whom  thispost  had  already  been  designed.  The  position  of  this  town,  in  themidst  of  the  Alps,  was  excellently  adapted  for  botanical  purposes;and  mamma,  who  always  tried  to  assist  one  scheme  by another,  com-bined  with  it the  idea  of a  college  of pharmacy,  which  really  seemedlikely  to  be very  useful  in  so  poor  a  country,  where  apothecaries  arealmost  the only  medical  men.  The  retirement  of  Grossi,  the  royalphysician  in ordinary,  to  Chambéri,  after  the  death  of  King  Victor,seemed  to  her  to  be  very  favourable  to  this  idea,  or,  perhaps,  sug-gested  it. However  that  may  be, she  laid  herself  out  to  flatter  Grossi,who  was  by no  means  an  easy  subject;  he was  certainly  the  most  sar-castic  and  brutal  fellow  that  I have  ever  known.  The  reader  will  beable  to  judge  of his  character  by two  or  three  specimens  of it, whichI will  mention.One  day,  he was  in  consultation  with  some  other  physicians,  oneof whom  had  been  summoned  from  Annecy,  and  was  the  patient’susual  medical  attendant.  This  young  man,  who  possessed  little  tactfor a  physician,  ventured  to  disagree  with  Grossi’s  opinion.  The  lat-ter,  by way  of  reply,  simply  asked  him  when  he  was  going  back,which  way  he  meant  to  go,  and  by what  conveyance  he  travelled.The  other,  having  satisfied  Grossi  on  these  points,  asked  him  in histurn  whether  he  could  do  anything  for  him.  “Nothing,  nothing,”said  Grossi,  “except  that  I intend  to  sit  at  a  window  while  you  arepassing,  to  have  the  pleasure  of seeing  an  ass  riding  on  horseback.”He  was  as  mean  as  he  was  wealthy  and  hard-hearted.  One  of  hisfriends  once  asked  him  to  lend  him  some  money  on  good  security.“My  friend,”  said  he, seizing  his  arm  and  grinding  his  teeth,  “if  St.Peter  himself  came  down  from  heaven  to  borrow  ten  pistoles  fromme,  and  offered  me  the  Trinity  as  sureties,  I would  not  lend  themto  him.”  One  day, being invited  to  dinner  with  Comte  Picon,  Gover-nor  of Savoy,  who  was  a very  religious  man,  he  arrived  before  the‘time;  and  his  Excellency,  who  was  busy  telling  his  beads,  proposedM.  GROSSI21Fthe  same  amusement  to  him.  Not  knowing  exactly  what  to  answer,he made  a  fearful  grimac€ and  knelt  down;  but  he had  scarcely  re-cited  two  Aves,  when,  unable  to  endure it  any longer,  he  hastily  gotup,  took  his stick,  ‘adi went  off without  saying  a  word.  Comte  Piconran  after  him,  crying,  “M.  Grossi!  M.  Grossi!  stop,  stop!  there is  anexcellent  red  partridge  on  the  spit!”  “Monsieur  le Comte,”  repliedthe  other,  turning  round,  “I  would  not  stay  if  you  were  to  set  aroasted  angel  before  me.”  Such  was  the  chief  physician,  M.  Grossi,whom  mamma  took  in  hand,  and  succeeded  in  taming.  Althoughextremely  busy,  he  was  in  the  habit  of coming  to  see  her  very  fre-quently,  conceived  a  friendship  for  Anet,  showed  that  he  thoughthighly  of his  learning,  spoke  of him  in  terms  of esteem,  and,  whatone  would  not  have  expected  from  such a bear,  treated  him  withstudious  respect,  to  obliterate  the  impressions  of  the  past.  For,  al-though  Anet  was  no  longer  on  the footing  of a  servant,  it was  knownthat  he  had  formerly  been  one,  and  it needed  nothing  less  than  theexample  and  authority  of the  chief  physician,  to  make  people  treathim  in a  manner  which  they would  certainly  not  have  adopted  fromanyone  else.  Claude  Anet,  with  his  black  coat,  well-combed  wig,.serious  and  respectable  demeanour,  prudent  and  careful  behaviour,  atolerably  extensive  knowledge  of botany  and  medicine,  and  the  sup-port  of the  head  of the  Faculty,  might  reasonably  have  hoped  to  fillthe  place  of Demonstrator  Royal  of plants,  if the  idea  of the  estab-lishment  had  been  carried  out;  and,  in  fact,  Grossi  had  approved  ofthe  plan,  had  taken  it up,  and  only  waited  an  opportunity  to  lay itbefore  the  Court,  when  the  conclusion  of  peace  should  allow  it togive attention  to  useful  things,  and  leave  some  money  at  its  disposalto  provide  for  the  necessary  expenses.But  this  project,  the  carrying  out  of which  would  probably  have_  plunged  me  into  the  study of botany,  for  which,  as  it appears  to  me,I was  born,  failed  in  consequence  of one  of  those  unexpected  acci-dents  which  overthrow  the  best  concerted  plans.  I was  fated  to  be-come  by degrees  an  example  of human  misery.  It  was  as  if Provi-dence,  who  summoned  me  to  these  great  trials,  with  its  own  handremoved  every  obstacle  which  might  have  prevented  me  from  en-countering  them.  In  an  excursion  which  Anet  had  made  to  the  topof the  mountains  to  look  for  genipi,  a  rare  plant  which  only  grows:212THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUupon  the  Alps  and  which  M.  Grossi  wanted,  the  poor  fellow  got  sohot  that  he was  attacked  by a  pleurisy,  which  the  genipi  was  unableto  cure,  although  it is said  to  be  a  specific  for  that  complaint;  and,notwithstanding  all  the  skill  of  Grossi,  who  was  certainly  a  veryclever  man,  in spite of the  unremitting  care.  and  attention  of his goodmistress  and  myself,  he  died  in  our  arms  on  the  fifth  day,  after  suf-fering  the  most  cruel  agonies,  during  which  he  had  no  spiritual  ex-hortations  but  mine,  which  I lavished  upon  him  with  such  outburstsof grief and  fervour,  that,  if he had  been  able  to  understand  me,  theymust  have  afforded  him  some  consolation.  Thus  I lost the most  faith-ful  friend  I have  had  in my  life;  an  uncommon  and  estimable  man,in  whom  Nature  took  the  place  of  education,  who,  in  his  positionas  a  servant,  nourished  in his  heart  all  the  virtues  of great  men,  andwho,  in order  to  show  himself  one  of them  to  all the  world,  perhapswanted  nothing  except  a  longer  life  and  a  different  position.The  next  day,  I was  speaking  of  him  to  mamma  with  the  mostlively  and  sincere  affliction;  when  suddenly,  in the  midst  of our  con-versation,  the  vile  and  unworthy  thought  came  across  my  mind,that  I should  inherit  his  wardrobe,  particularly  a  nice  black  coat,which  had  caught  my  fancy.  I thought  of  this,  and  consequentlygave  utterance  to  my  thought;  for when  I was  with  her, to  think  andspeak  was  the  same  thing  for  me.  Nothing  made  her  feel  morekeenly  the  loss  which  she  had  sustained  than  this  contemptible  andhateful  remark,  disinterestedness  and  nobility  of soul  being  qualitiesfor  which  the  deceased  had  been  pre-eminently  distinguished.  Thepoor  woman,  without  answering  a  word,  turned  away  from  me  andbegan to  cry.  Dear  and  precious  tears!  They were  understood,  and allmade  their  way  into  my  heart,  from  which  they  washed  away  eventhe  last  traces  of  so  contemptible  and  unworthy  a  thought.  Neveragain,  since  that  time,  has  a  similar  thought  entered  it.This  loss  caused  mamma  as  much  harm  as  sorrow.  From  thismoment,  her  affairs  went  from  bad  to  worse.  Anet  had  been  veryexact  and  methodical,  and  kept  his  mistress’s  house  in  good  order.His  vigilance  was  feared,  and  extravagance  was  checked.  Evenmamma  herself was  afraid  of his censure,  and  curtailed  her expenses.She  was  not  satisfied  with  his  attachment,  she  wished  to  preservehis  esteem,  and  she  dreaded  the  just reproach  which  he  sometimesMADAME  DE  WARENS’  EXTRAVAGANCE213ventured  to  utter,  that  she  was  squandering  not  only  her  own  prop-erty,  but  that  of others  a well.  I thought  as  he  did,  and  even  saidso;  but  I had  not  the  same  influence  over  her, and  my  words  did  notmake  the  same  impression  upon  her  as  his.  When  he was  no  more,I was  obliged  to  take  his  place,  for  which  I had  as  little  capacity  asinclination;  consequently,  I filled  it badly.  I was  not  sufficiently  care-ful, I was  very  shy; though  grumbling  to  myself,  I let everything  goon  as  it liked.  Besides,  although  I had  gained  the  same  confidence,  Ihad  not  the  same  authority.  I saw  the  disorder,  I sighed  over  it, Icomplained  of  it, but  no  one  paid  any  attention  to  me.  I was  tooyoung  and  too  lively  to  have  a  right  to  be  sensible;  and,  when  Iwanted  to  interfere  and  play  the  censor,  mamma  gave  me  two  orthree  playful  slaps  on  the  cheek,  called  me  her  little  Mentor,  andobliged  me  to  resume  the  part  which  suited  me.The  profound  conviction  of the  distress  into  which  her  unlimitedextravagance  was  bound,  sooner  or  later,  to  plunge  her,  made  animpression  upon  me,  which  was  so  much  the  stronger,  as,  being nowthe  overseer  of her  household,  I was  able  to  judge  for  myself  of thedifference  between  her  income  and  expenses,  in  which  the  balancewas  in  favour  of  the  latter.  It  is  from  this  period  that  I date  thetendency  to avarice,  which  I have  always  felt  since  then.  I havenever  been  foolishly  extravagant  except  by fits  and  starts;  but,  untilthen,  it never  troubled  me  whether  I had  little  or  much  money.  Inow  began  to  pay  attention  to  this, and  to  look  after  my  purse.  I be-came  miserly  from  a  very  excellent  motive;  for,  in  truth,  my  onlythought  was,  how  to  save  something  for mamma  against  the  time  ofthe  crash  which  I saw  coming.  I was  afraid  that  her  creditors  wouldconfiscate  her  pension,  or  that  it might  be  altogether  discontinued;and  I imagined,  with  my  narrow  ideas,  that  my  little  savings  wouldthen  be  of great  service  to  her.  But,  in  order  to  save  anything,  and,above  all, to  keep it, it was  necessary  for me  to  hide  it from  her;  for,while  she was  hard  pressed  for money,  it would  never  have  done  forher to  know  of the existence  of my  little  hoard.  I accordingly  lookedabout  for various  hiding-places,  where  I stored  a few  Jouts,  intendingto  increase  the  store  from  time  to  time,  until  the  moment  when  T in-tended  to  lay it at  her  feet.  But  I was  so  awkward  in  the  choice  ofmy hiding-places,  that  she always found  them  out;  and then, in orderTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU214to  let me  know  that  she  had  done  so,  she  removed  the  money  whichI had  deposited  and  replaced  it by a  larger  sum  in different  coinage.Then,  feeling  quite  ashamed,  I put  my  little  treasure  into  the  com-mon  purse,  and  she  never  failed  to  lay it out  in clothes  or  other  arti-cles  for  my  use,  such  as a silver-hilted  sword,  a  watch,  or  somethingof the  kind.Convinced  that I should  never  succeed  in saving much  money,  andthat,  after  all, it would  only  be  of very  little  use  to  her,  I at  last  feltthat  there  was  nothing  else  to  be done,  in view  of the  disaster  whichI feared,  except  for  me  to  secure  a  position,  which  would  enable  meto  provide  for  her  myself,  as  soon  as  she  ceased  to  provide  for  meand  found  herself  reduced  to  want.  Unfortunately,  I built  my  plansupon  my  own  inclinations,  and  foolishly  persisted  in looking  for  myfortune  in  music;  feeling  motifs  and  melodies  rising  in  my  head,  Ithought  that,  as  soon  as  I should  be  in  a  position  to  make  use  ofthem,  I should  become  a  celebrated  man,  a modern  Orpheus,  whosenotes  could  not  fail  to  attract  all the  wealth  of Peru.  As I now  beganto  read  music  fairly  well,  the  question  was,  how  I was  to  learn  com-position.  The  difficulty  was  to  find  anyone  to  teach  me;  for  I did  notexpect  to  be able  to  teach  myself  with  the  assistance  of my  Rameaualone;  and,  since  Le  Maitre’s  departure,  there  was  no  one  in  Savoywho  knew  anything  about  harmony.Here  will  be  seen  another  of those  inconsistencies  of which  my lifeis full,  and  which  have  often  led  me  directly  away  from  the  object  1had  in view,  even  when  I thought  that  I was  making  straight  for  it.Venture  had  often  spoken  to  me  of the  Abbé  Blanchard,  his compo-sition-master,  a  man  of great  merit  and  talents,  who  at  the time  wasmusic-master  of  Besançon  Cathedral,  and  now  occupies  the  samepost  in the  Chapel  of Versailles.  I determined  to  go to  Besançon  andtake  lessons  from  the  Abbé  Blanchard;  and  this  idea  seemed  to  me‘so  sensible,  that  I succeeded  in making  mamma  look  upon  it in thesame light.  She  immediately  set  about  getting  ready  my  little  outfitwith  the  extravagance  she  displayed  in  everything.  Thus,  with  theobject  of preventing  her  bankruptcy  and  repairing  in the  future  theconsequences  of her  extravagance,  I began  at  the  outset  by puttingher to  an  expenditure  of eight  hundred  francs;  I hastened  her  ruin,in  order  to  put myself  in a  position  to  prevent  it. Foolish  as  this con-LUGGAGE  CONFISCATED215duct  may  have  been,  the  illusion  was  complete  on  my  part  and  evenon  hers.  We  were  both  of fis  convinced—I,  that  I was  working  forher  benefit:  she,  that  I was  working  for  my  own.I had  counted  upon  finding  Venture  still  at  Annecy,  and  intendedto ask  him  for a letter  of introduction  to  the Abbé  Blanchard.  He wasno  longer  there.  I could  learn  nothing  more,  and  was  obliged  to  con-tent  myself  with  a  mass  composed  by himself,  written  in four  parts,which  he had  left  for  me.  With  this  recommendation,  I set  out  forBesançon,  by way  of Geneva,  where I paid  a  visit  to  my  relations,and  through  Nyon,  where  I saw  my  father,  who  received  me  asusual  and  undertook  to  send  on  my  trunk,  which,  as  I was  on  horse-back,  arrived  after  myself.  I reached  Besancon.  The  Abbé  receivedme  kindly,  promised  to  teach  me,  and  offered  to  help me  in any  wayhe could.  When  we  were  ready  to  begin,  I received  a letter  from  myfather,  informing  me  that  my  trunk  had  been  seized  and  confiscatedat  Rousses,  a French  custom-house  on  the  Swiss  frontier.  Alarmedat  this  news,  I made  use  of the  acquaintances  whom  I had  made  atBesançon,  to  find  out  the  reason  of this  confiscation;  for,  being  cer-’tain  that  I had  nothing  contraband,  I could  not  imagine  what  ex-cuse  there  was  for  it.  At  last  I discovered  the  reason,  and  it was  socurious  that  I must  relate  it.At  Chambéri  I had  made  the  acquaintance  of  an  old  Lyonnese,named  Duvivier,  a  very  worthy  fellow,  who, under  the Regency,  hadbeen  employed  at  the  passport-office,  and,  for  want  of  occupation,had  come  to  assist  in  the  land-survey.  He  had  lived  in  the  fashion-able  world;  he  possessed  talents  and  some  knowledge,  was  kind-hearted  and  courteous;  he  understood  music;  and,  as  we  worked  inthe  same  room,  we  had  become  attached  to  each  other  by preferencein the midst  of the  unlicked  cubs  around  us.  He  had  correspondentsat Paris,  who  kept him  supplied  with  those  little  trifles,  those  ephem-eral  publications,  which  circulate,  one  knows  not  why,  and  die, oneknows  not  how,  of which  no  one  thinks  any  further  after  they haveceased  to  be  spoken  of.  As  I  sometimes  took  him  to  dine  withmamma,  he  treated  me  with  a  certain  amount  of  respect,  and,  tomake  himself  agreeable,  endeavoured  to  inspire  me  with a taste  forsuch  twaddle,  for  which  I have  always  felt  such  disgust,  that  I havenever  in my  life read  any  of it myself.  Unhappily,  one  of these  cursed216THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUpapets  had  been  left  in the  breast-pocket  of a  new  coat  which  I hadworn  two  or  three  times,  to  prevent  its  seizure  by the  custom-houseofficers.  This  paper  contained  an  insipid  Jansenist  parody  of  thebeautiful  scene  in  Racine’s  Mithridates;  I had  not  read  ten  lines  ofit, and  had  forgotten  to  take  it out  of my  pocket.  This  was  the reasonof the  confiscation  of my  property.  The  tax-collectors,  at  the  head  ofthe  inventory  of my  trunk,  drew  up  an  imposing  report,  in  which,assuming  that  the  document  was  brought  from  Geneva  in  order  tobe printed  and  distributed  in  France,  they  launched  out  into  piousinvectives  against  the  enemies  of  God  and  the  Church,  and  intopraises  of  those  who,  by their  pious  watchfulness,  had  preventedthis  infernal  project  from  being  carried  out.  No  doubt  they  alsofound  that  my  shirts  smelt  of heresy,  for, on  the  strength  of this  ter-rible  paper,  everything  was  confiscated,  and  I never  received  anyaccount  or  news  of my  poor  outfit.  The  revenue-officers,  to  whom  Iapplied,  required  so  many  informations,  proofs,  vouchers,  andmemorials  that,  after  losing  myself  a  thousand  times  in  the  mazesof this  labyrinth,  I was  obliged  to  give  up  everything.  I genuinelyregret  that  I have  not  kept  the  report  drawn  up  by the  officials  ofRousses;  it  would  have  figured  with  distinction  amongst  the  col-lection  which  is to  accompany  this  work.This  loss  made  me  return  at  once  to  Chambéri,  without  havinglearned  anything  with  the  Abbé  Blanchard;  and,  after  weighingeverything  carefully,  and  seeing  that  misfortune  pursued  me  in  allmy  undertakings,  I resolved  to  attach  myself  entirely  to  mamma,  toshare  her  lot, and  no  longer  to  trouble  myself  to  no  purpose  about  afuture  on  which  I had  no  influence.  She  received  me  as  if  I hadbrought  back  treasures,  gradually  supplied  the  loss  of my  wardrobe;and  my  misfortune,  sufficiently  great  for  us  both,  was  forgotten  al-most  as  soon  as  it overtook  us.Although  it had  cooled  my  ardour  for  music,  I still  continued  tostudy  my  Rameau;  and,  by dint  of repeated  efforts,  I at  length  suc-ceeded  in understanding  it, and  made  some  trifling  attempts  at  com-position,  the  success  of which  encouraged  me.  The  Comte  de  Belle-garde,  son  of the  Marquis  d’Antremont,  had  returned  from  Dresdenafter  the death  of King Augustus.  He  had  lived  a long time  at Paris,and  was  passionately  fond  of  music,  especially  Rameau’s.  HisCONCERTS  AT  CHAMBERI2.brother,  the Comte  de Nangis,  played  the violin;  the Comtesse  de laTour,  their  sister,  sang  a  httle.  All  this  made  music  the  fashion  atChambéri,  and  what  may  be called  public  concerts  were  introducedthere,  which  I was  at  first  asked  to  direct;  but  it soon  became  clearthat  this  was  beyond  my  powers,  and  other  arrangements  weremade.  I still  continued,  however,  to  compose  some  little  pieces  of myown,  amongst  others  a  cantata,  which  met  with  great  approval.  Itwas  not  a  well-executed  piece  of work,  but  it was  full  of new  airyand  effects,  which  were  not  expected  from  me.  These  gentlemencould  not  believe  that  I, who  read  music  so  indifferently  at  sight,could  be  capable  of composing  anything  tolerable,  and  felt  certainthat  I had  taken  the credit  of someone  else’s  work.  In  order  to  settlethe matter,  M.  de Nangis  came  to  see  me  one  morning  and  broughta  cantata  by Clérambault,  which  he  told  me  he  had  transposed  tosuit  his  voice,  and  for  which  anather  bass  was  required,  since  theoriginal  could  no  longer  be played  in consequence  of the  transposi-tion.  I told  him  that  it would  involve  considerable  labour,  and  thatit could  not  be finished  on  the  spot.  He  thought  this  was  only an  ex-cuse,  and  pressed  me  to  write,  at  least,  the  bass  of a  recitative.  I didso, badly, I have  no  doubt,  since, in order  to  do anything  well, I mustbe  free  and  unrestrained;  but,  at  least,  I wrote  it  according  to  therules,  and,  as  he  was  present,  he  could  have  no  doubt  that  I knewthe elements  of composition.  I did  not,  therefore,  lose  my  pupils,  butit somewhat  cooled  my  ardour  for music,  to  see  that  they could  givea  concert  without  my  assistance.It was  about  this  time  that  peace  was  concluded,  and  the  Frencharmy  recrossed  the  Alps.  Several  officers  came  to  visit  mamma,amongst  others  the  Comte  de  Lautrec,  colonel  of the  Orleans  regi-ment,  afterwards  Plenipotentiary  at  Geneva,  and  subsequently  Mar-shal  of France,  to  whom  she  presented  me.  After  hearing  her  ac-count  of me,  he  appeared  to  take  a  great  interest  in  me,  and  mademe  several  promises,  which  he  never  remembered  till  the  last  yearof his  life,  when  I no  longer  needed  his  assistance.  The  young  Mar-quis  de  Sennecterre,  whose  father  was  at  the  time  ambassador  atTurin,  passed  through  Chambéri  at  the  same  time.  He  dined  withMadame  de  Menthon.  I happened  to  be dining  there  the  same  day.After  dinner,  the  conversation  turned  upon  music,  which  he  knewTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU218well.  The  opera  of  Jephtha  was  at  that  time  something  new;  hespoke  of it and  it was  brought  to  him.  He  made  me  shudder  by pro-posing  that  we  should  go  through  the  opera  together,  and  openedthe  book  just at  the  famous  piece  for  the  double  chorus:“La  terre,  l'enfer,  le ciel  même,Tout  tremble  devant  le  Seigneur.”  *He  asked  me,  “How  many  parts  will  you  take?  I will  take  thesesix.”  I was  not  yet accustomed  to  French  forwardness,  and,  althoughI had  sometimes  stammered  out  the  score,  I did  not  understand  howone  man  could  take  six parts  at  once,  or  even  two.  I have  found  noth-ing  more  difficult  in  practising  music,  than  skipping  lightly  fromone  part  to  the  other,  and  keeping  my  eye  on  a  whole  score  at  once.From  the manner  in which  I evaded  this  attempt,  M.  de Sennecterremust  have  been  inclined  to  think  that  I did  not  understand  music.It was,  perhaps,  in order  to  clear  up  his  doubts  on  the  point,  that  hesuggested  to  me  to  compose  the  score  of a  song  which  he wanted  togive  to  Mademoiselle  de  Menthon.  I could  not  refuse.  He  sang  thesong,  and  I wrote  down  the  music,  without  asking  him  to  repeat  ittoo  often.  He  afterwards  read  it, and  found  that  it  was  correctlyscored.  He  had  noticed  my  embarrassment  and  seemed  pleased  tomake  the  most  of my  trifling  success.  It was,  however,  in  reality,  avery  simple  matter.  In  the  main,  I had  a  very  considerable  knowl-edge  of  music;  I only  needed  that  first  rapid  glance,  which  I havenever  possessed  in any  single  thing,  and  which  can  only be acquiredin music  by constant  practice.  Anyhow,  I felt  thankful  for  his  hon-ourable  efforts  to  efface  from  the minds  of others,  as  well  as  my  own,the  trifling  disgrace  which  I had  suffered;  and,  twelve  or  fifteenyears  later,  when  I met  him  at  different  houses  in  Paris,  I was  fre-quently  tempted  to  remind  him  of  this  incident,  and  to  show  himthat  I had  not  forgotten  it.  But  he had  lost  his  sight  since  then,  andI was  afraid  to  renew  his regrets,  by reminding  him  of the use  he hadformerly  made  of  it, and  I held  my  tongue.I now  come  to  the  moment  which  connects  my  past  with  mypresent  existence.  Some  friendships,  which  have  lasted  from  thattime  to  this,  are  very  dear  to  me.  They  have  often  caused  me  to  re-‘Earth,  hell,  heaven  itself—everything  trembles  before  the  Lord.GAUFFECOURT210gret  that  happy  obscurity,  when  those  who  called  themselves  myfriends  were  really  such,  ard  loved  me  for  myself,  from  pure  good-will, not  from  the  vanity  of being intimate  with  a  well-known  man,or  from  the  secret  desire  of  thus  finding  more  opportunity  of  in-juring  him.It is from  this  period  that  I date  my  acquaintance  with  my  oldfriend  Gauffecourt,  who  has  always  remained  true  to  me,  in spite ofthe  efforts  of others  to  take  him  away  from  me.  Always?  Alas,  no!I have  just  lost  him.  But  his  affection  for  me  only  ended  with  hislife;  our  friendship  only  ended  at  his  death.  M.  de  Gauffecourt  wasone  of the  most  amiable  men  who  have  ever  existed.  It was  impos-sible  to  see  him  without  loving  him,  or  to  live  with  him  without  be-coming  devotedly  attached  to  him.  I have  never  seen  more  frankor  more  kindly  features,  or  an  expression  which  showed  greatercalmness,  feeling  and  intelligence,  or  inspired  greater  confidence.However  reserved  a  man  might be, it was  impossible  for him  to  helpbeing,  at  first  sight, as  familiar  with  him  as  if he had  known  him  fortwenty  years.  I myself,  who  found  it  so  hard  to  feel  at  ease  withstrangers,  was  at  home  with  him  from  the  first  moment.  His  man-ner,  his  way  of  speaking,  his  conversation  were  in  perfect  accordwith  his  features.  The  tone  of his  voice  was  clear,  full,  well  modu-lated,  a  fine  bass,  sonorous  and  powerful,  which  filled  the  ear  andpenetrated  to  the  heart.  It is impossible  to  imagine  a  gentler  or  moreuniform  cheerfulness,  simpler  or  more  unaffected  grace,  more  nat-ural  or  more  tastefully  cultivated  talents.  Add  to  this  a  loving  heart—a  little  too  affectionate  towards  all  the  world—a  character  tooready  to  oblige  without  discretion,  serving  his  friends  zealously,  orrather  making  friends  of people  whom  he was  able  to  serve,  capableof managing  his  own  affairs  very  cleverly,  while  warmly  promotingthe  interests  of others.  Gauffecourt  was  the  son  of a  humble  watch-maker,  and  had  himself  followed  his father’s  trade.  But  his  personalappearance  and  merits  summoned  him  to  another  sphere,  intowhich  he was  not  slow  to  enter.  He  made  the  acquaintance  of M.  dela Closure,  the French  Resident  at  Geneva,  who  took a fancy  to  him.He  procured  him  other  acquaintances  at  Paris  who  proved  usefulto  him,  and  by their  influence  he secured  the  right of supplying  thesalt at  Valais,  which  brought  him  in an  income  of twenty  thousandTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU220francs.  His  good  fortune,  which  was  amply  sufficient,  ended  thereas  far  as  men  were  concerned;  but,  in  regard  to  women,  it was  agreat struggle;  he had  to  choose,  and  made  what  choice  he thoughtbest.  It was  a  rare  and  most  honourable  point  about  him,  that,  hav-ing connections  with  persons  in  all ranks  of life, he was  everywherebeloved  and  sought  after  by  all,  without  ever  incurring  anyone’shatred  or  jealousy;  and  I believe  that  he  died  without  ever  havinghad  a  single  enemy.  Happy  man!  He  went  every  year  to  the  bathsat  Aix,  the  resort  of  the  best  society  of  the  neighbouring  countries.Intimate  with  all  the  nobility  of Savoy,  he came  from  Aix  to  Cham-béri  to  visit  the  Comte  de  Bellegarde  and  his  father  the  Marquisd’Antremont,  at  whose  house  mamma  made  his  acquaintance  andintroduced  me  to  him.  This  acquaintance,  which  did  not  seem  des-tined  to  lead  to  anything,  and  was  broken  off  for  several  years,  wasrenewed  on  an  occasion  which I will  afterwards  relate,  and  becamea  genuine  attachment.  This  is enough  to  justify  me  in speaking  of afriend  with  whom I have  been  so  closely  connected;  but,  even  if Ihad  no  personal  interest  in  remembering  him,  he  was  so  amiable  aman  and  born  under  so  lucky a star,  that,  for the credit  of the humanrace,  I should  always  think  his  memory  worth  preserving.  Certainly,this  charming  man  had  his  faults  like  others,  as  will  be  afterwardsseen;  but,  if he  had  not  had  any,  he  would,  perhaps,  have  been  lessamiable.  To  make  him  as  attractive  as  possible,  it was  necessary  thathe  should  sometimes  require  to  be  pardoned.Another  connection  of the  same  period  is not  yet  entirely  extinct,and  still  tempts  me  with  the  hope  of  earthly  happiness,  which  diesso  hard  in  the  heart  of man.  M.  de  Conzié,  a  Savoyard  gentleman,at  that  time  young  and  amiable,  took  it into  his  head  to  learn  music,or  rather  to  make  the  acquaintance  of him  who  taught  it. With  con-siderable  intelligence  and  a  taste  for  polite  acquirements,  M.  deConzié  combined  a  gentleness  of  character  which  made  him  veryfascinating,  and  I also  easily  made  myself  attractive  to  people  inwhom I found  such  a  disposition.  Our  friendship  was  soon  formed.The  germs  of  literature  and  philosophy,  which  were  beginning  toI have  seen  him  since,  and  found  him  entirely  changed.  What  a  mighty  ma-gician  is  M.  Choiseul!  None  of my  old  acquaintances  have  been  proof  against  hispowers  of transformation.5Basbe=VOLTAIRE221stir  in my  head  and  only waited  for  a  little  care  and  encouragementto  develop  themselves  completely,  found  them  in him.  M. de Conziéhad  little  talent  for  music,  which  was  a  good  thing  for  me;  for  thelesson  hours  were  devoted  to  everything  else  but  singing  scales.  Webreakfasted,  talked,  and  read  new  publications,  but  never  said  aword  about  music.  Voltaire’s  correspondence  with  the  CrownPrince  of Prussia  was  at  that  time  causing  some  stir;  we  frequentlyconversed  about  these  two  celebrated  men,  one  of  whom,  who  hadonly  lately  ascended  the  throne,  already  gave  promise  of  what  hewas  soon  to  become,  while  the other,  as  vilified  as  he is now  admired,caused  us  to  lament  sincerely  the  misfortune  by which  he seemed  tobe  pursued,  and  which  is so  often  the  heritage  of great  minds.  Theprince  had enjoyed  little  happiness  in his youth;  and  Voltaire  seemedborn  never  to  enjoy  any.  The  interest  which  we  took  in  both  ex-tended  to  everything  connected  with  them.  Nothing  that  Voltairewrote  escaped  us.  The  pleasure  which  these  readings  afforded  meinspired  me  with  the  desire  of learning  to  write  elegantly,  and  of at-tempting  to  imitate  the  beautiful  colouring  of this  author,  which  en-chanted  me.  Some  time  afterwards  his  “Philosophical  Letters”appeared.  Although  certainly  not  his  best  work,  it was  that  whichmost  attracted  me  to  study,  and  this  growing  taste  was  never  extin-guished  from  that  time.But  the  moment  had  not  yet  come  for  me  to  devote  myself  to  itentirely.  I still  had  a  somewhat  fickle  disposition,  a  desire  for  ram-bling,  which  had  been  restrained  rather  than  eradicated,  and  whichwas  fostered  by our  manner  of living  at  Madame  de Warens’,  whichwas  too  noisy  to  suit  my  solitary  disposition.  The  crowd  of strangerswho  swarmed  around  her  from  all  directions,  and  my  convictionthat  they  were  only  seeking,  each  in  his  own  way,  to  deceive  her,made  my  life  at  home  a  regular  torture.  Since  I had taken  the  placeof Claude  Anet  in  his  mistress’s  confidence,  I attentively  followedthe condition  of her  affairs,  and  saw  them  going  from  bad  to  worsein  a  most  alarming  manner.  A  hundred  times  I had  remonstrated,begged,  pressed  and  entreated  her, but  always  in vain.  I had  thrownmyself  at  her  feet,  and  represented  to  her,  as  forcibly  as  I was  able,the  catastrophe  which  threatened  her;  I had  strongly  advised  herto  curtail  her  expenses,  and  to  begin  on me;  to  undergo a littleTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU222privation  while  she  was  still  young,  -ather  than,  by continually  in-creasing  her  debts  and  the  number  of her  creditors,  to  expose  herselfto  their  annoyance  and  to  poverty  in  her  old  age.  Touched  by thesincerity  of my  zeal,  she  became  affected  like  myself,  and  made  methe  finest  promises  in  the  world.  But,  the  moment  some  worthlessfellow  arrived,  all was  forgotten.  After  a  thousand  proofs  of the  use-lessness  of my  remonstrances,  what  was  left  for  me  to  do but  to  turnmy  eyes  away  from  the  mischief  which  I could  not  prevent?  I with-drew  from  the  house,  the  door  of  which  I was  unable  to  guard;  Imade  little  excursions  to  Nyon,  Geneva  and  Lyons,  which  distractedmy  attention  from  my  secret  trouble,  while  at  the  same  time  they in-creased  the cause  of it owing  to  the  expense.  I can  swear  that  I wouldjoyfully  have  put  up  with  any  kind  of  retrenchment,  if  mammawould  really  have  profited  by  such  saving;  but,  feeling  convincedthat  the  money  I denied  myself  would  only  find  its  way  into  thepockets  of  swindlers,  I abused  her  generosity  in  order  to  share  itwith  them,  and,  like  a  dog returning  from  the  slaughter-house,  car-ried  off  my  bit  from  the  piece  which  I had  not  been  able  to  save.I never  lacked  excuses  for  all  these  journeys;  mamma  herselfwould  have  supplied  me  with  them  in  abundance,  having  so  manyengagements,  negotiations,  affairs  and  commissions  in  all  parts,which  required  a  trustworthy  agent  to  execute  them.  She  desirednothing  better  than  to  send  me  away;  I was  always  ready  to  go;  theresult  of this  could  only be a  wandering  kind  of life.  These  journeysafforded  me  the  opportunity  of making  acquaintances,  who  provedeither  agreeable  or  useful  to  me.  At Lyons,  M. Perrichon,  whom I re-proach  myself  for  not  having  cultivated  sufficiently,  considering  thekindness  he  showed  me;  at  Grenoble,  Madame  Deybens  and  thewife  of the President  of Bardonanche,  a  woman  of great  intelligence,who  would  have  shown  me  especial  favour,  if I had  had  the opportu-nity of seeing  her  oftener;  at  Geneva,  the  French  Resident,  M.  de laClosure,  who  often  spoke  to  me  of my  mother,  who  still  retained  ahold  upon  his  heart,  in  spite  of  death  and  time;  the  two  Barillots,whose  father,  who  called  me  his  grandson,  was  a  most  agreeablecompanion  and  one  of  the  worthiest  persons  I have  ever  known.During  the  troubles  of the  Republic,  these  two  citizens  took  oppo-site  sides;  the  son,  that  of the  people,  the  father,  that  of the  authori-REFLECTIONS  ON  CIVIL  WAR223ties;  and  when  fighting  began  in  1737,  happening  to  be at  Geneva,I saw  father  and  son  leaye  the  same  house  with  arms  in their  hands,the  former  to  go to  the  town  hall,  the  latter  to  his  headquarters,  cer-tain  of  finding  themselves,  two  hours  later,  face  to  face,  with  thechance  of  cutting  each  other’s  throat.  This  terrible  sight  made  sodeep  an  impression  upon  me,  that  I took  an  oath  never  to’take  partin  any  civil  war,  and  never  to  defend  liberty  at  home  by force  ofarms,  either  in my  own  person  or  by my  approval,  if I ever  enteredupon  my  rights  as  a  citizen.  I can  prove  that  I kept  my  oath  on  adifficult  occasion,  and  it will  be found—at  any  rate  I hope  so—thatmy  restraint  was  not  without  its  value.But  I had  not  yet  arrived  at  that  first  fermentation  of patriotismwhich  Geneva  in arms  excited  in my  heart.  How  far  I was  removedfrom  it may  be judged  from a very  serious  fact  which  reflects  uponmyself,  which  I have  forgotten  to  mention  in  its  proper  place,  butwhich  ought  not  to  be  omitted.My uncle,  Bernard,  some  years  ago,  had  crossed  over  to  Carolina,to  superintend  the  building  of the  city  of  Charlestown,  the  plan  ofwhich  he had  designed,  and  died  there  shortly  afterwards.  My poorcousin  had  also  died  in  the  service  of the  King  of Prussia,  and  thusmy  aunt  lost  her  son  and  husband  almost  at  the  same  time.  Theselosses  somewhat  revived  her  friendship  for  her  nearest  survivingrelative,  who  happened  to  be  myself.  Whenever  I went  to  Geneva,I stayed  with  her, and  amused  myself  with  rummaging  through  andturning  over  the  books  and  papers  which  my  uncle  had  left.Amongst  them  I found  several  curious  things,  together  with  someletters,  of the  existence  of which  certainly  no  one  had  any  suspicion.My aunt,  who  attached  little  value  to  these  papers,  would  have  al.lowed  me  to  take  them  all  away,  if I had  wanted  to  do  so.  I con-tented  myself  with  two  or  three  books  annotated  by my  grandfatherBernard,  the  minister,  amongst  others  a  quarto  edition  of the  post-humous  works  of Rohault,  the margin  of which  was  full  of excellentremarks,  which  gave  me  a  fondness  for  mathematics.  This  book  hasremained  with  those  of Madame  de Warens;  I have  always  regrettedthat  I did  not  keep  it.  Besides  these  books,  I took  five  or  six  manu-script  pamphlets,  and  one  printed  one,  written  by  the  famousMicheli  Ducret,  a  man  of great  talent,  learned  and  enlightened,  butTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU224too  revolutionary  in  his  ideas.  He  was  cruelly  treated  by the  Coun-cil  of Geneva,  and  recently  died  in  the  fortress  of Arberg,  in  whichhe had  been  imprisoned  for  many  years,  in consequence,  it is said,  ofhaving  been  mixed  up  in the  Bernese  conspiracy.This  pamphlet  was  a  judicious  criticism  of  the  extensive  andabsurd  plan  of  fortification  which  has  partly  been  carried  out  atGeneva,  and  is the  laughing-stock  of experts  who  do  not  know  thesecret  purpose  which  the  Council  had  in  carrying  out  this  mag-nificent  enterprise.  M.  Micheli,  who  had  been  excluded  from  thefortification-commission  for  having  found  fault  with  the  plan,  imag-a member  of  the  Two  Hundred,  and  even  as a citi-ined  that  he, aszen,  might  venture  to  express  his  opinion  at  greater  length;  this  hedid  in  the  pamphlet  in  question,  which  he  was  imprudent  enoughto  get printed,  although  he did  not  publish  it; for he only had a suff-cient  number  of  copies  struck  off  to  send  to  the  Two  Hundred,which  were  all  seized  at  the  post-office  by  order  of  the  Senate.  Ifound  the  pamphlet  amongst  my  uncle’s  papers,  together  with  thereply  which  he  had  been  commissioned  to  make  to  it, and  I tookboth  away  with  me.  I had  taken  this  journey  soon  after  leaving  theSurvey,  and  I was  still  on  good  terms  with  the  advocate  Coccelli,who  was  at  the  head  of  it.  Some  time  afterwards,  the  Director  ofCustoms  took  it into  his  head  to  ask  me  to  stand  godfather  to  hischild,  with  Madame  de  Coccelli  as  godmother.  This  complimentturned  my  head;  and  proud  of being  so  closely  connected  with  theadvocate,  I tried  to  put  on  an  air  of importance,  to  appear  worthy  ofso  great  an  honour.With  this  idea,  I thought  I could  do  nothing  better  than  showhim  Micheli’s  printed  pamphlet—which  was  really  a  curiosity—toprove  to  him  that  I belonged  to  the  important  personages  of Genevawho were  acquainted  with  State  secrets.  However,  with  a  kind  ofsemi-reserve  which  I should  find  it difficult  to  account  for, I did  notshow him  my  uncle’s  reply  to  the  pamphlet,  perhaps  because  it wasin  manuscript, and  nothing  but  printed  matter  was  worth  the  advo-cate  s  attention.  However,  he  had  so  strong  an  opinion  of the  valueof the document,  which  I had  been  foolish  enough  to  intrust  to  him,that I was  never  able  to  get  it back  or  ever  to  see  it again;  and,  con-yinced  of the uselessness  of my  efforts,  I made a  merit  of the  matter,EXPERIMENTS225and  changed  the  theft  into  a  present.  I do  not  doubt  for  a  momentthat  he made  the  most  ofthis  pamphlet,  although  it was  more  curi-useful,  at  the  Court  of Turin,  and  that,  somehow  or  other,ous  thanhe  took  care  to  reimburse  the  money  which  it  was  naturally  sup-posed  he  must  have  spent  in  getting  possession  of  it.  Happily,  of  .all  possible  future  contingencies,  one  of  the  least  likely  is  that  theKing  of Sardinia  will  ever  besiege  Geneva.  But,  as  it is not  impossi-ble,  I shall  always  reproach  myself  for  my  foolish  vanity  in  havingrevealed  the  weaknesses  of that  place to  its most  inveterate  enemy.In  this  manner  I passed  two  or  three  years,  my  attention  dividedbetween  music,  magisteries,  schemes,  and  journeys;  wandering  in-cessantly  from  one  thing to  another;  wanting  to  settle  down  to  some-thing,  without  knowing  what,  but  gradually  being  drawn  towardsstudy,  associating  with  men  of  letters,  hearing  literature  discussed,even  sometimes  venturing  to  join  in  the  discussion  myself;  ratheradopting  the  terminology  of  books  than  understanding  their  con-tents.  In my  journeys  to  Geneva,  I occasionally  called  upon  my  goodold  friend  M.  Simon,  who  encouraged  my  growing  eagerness  by en-tirely  fresh  news  from  the  republic  of  letters,  taken  from  Baillet  orColomiés.  At  Chambéri  I also  frequently  saw  a  Jacobin,  a  professorof physics,  a  good-natured  friar,  whose  name  I have  forgotten,  whooften  performed  little  experiments  which  amused  me  extremely,From  his  directions,  and  with  the  assistance  of  the  “MathematicalRecreations”  of  Ozanam,  I tried  to  make  some  sympathetic  ink.With  this  object,  having  filled  a  bottle  more  than  half  full  withquicklime,  orpiment  and  water,  I corked  it tightly.  Almost  immediately  it began  to  effervesce  violently.  I ran  to  uncork  the  bottle,  butwas  too  late;  it burst  in  my  face  like  a  bomb.  I swallowed  so  muchchalk  and  orpiment  that  it nearly  killed  me.  I could  not  see  for morethan  six  weeks,  and  this  taught  me  not  ta  dabble  again  in  experi-mental  physics,  without  any  knowledge  of  the  elements  of  thescience.This  event  proved  very  detrimental to my  health,  which  for  sometime  had  been  sensibly  deteriorating.  I do  not  understand  how  itwas  that,  although  I had  a good constitution,  and  did  not  indulge  inany  excesses,  I visibly  declined.  I am  pretty  strongly  built  and  broad.chested,  and  my  lungs  must  have  ample  room  to  play;  notwithTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU226standing,  I was  short  of breath,  had  a  feeling  of oppression,  sighedinvoluntarily,  had  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  spat  blood;  a  slowfever  supervened,  from  which  I have  never  been  entirely  free.  Howcan  one  fall  into  such  a  state  in the  flower  of one’s  age,  without  anyinternal  injury,  without  having  done  anything  to  destroy  health?It is sometimes  said  that  the  sword  wears  out  the  scabbard.  Thatis my  history.  My passions  have  made  me  live,  and  my  passions  havekilled  me.  What  passions?  will  be  asked.  Trifles,  the  most  childishthings  in  the  world,  which,  however,  excited  me  as  much  as  if thepossession  of Helen  or  the  throne  of the  universe  had  been  at  stake.In  the  first  place—women.  When  I possessed  one,  my  senses  werecalm;  my  heart,  never.  The  needs  of love  devoured  me  in  the  midstof enjoyment;  I had  a  tender  mother,  a  dear  friend;  but  I needed  amistress.  I imagined  one  in her  place;  I represented  her  to  myself  ina  thousand  forms,  in  order  to  deceive  myself.  If I had  thought  thatI held  mamma  in  my  arms  when  I embraced  her,  these  embraceswould  have  been  no  less  lively,  but  all  my  desires  would  have  beenextinguished;  I  should  have  sobbed  from  affection,  but  I  shouldnever  have  felt  any  enjoyment.  Enjoyment!  Does  this  ever  fall  to  thelot  of man?  If I had  ever,  a  single  time  in my  life,  tasted  all  the  de-lights  of love  in their  fulness,  I do not  believe  that  my  frail existencecould  have  endured  it; I should  have  died  on  the  spot.Thus  I was  burning  with  love,  without  an  object;  and  it  is thisstate,  perhaps,  that  is most  exhausting.  I was  restless,  tormented  bythe  hopeless  condition  of poor  mamma’s  affairs,  and  her  imprudentconduct,  which  were  bound  to  ruin  her  completely  at  no  distantdate.  My  cruel  imagination,  which  always  anticipates  misfortunes,exhibited  this  particular  one  to  me  continually,  in all  its  extent  andin all its results.  I already  saw  myself  compelled  by want  to  separatefrom  her to  whom  I had  devoted  my  life, and  without  whom  I couldnot  enjoy  it. Thus  my  soul  was  ever  in a state  of agitation;  I was  de-voured  alternately  by desires  and  fears.Music  was  with  me  another  passion,  less  fierce,  but  no  less  wast-ing,  from  the  ardour  with  which  I threw  myself  into  it, from  mypersistent  study  of the  obscure  treatises  of Rameau,  from  my  invin-cible  determination  to  load  my  rebellious  memory  with  them,  fromPASSIONS  AND  RESTLESSNESS22SPmy  continual  running  about,  from  the  enormous  heap  of compila-tions  which  I got  together and often  spent  whole  nights  in copying,But  why  dwell  upon  permanent  fancies,  while  all  the  follies  whick;passed  through  my  inconstant  brain—the  transient  inclinations  ofa  single  day,  a  journey,  a  concert,  a  supper,  a  walk  to  take,  a  novelto  read,  a  comedy  to  see,  everything  that  was  entirely  unpremedi-tated  in  my  pleasure  or  business,  became  for  me  so  many  violentpassions,  which,  in their  ridiculous  impetuosity,  caused  me  the  mostgenuine  torment?  The  imaginary  sufferings  of  Cleveland,  which  1read  of  with  avidity  and  constant  interruption,  have,  I believe,  af:flicted  me  more  than  my  own.At  Chambéri  there  was  a  Genevese,  named  M.  Bagueret,  whohad  been  employed  by Peter  the  Great  at  the  Russian  Court;  he wasone  of the  greatest  rascals  and  greatest  fools  that  I have  ever  seen,always  full  of schemes  as  mad  as  himself,  who  flung  millions  aboutlike  rain  and  thought  nothing  of  an  extra  cipher.  This  man,  whehad  come  to  Chambéri  on  account  of some  law-suit  before  the  Senate,  got  hold  of mamma,  as  was  only  to  be  expected,  and  in  returnfor the ciphers  which  he generously  lavished  upon  her, drew  her fewcrowns,  one  by one,  out  of  her  purse.  I disliked  him;  he  saw  it—never  a  difficult  matter  in  my  case—and  left  no  kind  of  meannessuntried,  in order  to  gain  my  favour.  He  took  it into  his  head  to  pro-pose  to  teach  me  chess,  which  he  himself  played a little.  I tried  it,almost  against  my  inclination;  and,  after  I had  learnt  the  moves  in-differently,  I made  such  rapid  progress  that,  before  the  end  of  thefirst  sitting,  I was  able  to  give  him  the  rook  which  at  first  he  hadgiven  me.  That  was  enough;  I was  mad  for  chess  from  that  mo-ment.  I bought  a  chess-board  and  a  “Calabrois’;®  I shut  myself  upin  my  room,  and  spent  days  and  nights  in  trying  to  learn  all  theopenings  by heart,  in  stuffing  them  into  my  head  by force,  and  inplaying  by  myself  without  rest  or  relaxation.  After  two  or  threemonths  of this  praiseworthy  occupation  and  these  incredible  efforts,I went  to  the  café,  thin,  sallow,  and  almost  stupid.  I tried  my  hand,I played  again  with  M.  Bagueret;  he  beat  me  once,  twice,  twenty€A  treatise  by  a  famous  Italian  chess-player,  Gioachino  Greco,  called  “LeCalabrois”’;  he  lived  in  the  time  of Louis  XIV.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU228times;  all  the  different  combinations  had  become  mixed  up  in  myhead,  and  my  imaginatjon  was  so  enfeebled,  that  I saw  nothing  buta  cloud  before  my  eyes.  Whenever  I wished,  with  the  help  of Phili-dor  or  Stamma,  to  practise  myself  in  studying  different  games,  thesame  thing  happened  to  me;  and,  after  exhausting  myself  withfatigue,  I found  myself  weaker  than  before.  For  the  rest,  whether  Igave  up  chess  for  a  time,  or  endeavoured  to  improve  myself  by con-stant  practice,  I never  made  the  slightest  progress  after  the  first  sit-ting,  and  always  found  myself  just  where  I was  when  it was  over..  I might  practise  for  thousands  of generations  and  not  be  able  to  domore  than  give  Bagueret  the  rook,  and  nothing  else.  Time  well  em-ployed!  you  will  say;  and  I employed  not a little  of it in  this  way.  Idid  not  finish  the  first  attempt,  until  I no  longer  had  strength  tocontinue  it.  When I left  my  room,  I looked  like  a  corpse,  and,  if Ihad  continued  to  live  in  the  same  manner,  I should  certainly  nothave  remained  long above  ground.  It will  be admitted  that  it is dif-cult, especially  in the  ardour  of youth,  for  such  a  disposition  to  allowthe  body  to  enjoy  continued  good  health.The  decline  in my  health  affected  my  temper  and  moderated  theardour  of my  imagination.  Feeling  myself  weaker,  I became  quieter,and  lost,  in some  degree,  my  mania  for  travelling.  I remained  moreat  home,  and  was  attacked,  not  by ennui,  but  by melancholy;  mypassions  were  succeeded  by hysteria;  my  languor  changed  to  sadness;I wept  and  I sighed  about  nothing;  I felt  life  slipping  away  fromme  before  I had  enjoyed  it.  I sighed  over  the  state  in  which  I wasleaving  my  poor  mamma;  over  the  state  into  which  I saw  her  readyto  fall.  I can  assert  that  my  only  regret  was  at  leaving  her,  and  leav-ing her  in  so  lamentable  a  condition.  At  length,  I became  really  ill.She  nursed  me  more  tenderly  than  any  mother  ever  nursed  herchild;  and  this  was  beneficial  to  herself,  since  it diverted  her  fromschemes, and  kept away  the  promoters  of them.  How  sweet  woulddeath  have  been  if it had  come  then!  If I had  not  enjoyed  many  ofthe good things  of life,  I had  felt but  few  of its  sorrows.  My peacefulsoul  would  have  departed  without  that  cruel  feeling  of the  injusticeof mankind,  which  poisons  both  life  and  death.  I should  have  hadthe consolation  that  I was  surviving  myself  in the better  half  of me;DECLINING  HEALTH229it could  hardly  have  been  called  death.  Had  it not  been  for  the  un-easiness  I felt  concerningrher  lot,  I could  have  died  as  easily  as  Icould  have  fallen  asleep;  and  my  very  uneasiness  was  connected  withan  affectionate  and  tender  object,  which  softened  its  bitterness.  Isaid  to  her:  “My whole  being is in your  hands;  make  it happy.”  Twoor  three  times,  when  I was  worse  than  usual,  I got  up  during  the  |night  and  dragged  myself  to  her  room,  to  give her  advice  upon  herconduct,  which  I may  say  was  thoroughly  correct  and  sensible,  butin  which  my  sympathy  for  her  was  more  marked  than  anythingelse.  As  if tears  had  been  food  and  medicine,  those  which  I shed  byher  side,  sitting  on  her  bed,  holding  her  hands  in  mine,  seemed  togive me  strength.  The  hours  slipped  away  in these  nightly  conversa-tions,  and  I left  her,  feeling  better  than  when  I entered;  calm  andcontent  with  the  promises  which  she  had  made  me,  with  the  hopeswith  which  she  had  inspired  me,  I went  to  sleep,  peace  in my  heart,and  resigned  to  Providence.After  I have  had  so  many  reasons  to  hate  life,  after  all  the  stormswhich  have  shaken  my  existence,  and  only  make  it a  burden  to  me,may  God  grant  that  the  death  which  is to  end  it may  not  be  morecruel  than  it would  have  been  to  me  at  that  moment!By  her  unremitting  attention  and  watchfulness,  and  incredibleexertions  she  saved  me;  and  it is certain  that  she  alone  could  havedone  so.  I have  little  faith  in the  medicine  of physicians,  but  a  greatdeal  in  that  of  true  friends;  those  things  on  which  our  happinessdepends  are  always  more  salutary  than  anything  else.  If there  is sucha  thing  as  a  delightful  sensation  in life, it is that  which  we  felt  whenwe  were  restored  to  each  other.  Our  mutual  attachment  was  not  in-creased,  that  was  impossible;  but  it assumed  a  more  intimate  formwhich  I cannot  explain,  more  touching  in  its  great  simplicity.  I be-came  entirely  her  work,  entirely  her  child,  more  so  than  if she  hadbeen  really  my  mother.  We  began,  without  thinking  of it, to  be in-separable,  to  share,  as  it were,  our  existence  in common;  and  feelingthat  we  were  not  only  necessary,  but  sufficient,  for  each  other,  weaccustomed  ourselves  to  think  of nothing  that  was  foreign  to  us,  tolimit  our  happiness  and  all  our  desires  to  that  possession  of  eachother,  which  was,  perhaps,  unique  of its  kind  amongst  human  be-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU230ings,  which,  as  I have  said,  was  not  love,  but  a  more  real  possession,which,  without  being  dependent  upon  the  senses,  sex,  age  or  per-sonal  appearance,  was  concerned  with  all  that  which  makes  onewhat  one  is, and  which  one  can  only  lose  by ceasing  to  exist.How  came  it that  this  delightful  crisis  did  not  bring  happiness  for’the rest  of her  days and  mine?  It was  not  my  fault;  I can  console  my-self  with  the conviction  of that.  Neither  was  it hers,  at  least,  not  wil-fully.  It  was  written  that  the  ineradicable  tendency  of  my  disposi-tion  should  soon  reassert  its  sway.  But  this  fatal  recoil  did  not  takeplace all at once.  There  was,  thank  Heaven,  an  interval—a  short  andprecious  interval—which  did  not  end  through  any  fault  of  mine,and  which  I cannot  reproach  myself  with  having  badly  employed.Although  cured  of my  serious  complaint,  I had  not  recovered  mystrength.  My  chest  was  still  weak;  some  traces  of  fever  remained,and  made  me  languid.  I desired  nothing  except  to  end  my  days nearher  who  was  so  dear  to  me,  to  support  her  in  her  good  resolutions,to  make  her  fee!  what  constituted  the  real  charm  of a  happy  life, tomake  her  life  such,  as  far  as  it depended  on  me.  But  I saw,  I evenfelt,  that  the  continual  solitude  of  our  intercourse  in  a  dull  andgloomy  house  would  end  in becoming  equally  dull  and  gloomy.  Theremedy  presented  itself  as  it were  of  its  own  accord.  Mamma  hadprescribed  milk  for  me,  and  wanted  me  to  go  into  the  country  totake  it.  I consented,  provided  she  went  with  me.  That  was  enoughto  determine  her;  the  only  question  to  be  decided  was,  where  weshould  go.  The  garden  in  the  suburb  could  not  be  properly  calledcountry—surrounded  by houses  and  other  gardens,  it did  not  pos-sess  the charm  of a rustic  retreat.  Besides,  after  Anet’s  death,  we  had.given up the garden  for the  sake  of economy,  since  we  no  longer  had.any  desire  to  rear  plants,  and  other  considerations  caused  us  to  feelbut  little  regret  for  that  retreat.Taking  advantage  of  the  dislike,  which  I discovered  she  felt  to-wards  the  town,  I proposed  to  her  to  leave  it altogether,  and  to  settlein pleasant  solitude,  in some  little  house,  at  a  sufficient  distance  from.the  town  to  baffle  troublesome  visitors.  She  would  have  done  so,  andthe  resolution,  which  her  good  angel  and  mine  suggested  to  me,,would  probably  have  assured  us  a  happy  and  peaceful  life,  untilLES  CHARMETTES231death  should  have  separated  us.  But  we  were  not  destined  for  such  alot.  Mamma  was  fated  o  experience  all  the  miseries  of  want  anddiscomfort,  after  having  passed  her  life  in abundance,  to  enable  herto  quit it with  less  regret;  while  I, overwhelmed  with  misfortune  ofall  kinds,  was  destined  one  day to  serve  as  a  warning  to  all  who,  in-spired  solely  by love  of justice  and  the  public  welfare,  and  trustingto  the  strength  of their  innocence  alone,  have  the  courage  to  tell  thetruth  openly  to  the  world,  without  the  support  of cabals,  and  with-out  having  formed a party  to  protect  them.An  unfortunate  apprehension  kept  her  back.  She  did  not  dare  toleave  her  uncomfortable  house,  for  fear  of displeasing  the  landlord.“Your  plan  of retirement,”  she  said,  “is  charming,  and I like  it verymuch;  but  in  such  retirement  we  should  have  to  live.  If I leave  myprison,  I run  the  risk  of losing  my  bread;  and,  when  this  fails  us  inthe  woods,  we  shall  be obliged  to  return  again  to  town  to  look  for it.To  lessen  the  chance  of being  obliged  to  do  so,  do  not  let  us  leavethe  town  altogether.  Let  us  pay  this  trifling  annuity  to  the  Comte  deSt.  Laurent,  that  he  may  leave  me  mine.  Let  us  look  for  some  re-treat,  far  enough  from  the  town  to  allow  us  to  live  in  peace,  andnear  enough  for  us  to  return  to  it whenever  it  is  necessary.”  Thiswas  what  we  did.  After  looking  about a little,  we  settled  upon  LesCharmettes,  an  estate  belonging  to  M.  de Conzié,  close  to  Chambéri,but  as  retired  and  solitary  as  if it had  been  a  hundred  leagues  away.Between  two  rather  high hills,  there  is a  little  valley  extending  fromnorth  to  south,  at  the  bottom  of  which  a  stream  of  water. runsamongst  the  trees  and  pebbles.  Along  this  valley,  half-way  up  thehill,  there  are  some  scattered  houses,  a  very  pleasant  retreat  for  any-one  who  is fond  of  a  somewhat  wild  and  retired  asylum.  Havinglooked  at  two  or  three  of  these  houses,  we  at  last  chose  the  nicest,which  belonged  to  a  gentleman  in  the  army,  named  Noiret.  Thehouse  was  very  habitable.  In front  was  a garden  with a terrace,  abovethat,  a  vineyard,  and  below,  an  orchard;  facing  it was a little  forestof chestnut-trees,  and  a fountain  close  by; higher  up on  the mountainwere  pasture  meadows;  in  short,  everything  requisite  for  the  littlecountry  establishment  we  intended  to  set  up.  As  far as  I can  remem-ber  times  and  dates,  we  took  possession  of it towards  the  end  of the232THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsummer  of 1736.  I was  delighted  the  first  night  we  slept there.  “Oh,mamma,”  said  I to  my  dear  friend,  while  I embraced  her  with  tearsof tenderness  and  joy, “this  is the abode  of happiness  and  innocence.If we  do not  find  both  here,  it will  be  useless  to  look  for  them  any-where  else.”BOOK  VI[1736]Hoc  erat  in  votis;  modus  agri  non  ita  magnus,Hortus  ubi  et  tecto  vicinus  iugis.  aquae  fons,Et  paulum  silvae  super  his  foret.*Í cannot  add:Di  melius  fecere.”Auctius  atque—Horace,  Satire  II.,  vi.,  1-4.But  no  matter;  I had  no  need  of more;  I did  not  even  need  any  prop-erty  at  all;  the  enjoyment  of it was  enough  for  me,  and  I have  longago  said  and  felt, that  the  proprietor  and  the  possessor  are  often  twovery  different  persons,  even  if one  leaves  husbands  and  lovers  out  ofthe  question.At  this  period  commences  the  brief  happiness  of  my  life;  hereapproach  the  peaceful,  but  rapid  moments  which  have  given  me  theright  to  say,  I have  lived.  Precious  and  regretted  moments!  beginagain  for me  your  delightful  course;  and,  if it be possible,  pass  moreslowly  in  succession  through  my  memory,  than  you  did  in  yourfugitive  reality.  What  can  I do,  to  prolong,  as  I should  like,  thistouching  and  simple  narrative,  to  repeat  the  same  things  over  andover  again,  without  wearying  my  readers  by such  repetition,  anymore  than  I was  wearied  of them  myself,  when  I recommenced  thelife again  and  again?  If all this consisted  of facts,  actions,  and  words,I could  describe,  and  in  a  manner,  give  an  idea  of them;  but  how  isit  possible  to  describe  what  was  neither  said  nor  done,  nor  even1 This  used  to  be  the  height  of  my  wishes:  a  small  piece  of  land,  with  a  gar-den,  a  stream  of running  water  near  the  house,  and a little  wood  besides.?  The  gods  have  blessed  me  with  more  than  I desire.233THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU~  thought,  but enjoyed  and  felt, without  being  able  to  assign  any  otherreason  for  my  happiness  than  this  simple  feeling?  I got  up  at  sun-rise,  and  was  happy;  I walked,  and  was  happy;  I saw  mamma,  andwas  happy;  I left  her, and  was  happy;  I roamed  the  forests  and  hills,I wandered  in the  valleys,  I read,  I did  nothing,  I worked  in the gar-den,  I picked  the  fruit,  I helped  in  the  work  of the  house,  and  hap-piness  followed  me  everywhere—happiness,  which  could  not  be  re-ferred  to  any  definite  object,  but  dwelt  entirely  within  myself,  andwhich  never  left  me  for  a  single  instant.Nothing  that  occurred  to  me  during  that  delightful  period,  noth-ing that  I did,  said,  or  thought,  during  all  the  time  it lasted,  has  es-caped  my  memory.  Preceding  and  subsequent  periods  only  comeback  to  me  at  intervals;  I recall  them  unequally  and  confusedly;  butI recall  this  particular  period  in its  entirety,  as  if it still  existed.  Myfancy,  which,  during  my  youth,  always  looked  ahead,  and  now  al-ways  looks  back,  compensates  me  by these  charming  recollectionsfor  the  hope  which  I have  lost  for  ever.  I no  longer  see  anything  inthe  future  to  tempt  me;  only  the  reminiscences  of the  past  can  flat-ter  me,  and  these  reminiscences  of the  period  of  which  I speak,  sovivid  and  so  true,  often  make  my  life  happy,  in  spite  of my  misfor-tunes.I will  mention  one  single  instance  of  these  recollections,  whichwill  enable  the  reader  to  judge  of their  liveliness  and  accuracy.  Thefirst  day we  set  out  to  pass  the night at  Les Charmettes,  mamma  wasin  a  sedan-chair,  and  I followed  on  foot.  The  road  was  somewhatsteep,  and,  being  rather  heavy  and  afraid  of  tiring  her  bearers,  shegot  down  about  half-way,  intending  to  finish  the  rest  of the  journeyon  foot.  During  the walk,  she  saw  something  blue  in the hedge,  andsaid  to  me,  “Look!  there  is some  periwinkle  stili  in  flower.”  I hadnever  seen  any  periwinkle,  I did  not  stoop  down  to  examine  it, andI am  too  near-sighted  to  distinguish  plants  on  the  ground,  whenstanding  upright.  I merely  cast  a  passing  glance  at  it, and  nearlythirty  years  passed  before  I saw  any  periwinkle  again,  or  paid  anyattention  to  it.  In  1764,  when  I was  at  Cressier  with  my  friend  DuPeyrou,  we  were  climbing a hill,  on  the  top  of which  he has  built  apretty  salon,  which  he rightly  calls  Belle-Vue.  I was  then  beginningto  botanise  a  little.  While  ascending  the  hill,  and  looking  amongstA  STRANGE  MALADY235the  bushes,  I exclaimed  with  a  cry  of joy,  “Ah!  there  is some  peri-winkle!”  as in fact  it was»Du  Peyrou  observed  my  delight,  withoutknowing  the  cause  of it; he  will  learn  it,  I hope,  one  day,  when  hereads  these  words.  The  reader  may  judge,  from  the  impressionwhich  so  trifling  a  circumstance  made  upon  me,  of  the  effect  produced  by everything  which  has  reference  to  that  period.;In the  meantime,  the country  air  did  not  restore  me  to  my  formerstate  of health.  I was  sickly,  and  grew  worse.  I could  not  take  milk,and  was  obliged  to  give it up.  At that  time  hydropathy  was  the rage,as  a  cure  for  every  complaint.  I rushed  into  it with  so  little  discre-tion,  that  it nearly  put  an  end,  not  to  my  ailments,  but  to  my  life.Every  morning,  when  I got  up,  I went  to  the  spring  with  a  largegoblet,  and, walking  about,  drank  about  two  bottlefuls  without  stop-ping.  I entirely  gave  up  drinking  wine  at  my  meals.  The  waterwhich  I drank  was  rather  hard  and  difficult  to  pass,  like  most  moun-tain  waters.  In short,  I managed  so  well, that in less than  two  monthsI completely  ruined  my stomach,  which  had  hitherto  been  excellent,and  I recognised  that  I could  no  longer  hope  to  be  cured,  as  I wastotally  incapable  of  digesting  anything.  At  the  same  time,  an  acci-dent  occurred  to  me,  as  curious  in  itself  as  in  its  results,  which  willonly end  with  my  life.One  morning,  when  I was  no  worse  than  usual,  while  lifting  thetop  of a little  table  upon  its  stand,  I became  conscious  of a  suddenand  almost  incomprehensible  disturbance  in my  whole  body.  I can-not  compare  it better  than  with  a  kind  of storm,  which  arose  in myblood,  and  in  a  moment  gained  the  mastery  over  all  my  limbs.  Myveins  began  to  beat  so  violently  that  I not  only  felt,  but  even  heardit,  especially  the  beating  of  the  carotid  arteries.  This  was  accom.panied  by a  loud  noise  in  my  ears,  of three,  or  rather,  four  kinds;  adull  and  heavy  buzzing,  a  more  distinct  murmur  like  that  of  run-ning  water,  a  sharp  whistling  sound,  and  the  beating  which  I havejust described,  the  pulsations  of which  I could  easily  count,  withoutfeeling  my  pulse or  touching  my  body with  my  hands.  This  internalnoise  was  so  loud,  that  it deprived  me  of my  hitherto  keen  facultiesof  hearing,  and  made  me  not  altogether  deaf,  but  hard  of hearing,as  I have  continued  to  be from  that  day.My  surprise  and  affright  may  easily  be  imagined.  I looked  uponTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU236myself  as  dead;  I took  to  my  bed,  and  the  physician  was  sent  for;trembling  with  fear,  I told  him  my  case,  which  I considered  hope-less.  I believe  he  thought  the  same,  but  he  acted  as  became  his  pro-fession.  He  strung  together  a  series  of lengthy  explanations  of whichI understood  nothing;  then,  in consequence  of his  sublime  theory,  hecommenced,  in  anima  vili,  the  experimental  cure  which  he  waspleased  to  try.  It was  so  painful,  so  disgusting,  and  produced  so  littleeffect,  that  1 soon  became  tired  of it; and,  at  the  end  of a  few  weeks,finding  myself  neither  better  nor  worse,  I left  my  bed  and  resumedmy  ordinary  occupations,  although  the  beating  of  my  arteries  andthe  buzzing  in  my  ears  still  continued,  and,  in  fact,  have  never  leftme  for  a moment  from  that  day,  that  is to  say,  for  thirty  years.Hitherto  I had  been a great  sleeper.  The  total  inability  to  sleep, bywhich  all  these  symptoms  have  been  accompanied,  even  to  the  pres-ent  day, finally  convinced  me  that  I had  not  long  to  live.  This  con-viction  at  first  calmed  my  anxiety  to  recover.  As  I could  not  prolongmy  life, I resolved  to  get as  much  as  possible  out  of the  few  years  ormonths  that  remained  to  me;  and  this  I was  enabled  to  do, thanksto  a  special  favour  of  Nature,  which,  notwithstanding  my  melan-choly  condition,  gave  me  exemption  from  the  pain  by  which  itwould  naturally  have  been  accompanied.  I was  inconvenienced  bythe noise,  but  it caused  me  no  suffering;  the  only habitual  inconven-iences  by which  it was  attended  were,  inability  to  sleep  at  night, anda perpetual  shortness  of breath,  not,  however,  amounting  to  asthma,and  which  only  made  itself  felt  when  I attempted  to  run  or  exertmyself  more  than  usual.This  accident,  which  should  have  killed  my  body,  only  killed  mypassions;  and  I bless  Heaven  every  day for the  happy  effect  which  itproduced  upon  my  soul.  I can  certainly  say  that  I never  began to  live,until  I looked  upon  myself  as  a  dead  man.  While  estimating  at  theirtrue  value  the  things  I was  going  to  leave,  I began  to  occupy  mythoughts  with  nobler  cares,  as  if in anticipation  of the duties  I shouldsoon  have  to  fulfil,  and  which  until  then  I had  seriously  neglected.I had  often  burlesqued  religion  after  my  own  fashion,  but  I hadnever  been  entirely  without  it. It was  easier  for  me  to  hark  back  tothis  subject,  so  melancholy  for  so  many,  but  so  sweet  for  one  whocan  find  in  it a  source  of  hope  and  consolation.  On  this  occasion,=MME.  DE  WARENS’  RELIGION237mamma  was  far  more  useful  to  me  than  all  the  theologians  in  theworld  could  have  been.pAs  she  always  reduced  everything  to  a  system,  she  had  not  failedto  treat  religion  in  the  same  manner.  Her  system  of  religion  wasmade  up  of  ideas  of  the  most  different  kinds,  some  very  sensible,others  very  foolish,  of feelings  connected  with  her  character,  and  ofprejudices  arising  from  her  education.  As  a  rule, believers  make  Godlike  themselves;  the  good  represent  him  as  good,  the  wicked,  aswicked;  malicious  and  bilious  devotees  see  nothing  but  hell, becausethey  would  like  to  see  the  whole  world  damned;  while  loving  andgentle  souls  do  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  such  a  place.  I havenever  been  able  to  recover  from  my  astonishment  at  finding  the goodFénélon  speak  of it in  his  “Telemachus,”  as  if he  sincerely  believedin  it; but  I hope  that  he  lied  then,  for,  after  all,  however  truthful  aman  may  be, he  is obliged  to  lie  sometimes—when  he  is  a  Bishop.Mamma  did not  lie to  me;  and  her soul, free  from  gall and  bitterness,which  could  not  imagine  a  vindictive  and  ever-wrathful  God,  sawonly mercy  and  compassion,  where  devotees  see  nothing  but  retribu-tive  justice  and  punishment.  She  often  used  to  say  that,  if God  wereto  be  strictly  just  towards  us,  it would  not  be  justice  on  His  part,since  He  has  not  made  us  such  as  to  require  it, and  would  in such  acase  require  from  us  more  than  He has given.  The  curious  thing wasthat,  while  not  believing  in hell,  she  still  believed  in  purgatory.  Thereason  of this  was  that  she  did not  know  what  to  do with  the  souls  ofthe wicked,  feeling  unable  either  to  damn  them  or  to  put  them  withthe  good until  they  had  become  good  themselves.  In  fact,  it must  beconfessed  that,  both  in  this  world  and  the  next,  the  wicked  are  al-ways  a  source  of considerable  embarrassment.Another  of her  curious  ideas  was  the  following.  It is obvious  thatthe  whole  doctrine  of  original  sin  and  redemption  is  destroyed  bythis  system,  that the foundations  of ordinary  Christianity  are  shaken,and  that  Catholicism,  at  any  rate,  cannot  exist.  Mamma,  however,was  a  good Catholic,  or  professed  to  be one,  and  certainly  in all goodfaith.  It  seemed  to  her  that  people  were  accustomed  to  explain  theScriptures  too  literally  and  too  harshly.  All  that  we  read  in  theraabout  eternal  torments  was,  according  to  her,  to  be  taken  only  as  athreat  or  in a figurative  sense.  The  death  of Jesus  Christ  appeared  toTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU230her an  example  of truly  divine  charity,  to  teach  men  to  love  God  andone  another  in  the  same  manner.  In  a  word,  true  to  the  religionwhich  she  had  adopted,  she  accepted  in  all  sincerity  its  entire  pro-fession  of faith;  but,  when  it came  to  a  discussion  of each  article,  itwas  manifest  that  her  belief  was  quite  different  from  that  of  theChurch  to  which  she  always  professed  submission.  In  reference  tothis,  she  displayed  a  simplicity  of heart,  and  a  frankness  which  wasmore  eloquent  than  petty  cavillings,  and  which  frequently  embar-rassed  even  her  confessor,  from  whom  she  concealed  nothing.  “I ama  good  Catholic,  and  desire  always  to  remain  one,”  she  used  to  sayto  him;  “I  submit  with  my  whole  heart  to  the  decisions  of  HolyMother  Church.  I am  not  mistress  of my  belief,  but  I am  mistress  ofmy  will,  which  I control  without  reserve,  and  am  prepared  to  believeeverything.  What  more  can  you  ask  of me?”Even  had  no  Christian  morality  existed,  I believe  she  would  havefollowed  its  principles,  since  they  harmonised  so  completely  withher  character.  She  did  all  that  was  prescribed;  but  she  would  havedone  it just  the  same,  even  if it had  not  been  prescribed.  In  unim-portant  matters  she  liked  to  show  her  obedience;  and,  if it had  notbeen  permitted,  even  if she  had  been  ordered,  to  eat  meat  on  fast-days,  she  would  have  fasted  in order  to  please  God,  without  any  re-gard  for  considerations  dictated  by prudence.  But  all  these  princi-ples of morality  were  subordinated  to  the  principles  of M.  de Tavel,or  rather,  she  declared  that  she  found  nothing  contradictory  therein.She  would  have  slept  every  day with  twenty  men  with  a  calm  con-science,  and  without  feeling  any  more  scruple  than  desire  in  thematter.  I know  that  many  devotees  are  not  more  scrupulous  on  thispoint,  but  the  difference  is  that,  while  they  are  led  astray  by theirpassions,  she  was  only  misled  by her  sophisms.  In  the  course  of themost  touching,  I even  venture  to  say  the  most  edifying,  conversa-tions,  she  would  have  been  able  to  allude  to  this  matter  without  anyalteration  of tone  or  manner,  and  without  thinking  that  she  was  inthe least  inconsistent.  She  would  even,  if necessary,  have  interruptedsuch  a  conversation  to  speak  of  the  subject,  and  would  have  beenable  to  resume  it as  calmly  as  before,  so  intimate  was  her  convictionthat  the whole  matter  was  only  a  principle  of social  economy,  whichevery  intelligent  person  was  at  liberty  to  interpret,  apply,  or  reject,TRANQUILLITY3239according  to  his or  her  view  of the  matter,  without  the least  dangerof offending  God.  Although I certainly  did  not  share  her  opinionupon  this  point,  I confess  that  I never  ventured  to  contradict  her,since  I was  ashamed  of the  lack  of politeness  which  such  conduct  onmy  part  would  have  forced  me  to  exhibit.  I might,  certainly,  haveendeavoured  to  establish  a rule  for others,  and  attempted  to  make  anexception  in  my  own  case;  but,  not  only  was  her  temperament  asufficient  protection  against  the  abuse  of her  principles,  but  I knewthat  she  was  not  a  woman  to be easily deceived,  and, if I had  claimedexception  for  myself,  I should  only have  left  it for  her  to  grant  it toanyone  else  who  might  be agreeable  to  her.  Besides,  I only  mentionthis  inconsistency  incidentally  by the side  of the  rest,  although  it hasnever  had  much  influence  upon  her  conduct,  and  at  that  time,  hadnone  at  all;  but  I have  promised  to  give  a  faithful  account  of  herprinciples,  and  I wish  to  fulfil  this  promise.  Let  me  now  return  tomyself.As  I found  in  her  all  the  principles  which  I needed  in  order  tofortify  my  soul  against  the  terrors  of  death  and  its  consequences,  Idrew  upon  this  source  of confidence  with  perfect  security.  I becamemore  closely  attached  to  her  than  I had  ever  been:  I should  havebeen  willing  to  hand  over  to  her  entirely  the  life  which  I felt  wasready  to  leave  me.  The  result  of this  redoubled  attachment  to  her,  ofthe  conviction  that  I had  only  a  short  time  to  live,  of the  profoundcalmness  with  which  I contemplated  my  future  state,  was  an  habit-ual  condition  of  tranquillity—even  of enjoyment—which,  while  itallayed  all  those  passions,  which  remove  our  hopes  and  fears  to  adistance,  permitted  me  to  enjoy,  without  anxiety  or  trouble,  the  fewdays  which  remained  to  me.  Another  thing  helped  to  make  themmore  agreeable:  the  endeavour  to  foster  her  taste  for country  life  byevery  amusement  that  I could  think  of.  While  I made  her  fond  ofher  garden,  her  poultry-yard,  her  pigeons,  and  her  cows,  I myselfacquired a liking  for  them  all, and  these  trifling  occupations,  whichfilled  up  my  day  without  disturbing  my  tranquillity,  did  me  moregood than  the milk  and  all other  remedies  employed  to  keep my poormachine  in order,  and  even  repaired  it as  far  as  was  possible.The  vintage  and  the  gathering  of the  fruit  amused  us  for  the  re-mainder  of this  year,  and  made  us  more  and  more  attached  to coun-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU240try life, amongst  the good people  by whom  we  were  surrounded.  Wewere  very  sorry  to  see  the  approach  of  winter,  and  went  back  totown  as  if we  had  been  going  into  exile—myself  especially,  since  Idid  not  think  that  I should  live  to  see  the  spring  again,  and  believedthat  I was  saying  good-bye to Les  Charmettes  for  the last  time.  Be-fore  I left, I kissed  the  ground  and  the  trees,  and  turned  back  severaltimes  as  I went  on  my  way.  As  I had  long  given  up  my  pupils,  andlost  my  taste  for  the  amusements  and  society  of  the  town,  I neverwent  out,  and  never  saw  anybody,  except  mamma  and  M.  Salomon,who  had  recently  become  her  physician  and  mine,  an  honourableand  intelligent  man,  a  strong  Cartesian,  who  talked  sensibly  aboutthe  system  of  the  world,  and  whose  agreeable  and  instructive  con-versation  did  me  more  good  than  all  his  prescriptions.  I have  neverbeen  able  to  endure  the  silly  and  nonsensical  padding  of  ordinaryconversation,  but  serious  and  useful  discourse  always  affords  megreat  pleasure,  and  I never  refuse  to  take  part  in  it.  I took  great  de-light  in  M.  Salomon’s  conversation;  it seemed  to  me  that,  while  inhis  company,  I was  acquiring  a  foretaste  of that  higher  knowledge,which  was  reserved  for  my  soul,  when  it had  lost  the  fetters  whichconfined  it.  My predilection  for  him  extended  to  the  subjects  whichhe discussed,  and  I began  to  look  for  books  which  might  help me  tounderstand  him  better.  Those  which  combined  devotion  and  sciencewere  most  suitable  for  me,  particularly  those  of  the  Oratory  andPort  Royal,*  which  I began  to  read,  or  rather,  to  devour.  I cameacross  one  written  by Father  Lamy,  entitled  “Entretiens  sur  les  Sci-ences,”  a  kind  of  introduction  to  the  knowledge  of  those  bookswhich  treated  of  them.  I read  and  re-read  it a  hundred  times,  andresolved  to  make  it my  guide.  At  last,  I felt  myself,  in  spite  of,  orrather  by  reason  of,  my  condition,  gradually  and  irresistibly  at-tracted  to  study,  and,  while  looking  upon  each  day  as  my  last,  Istudied  with  as  great  eagerness  as  if I had  been  destined  to  live  forever.  | was  told  that  this  was  injurious  to  me.  I believe  that  it wasbeneficial, not  only tomy  mind,  but  also  to  my  body;  for this  occupa-tion,  to  which  I passionately  devoted  myself,  became  so  delightful  toA  follower  of  the  doctrines  of Descartes,The  school  of the  Jansenists.ENLIVENED  TASTE  FOR  STUDY241me,  that  I no  longer  thought  of my  sufferings,  and  was  much  lessaffected  by them.  It is cergainly  true  that  nothing  afforded  me  anyreal  relief;  but,  as  I felt  no  acute  pain,  I became  accustomed  to  lan-guor  and  sleeplessness,  to  thought  instead  of  action,  and,  at  last  Icame  to  look  upon  the  sloW  and  gradual  decay  of my  powers  as  amunavoidable  process,  which  death  alone  could  arrest.Not  only  did  this  opinion  release  me  from  all  idle  and  earthlycares,  but  it  also  delivered  me  from  the  annoyance  of  the  variousremedies  to  which,  hitherto,  I had  been  obliged  to  submit,  in spite ofmyself.  Salomon,  convinced  that  his drugs could  not  cure  me,  sparedme  the  unpleasantness  of  taking  them,  and  was  content  to  soothepoor  mamma’s  grief  with  some  of  those  harmless  prescriptionswhich  deceive  the  sick  man  with  hopes  and  keep  up  the  reputationof the physician.  I gave  up  strict  diet, began  to  take  wine  again,  and,as  far  as  my  strength  allowed  me,  led  the  life  of a  man  in  perfecthealth,  temperate  in everything,  but  denying  myself  nothing.  I evenwent  out  sometimes,  and  began  to  visit  my  acquaintances  again,  es-pecially  M.  de  Conzié,  whose  society  I found  very  agreeable.  Inshort,  whether  it was  that  I thought  it a  fine  thing  to  keep  on  learn-ing till  my  last  hour,  or  that  some  slight  hope  of life  still  remainedconcealed  at  the  bottom  of my  heart,  the  expectation  of  death,  farfrom  diminishing  my  taste  for  study,  seemed  rather  to  enliven  it,and  I made  great  haste  to  pick  up a little  knowledge  for  the  nextworld,  as  if  I had  believed  that  in  it  I  should  only  possess  suchknowledge  as  I took  with  me.  I became  fond  of the  bookshop  of aM.  Bouchard,  frequented  by  several  men  of  letters;  and,  as  thespring,  which  I had  never  expected  to  live  to  see,  was  close  at  hand,I looked  out  some  books  to  take  to  Les  Charmettes,  in case  I shouldhave  the  good  fortune  to  return  there.I had  this  good  fortune,  and  I made  the  best  use  of  it.  The  joywith  which I beheld  the first buds  is indescribable.  To me  it was  likea resurrection  in Paradise  to  see  the  spring  again.  No  sooner  had  thesnow  begun  to  melt  than  we  left  our  dungeon,  and  arrived  at  LesCharmettes  soon  enough  to  hear  the  first  notes  of  the  nightingale.From  that  time  I no  longer  thought  of  dying;  and  it  is  really  re-markable,  that  I have  never  had  any  serious  illness  in  the  country.  Ihave  suffered  much  there,  but have  never  been  confined  to  my  bed.  ITHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU242have  often  said, when  feeling  more  than  usually  unwell:  “When  yousee  me  at  the  point  of death,  carry  me  under  the  shade  of an  oak.  Ipromise  you  that  I shall  get  well  again.”  Although  still  weak,  I re-sumed  my  country  occupations,  but  to  an  extent  proportionate  tomy  powers.  I was  truly  grieved  not  to  betable  to  see  after  the  gardenalone;  but  after  half  a  dozen  digs with  the  spade,  I was  quite  out  ofbreath,  the  sweat  poured  down  my  face,  and I felt  quite  exhausted.When I stooped,  my  palpitations  increased,  and  the blood  flew  to  myhead  with  such  violence  that  I was  obliged  to  stand  upright  immedi-ately.  Compelled  to  confine  myself  to  less  fatiguing  occupations,  Iundertook,  amongst  other  things,  the  care  of  the  pigeon-house,  towhich  I became  so  strongly  attached,  that  I often  spent  several  hoursin  succession  there  without  feeling  a  moment’s  weariness.  Thepigeon  is  a  very  timid  creature,  and  difficult  to  tame.  However,  Isucceeded  in inspiring  mine  with  such  confidence  that  they followedme  everywhere,  and  allowed  me  to  catch  them  whenever  I wanted.I could  not  show  myself  in the garden  or  court  without  immediatelyfinding  two  or  three  of them  on  my  arms  and  head;  and  at  last,  inspite  of  the  pleasure  this  afforded  me,  this  following  became  sotroublesome  to  me,  that  I was  obliged  to  discourage  their  excessivefamiliarity.  I have  always  found  singular  pleasure  in taming  animals,especially  such  as  are  shy and  wild.  It appeared  to  me  delightful  toinspire  them  with  a  confidence  which  I have  never  abused.  I desiredtheir  fondness  for  me  to  be  perfectly  unrestricted.I have  mentioned  that  I took  some  books  with  me;  but I made  useof them  in  a  manner  less  calculated  to  instruct  than  to  overwhelmme.  The  false  idea  which  I entertained  of  things  caused  me  to  be-lieve  that,  in  order  to  read  a  book  with  profit,  it was  necessary  topossess  all  the  preliminary  knowledge  which  it presupposed.  I hadno  suspicion  that  very  frequently  the  author  himself  did  not  possessit, and  that  he  extracted  it from  other  books  as  he  required  it, Pos-sessed by this foolish  idea, I was  detained  every  moment,  and  obligedto  run  incessantly  from  one  book  to another:  sometimes,  before  I hadreached  the  tenth  page  of the  work  I wanted  to  study,  I should  havebeen  obliged  to  exhaust  the  contents  of whole  libraries.  However,  Ifollowed.  this  senseless  method  so  persistently  that  I lost  an  enor-mous  amount  of  time,  and  my  head  became  so  confused  that  I al-PLAN  OF  STUDY243,most  lost  the power  of seeing  or  comprehending  anything.  Happily,I at  last perceived  that  I  wa§  on  the  wrong  track,  which  was  leadingme  astray  in  an  interminable  labyrinth,  and I left  it before  I was:quite  lost  in it.The  first  thing  that  strikes  anyone  who  has  a  genuine  taste  forlearning,  however  slight,  when  he  devotes  himself  to  it, is the  closeconnection  of the sciences,  which  causes  them  to  attract,  support,  andthrow  light  upon  each  other,  so  that  one  cannot  dispense  with  theother.  Although  the  human  intellect  is not  capable  of mastering  all,and  one  must  always  be  regarded  as  the  principal  object  of  study,yet,  without  some  idea  of the  rest,  a man  often  finds  himself  in  thedark  in his  own  particular  branch.  I felt  that  what  I had  undertakenwas  good  and  useful  in  itself,  and  that  all  that  was  necessary  was  achange  of method.  Taking  the  Encyclopedia  first,  I had  divided  itinto  its different  branches.  I saw  that  I should  have  done  exactly  theopposite;  that  I ought  to  have  taken  each  branch  separately  and  fol-lowed  it up  to  the  point  at  which  all  unite.  Thus,  I returned  to  theordinary  synthetical  method,  but  like  a  man  who  knows  what  he is.about.  In  this,  meditation  supplied  the  place  of  knowledge,  and  avery  natural  reflection  helped  me  on  the  right  road.  Whether  I livedor  died,  I had  no  time  to  lose.  A man  who,  at  the  age  of  five-and-twenty,  knows  nothing  and  wishes  to  learn  everything,  is bound  tomake  the best  use  of his time.  Not  knowing  at  what  point  destiny  ordeath  might  arrest  my  zeal,  I desired,  in any  case,  to  get  an  idea  ofeverything,  in order  to  discover  the  special  bent  of my  natural  abili-ties,  and  also  to  judge  for  myself  what  was  worthy  of cultivation.In the execution  of this  plan I found  another  advantage  which  hadnot  occurred  to  me—that  of economising  my  time.  I certainly  cannothave  been  born  for study,  for continuous  application  tires  me  to  suchan  extent,  that  J am  utterly  unable  to  devote  more  than  half  an  hourtogether  to  the  close  study  of the  same  subject,  especially  when  fol-lowing  another’s  train  of  thought;  for  it  has  sometimes  happenedthat  I have  been  able  to  devote  myself  to  my  own  ideas  longer,  andeven  with  tolerable  success.  When  I have  read  a  few  pages  of an  au-thor  who  must  be  read  carefully,  my  mind  wanders  from  him,  andis lost  in the clouds.  If I persist,  I exhaust  myself  to  no  purpose;  I be-come  dazed,  and  cease  to  see  anything.  But  if different  subjects  fol-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF-  ROUSSEAU244low  each  other,  even  without  interruption,  one  relieves  me  from  theother,  and, without  feeling  the need  of any  relaxation,  I follow  themmore  easily.  I profited  by this  observation  in  my  plan  of study,  andI combined  them  in  such  a  manner  that  I was  busy  the whole  daywithout  ever  fatiguing  myself.  It is true  that  rural  and  domestic  oc-cupations  afforded  me  useful  distractions;  but, in my  increasing  zeal,I soon  found  means  to  spare  time  from  these  to  devote  to  study,  andto  busy  myself  with  two  kinds  of  things  at  the  same  time,  withoutthinking  that  the  result  in  each  case  was  less  satisfactory.In  these  trifling  details,  which  afford  me  delight,  and  with  whichI often  weary  my  reader,  I nevertheless  exercise  a  reserve  which  hewould  scarcely  suspect  unless  I took  care  to  inform  him.  Here,  forexample,  I remember  with  delight  all the various  attempts  I made  todistribute  my  time  in  such  a  manner  as  to  derive  from  it as  muchpleasure  and  profit  as  possible;  and  I can  say  that  this  period,  duringwhich I lived  in retirement  and  always  in  ill-health,  was  the  periodof my  life  during  which  I was  least  idle  and  least  wearied.  Two  orthree  months  were  thus  spent  in trying  the bent  of my  mind,  and  inenjoying,  in  the  most  beautiful  season  of  the  year,  and  in  a  spotwhich  it rendered  delightful,  the  charm  of life,  the  value  of which  Iso  well  appreciated,—the  charmi  of an  unrestrained  and  sweet  com-panionship,  if such  a name  can  be given  to  a  union  so  perfect,  and  ofthe wonderful  knowledge  which  I proposed  to  acquire;  for it seemedto  me  as  if I already  possessed  it, or  rather,  it was  still  better,  since  thepleasure  of  learning  counted  for  much  in  my  happiness.I must  pass  over  these  attempts,  which  were  all  a  source  of enjoy-ment  to  me,  but are  too  simple  to be satisfactorily  expressed.  I repeat,true  happiness  cannot  be  described;  it can  only  be  felt,  and  felt  themore,  the  less  it can  be described,  since  it is not  the  result  of  a num-ber  of facts,  but  is a  permanent  condition.  I often  repeat  myself,  butI should  do  so  still  more  if I said  the  same  thing  as  often  as  it occursto  me.  When  my  frequently-changed  manner  of  life  had  at  lastadopted  a  regular  course,  it was  distributed  as  nearly  as  possible  inthe  following  manner.I got up  every  day before  sunrise;  I climbed  through  a  neighbour-ing orchard  to a very  pretty  path above  the vineyard  which  ran  alongthe  slope  as  far  as  Chambéri.  During  my  walk  I offered  a  prayer,LIFE  AT  LES  CHARMETTES245which  did  not  consist  merely  of  idle,  stammering  words,  but  of asincere  uplifting  of the heagt to the Creator  of this delightful  Nature,whose  beauties  were  spread  before  my  eyes.  I never  like  to  pray  in aroom:  it has  always  seemed  to  me  as  if the  walls  and  all  the  pettyhandiwork  of  man  interposed  between  myself  and  God.  I love  tocontemplate  Him  in His  works,  while  my  heart  uplifts itself  to  Him.My prayers  were  pure,  I venture  to  say,  and  for  that  reason  deservedto  be heard.  I only asked  for myself and  for her, who  was  inseparablyassociated  with  my  wishes,  an  innocent  and  peaceful  life,  free*fromvice,  pain,  and  distressing  needs;  the  death  of  the  righteous,  andtheir  lot  in  the  future.  For  the  rest,  this  act  of  worship  consistedrather  of admiration  and  contemplation  than  of requests,  for  I knewthat  the  best  means  of  obtaining  the  blessings  which  are  necessaryfor us  from  the giver of all true  blessings,  was  to  deserve,  rather  than.to  ask  for,  them.  My walk  consisted  of a  tolerably  long  round,  dur-ing which  I contemplated  with  interest  and  pleasure  the  rustic  scen-ery  by which  I was  surrounded,  the  only  thing  of which  heart  andeye  never  tire.  From  a  distance  I looked  to  see  if it was  day  withmamma.  When  I saw  her  shutters  open,  I trembled  with  joy and  rantowards  the  house;  if they were  shut,  I remained  in the  garden  untilshe  awoke,  amusing  myself  by going  over  what  I had  learned  theevening  before,  or  by gardening.  The  shutters  opened,  I went  to  em-brace  her  while  she  was  still  in  bed,  often  still  half  asleep;  and  thisembrace,  as  pure  as  it was  tender,  derived  from  its  very  innocence  acharm  which  is never  combined  with  sensual  pleasure.We  usually  took  café  au  lait  for  breakfast.  This  was  the  period  ofthe  day  when  we  were  most  undisturbed,  and  chatted  most  at  ourease.  We  usually  sat  a  considerable  time  over  our  breakfast,  andfrom  that  time  I have  always  had a great  liking  for  this  meal.  I in-finitely  prefer  the  fashion  of  the  Swiss  and  English,  with  whombreakfast  is really  a  meal  at  which  all the  family  assemble,  to  that  ofthe  French,  who  breakfast.separately  in  their  rooms,  or,  most  com-monly,  take  no  breakfast  at  all. After  an  hour  or  two  of conversation,I went  to  my  books  till  dinner.  I began  with  some  philosophicaltreatise,  such  as  the  Logic.  of  Port-Royal,  Locke’s  Essay,  Male-branche,  Leibnitz,  Descartes,  &c.  I soon  observed  that  all  these,  au-‘thors  nearly  always  contradicted,  each- other, and  I conceived  theTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU246fanciful  idea  of  reconciling  them,  which  fatigued  me  greatly,  andmade  me  lose  considerable  time.  I muddled  my  head  without  mak-ing any  progress.  At  last,  abandoning  this  plan,  I adopted  one  thatwas  infinitely  better,  to  which  I attribute  all  the  progress  which,  inspite  of my  want  of talent,  I may  have  made;  for  it is certain  that  Inever  had  much  capacity  for  study.  As  I read  each  author,  I madea  practice  of  adopting  and  following  up  all  his  ideas,  without  anyadmixture  of my  own  or  of those  of  anyone  else,  and  without  everattempting  to  argue  with  him.  I said  to  myself:  “Let  me  begin  bylaying  up  a  store  of ideas,  no  matter  whether  they  be  true  or  false,provided  only they are  definite,  until  my head  is sufficiently  equippedwith  them  to  be able  to  select  and  compare  them.”  I know  that  thismethod  is not  without  its  inconveniences;  but  it  has  answered  mypurpose  of self-instruction.  After  I had  spent  some  years  in thinkingexactly  as  others  thought,  without,  so  to  speak,  reflecting,  and  almostwithout  reasoning,  I found  myself  in  possession  of a  fund  of  learn-ing  sufficient  to  satisfy  myself,  and  to  enable  me  to  think  withoutthe  assistance  of  another.  Then,  when  travelling  and  business  mat-ters  deprived  me  of the  opportunity  of consulting  books,  I amusedmyself  by going  over  and  comparing  what  I had  read,  by weighingeverything  in  the  scale  of  reason,  and,  sometimes,  by passing  judg-ment  upon  my  masters.  I did  not  find  that  my  critical  faculties  hadlost  their  vigour  owing  to  my  having  begun  to  exercise  them  late;and,  when  I published  my  own  ideas,  I have  never  been  accused  ofbeing a servile  disciple,  or  of  swearing  in  verba  magistri®From  these  studies  I proceeded  to  elementary  geometry,  beyondwhich  I never  advanced,  although  I persistently  attempted,  in  somedegree,  to  overcome  my  weakness  of  memory  by dint  of  retracingmy  steps  hundreds  of times,  and  by incessantly  going  over  the  sameground.  I did not  like  Euclid,  whose  object is rather  a chain  of proofsthan  the connection  of ideas.  I preferred  Father  Lamy’s  “Geometry,”which  from  that  time  became  one  of my  favourite  works,  and  whichI am  still  able  to  read  with  pleasure.  Next  came  algebra,  in which  Istill  took  Father  Lamy  for  my  guide.  When  I was  more  advanced,  Itook  Father  Reynaud’s  “Science  of Calculation”;  then  his  “Analysis5  “By  the  words  of  a  master”:  an  allusion  to  the  disciples  of Pythagoras,  whoslavishly  reproduced  the  ideas  of their  master.STUDY  OF  LATIN247Demonstrated,”  which  I merely  skimmed.  I have  never  got  so  far asto  understand  properly  thé application  of algebra  to  geometry.  I didnot  like this  method  of working  without  knowing  what  I was  doing:and  it appeared  to  me  that  solving  a  geometrical  problem  by meansof equations  was  like playing  a  tune  by simply  turning  the handle  ofa  barrel-organ.  The  first  time  that  I found  by calculation,  that  thesquare  of a  binomial  was  composed  of the  square  of each  of its partsadded  to  twice  the  product  of those  parts,  in  spite  of the  correctnessof my  multiplication,  I would  not  believe  it until  I had  drawn  thefigure.  I had  considerable  liking  for algebra,  in so  far as  it dealt  withabstract  quantities;  but,  when  it  was  applied  to  space  and  dimen-sions,  I wanted  to  see  the  operation  explained  by lines;  otherwise  Iwas  entirely  unable  to  comprehend  it.After  this  came  Latin.  I found  this  my  most  difficult  task,  and  Ihave  never  made  much  progress  in it. At first  I began  with  the  Port-Royal  method,  but  without  result.  Its barbarous  verses  disgusted  me,and  my  ear  could  never  retain  them.  The  mass  of rules  confused  me,and  when  learning  the  last, I forgot  all  that  had  preceded  it.  A manwho  has no  memory  does  not  want  to  study  words;  and  it was  just inorder  to  strengthen  my  memory  that  I persisted  in this  study,  whichI was  finally  obliged  to  abandon.  I was  sufficiently  acquainted  withthe  construction  to  be able  to  read  an  easy  author  with  the  help of adictionary.  I kept  to  this  plan  with  tolerable  success.  I limited  my-self  to  translations,  not  written,  but  mental.  By  dint  of  continualpractice,  I was  able  to  read  the  Latin  authors  with  tolerable  ease,  butI have  never  been  able  to  speak  or  write  in that  language,  which  fre-quently  caused  me  embarrassment,  when  I found  myself,  I know  nothow,  enrolled  a  member  of the  society  of  men  of  letters.  Anotherdisadvantage  resulting  from  this  method  of learning  is, that  I havenever  learned  prosody,  still  less  the  rules  of versification.  However,in my  desire  to  feel  the  harmony  of the  language  in verse  as  well  asprose,  I made  great  efforts  to  succeed  in  this;  but  I am  convincedthat  it is impossible  without  the  aid  of a  master.  After  I had  learnedthe  structure  of  the  easiest  of all  verses,  the  hexameter,  I had  suff:cient  patience  to  scan  nearly  the  whole  of  Virgil,  marking  the  feetand  quantities;  then,  when  I afterwards  had  any  doubt  whether  asyllable  was  long or  short,  I referred  to  my  Virgil.  It may  easily  beTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU248conceived  that  this  made  me  commit  many  errors,  in consequence  ofthe licence  allowed  by the rules  of versification.  But,  if there  is an  ad-vantage  in  self-instruction,  there  are  also  great  disadvantages,  espe-cially  the  incredible  amount  of labour  necessary.  This  I know  betterthan  anyone  else.Before  noon I left  my  books,  and,  if dinner  was  not  ready,  I paida  visit  to  my  friends  the  pigeons,  or  worked  in  the  garden  until  itwas.  When  I heard  myself  called,  I was  very  glad  to  run  to  table,provided  with  an  excellent  appetite;  for it is  a remarkable  thing that,however  ill  I may be, my  appetite  never  fails.  We  dined:very  pleas-antly,  talking  of  our  affairs,  until  mamma  was  able  to  eat.  Two  orthree  times  a  week,  when  it was  fine,  we  took  our  coffee  in  a  cooland  shady  arbour  behind  the  house,  which  I had  decorated  withhops,  which  made  it very  agreeable  during  the  heat.  We  spent  somelittle  time  in  looking  at  our  vegetables  and  flowers,  and  in  talkingabout  our  mode  of life,  which  heightened  the  enjoyment  of it.  I hadanother  little  family  at  the bottom  of the  garden—some  bees.  I rarelyfailed  to  visit  them,  and  mamma  often  accompanied  me.  I took  greatinterest  in  their  work:  it amused  me  immensely  to  see  them  return-ing from  their  foraging  expeditions,  their  little  legs  often  so  loaded.that  they could  scarcely  move.  At  first  my  curiosity  made  me  too  in-quisitive,  and  I was  stung  two  or  three  times;  but  at  last  they  got  toknow  me  so  well,  that  they  let me  go  as  close  to  them  as  I pleased;and,  however  full  their  hives  were,  when  they were  ready  to  swarm,Thad  them  all round  me,  on  my  hands  and  on  my  face, without  evergetting  stung.  All  animals  rightly  distrust  human  beings;  but  whenthey  once  feel  sure  that  they  do  not  mean  to  hurt  them,  their  confi-dence  becomes  so  great  that  a man  must  be  worse  than.a  barbarianto  abuse  it.I returned  to  my  books,  but  my  afternoon  occupations  deservedless  to  be  called  work  and  study  than  recreation  and  amusement.  Ihave  never  been  able  to  endure  close  application  in  my  room  afterdinner,  and,  generally  speaking,  any  effort  during  the  heat  of  theday is painful  to  me.  However,  I occupied  myself  with  reading  with-out  study,  without  restraint,  and  almost  without  any  system.  Mymost  regular  occupations  were  history  and  geography;  and,  as  thesedid  not  require  any  great  effort  of mind,  I made  as  much  progressSTUDY  OF  ASTRONOMY2497as  was  possible,  considering  my  weak  memory.  I tried  to  studyFather  Pétau,  and  plungef  into  the  obscurities  of chronology;  but  Iwas  disgusted  by the  critical  portion  of it, which  is  most  intricate,and  by preference  I took  up  the  study  of the  exact  measurement  oftime  and  the  course  of the  heavenly  bodies.  I should  also  have  be-come  fond  of astronomy,  if I had  had  the necessary  appliances;  but Iwas  obliged  to  content  myself  with  a  few  elementary  principles,learnt  from  books,  and  some  crude  observations  which  I made  witha  telescope,  merely  to  learn  the  general  idea  of  the  situation  of theheavenly  bodies;  for  my  shortsightedness  does  not  allow  me  to  dis-tinguish  the  stars  clearly  with  the  naked  eye.  In regard  to  this,  I re-member  an  adventure  which  has  often  made  me  laugh  since.  I hadbought  an  astronomical  chart,  in order  to  study  the  constellations.  Ifastened  this  chart  to  a  frame,  and,  when  the  nights  were  clear,  Iwent  into  the  garden,  and  placed  my  frame  on  four  stakes  about  myown  height,  with  the  chart  turned  downwards.  In  order  to  preventthe  wind  from  blowing  out  my  candle,  I put  it in  a  pail,  which  Iplaced  between  the  four  stakes  on  the  ground.  Then,  looking  alter-nately  at  the  map  with  my  eyes  and  the  stars  with  my  telescope,  Ipractised  myself  in distinguishing  the  constellations  and  the  individ-ual  stars.  I think  I have  mentioned  that  M.  Noiret’s  garden  was  inthe  form  of a terrace,  so  that  everything  that  took  place  could  beseen  from  the  road.  One  evening,  some  peasants,  who  were  passingby at  rather  a  late  hour,  saw  me,  most  comically  attired,  busy  at  mywork.  The  dim  light,  which  fell  upon  my  chart,  without  their  beingable  to  see  where  it came  from,  since  it was  hidden  from  their  eyesby the  edges  of  the  pail,  the  four  stakes,  the  large  sheet  of  papercovered  with  figures,  the  frame,  and  the  movements  of  my  tele-scope, which  kept appearing  and  disappearing,  gave  an  air of witch-craft  to  the  whole  proceeding,  which  terrified  them.My dress  was  not  calculated  to  reassure  them.  A  broad-brimmedhat  over  my  cap,  and  a  short,  wadded  night-dress  belonging  tamamma,  which  she  had  forced  me  to  put on,  presented  to  their  eyesthe appearance  of a  real  sorcerer;  and, as  it was  nearly  midnight,  theyhad  no  doubt  that  a  witches’  meeting  was  going  to  commence.  Feel-ing  little  curiosity  to  see  any  more,  they  ran  away  in  great  alarm,woke  up  their  neighbours  to  tell  them  of  the  apparition  they  had—THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU250seen,  and  the  story  spread  so  quickly  that,  on  the  following  day,everyone  in  the  neighbourhood  knew  that  a  witches’  gathering  hadbeen  held  in  M.  Noiret’s  garden.  I do  not  know  what  would  have'  been  the  result  of this  rumour,  had  not  one  of the  peasants,  who  hadbeen  a  witness  of my  incantations,  carried  a  complaint  on  the  sameday  to  two  Jesuits,  who  often  came  to  see  us,  and  who,  withoutknowing  what  it was  all  about,  in  the  meantime  disabused  them  ofthe  idea.  They  told  us  the  story;  I told  them  the  origin  of it, and  weenjoyed  a  hearty  laugh  over  it. However,  it was  decided,  for  fear  ofits being  repeated,  that  for  the  future  I should  take  my  observationswithout  the  assistance  of a  light,  and  that  I should  consult  my  chartat  home.  Those  who  have  read,  in my  “Letters  from  the  Mountain,”of my  Venetian  magic,  will,  I hope,  find  that  sorcery  had  long beenmy  vocation.Such  was  my  life at Les  Charmettes,  when  I was  not  occupied  withcountry  pursuits,  to  which  I always  gave  the  preference,  and  in any-thing  which  was  not  beyond  my  strength  I worked  like  a  peasant;but  it is true  that  my  extreme  weakness  allowed  me  little  merit  onthis  point,  except  that  of  good  intentions.  Besides,  I wanted  to  dotwo  different  things at once,  and  consequently  did neither  well.  I hadresolved  to  acquire  a  good  memory  by violent  measures,  and  per-sisted  in my  attempts  to  learn  a great  deal  by heart.  With  this  object,I always  carried  some  book  with  me,  which  I studied  and  repeatedto  myself  while  at  work,  with  incredible  pains.  I cannot  understandhow  it was  that  my  persistency  in these  useless  and  continued  effortsdid  not  end  by reducing  me  to  a  state  of stupidity.  I must  have  learntand  relearnt  at  least  twenty  times  the Eclogues  of Virgil,  and yet I donot  know a single  word  of them.  I have  lost  or  dismembered  num-bers  of  books  through  the  habit  of  carrying  them  about  with  meeverywhere,  in  the  pigeon-house,  in the  garden,  in  the  orchard,  andin the vineyard.  While  occupied  with  something  else, I put  my  bookdown  at the  foot  of a tree  or  on  a hedge;  I always  forgot to  take  it upagain,  and,  at  the  end  of a fortnight,  I frequently  found  it  rottedaway,  or  eaten  by ants  and  snails.  This  eagerness  for learning  becamea  mania  which  drove  me  nearly  stupid,  so  incessantly  was  I em-ployed  with  muttering  something  or  other  to  myself.The  writings  of Port-Royal  and  the  Oratory,  which  I read  mostTHEOLOGY251frequently,  had  made  me  half a  Jansenist,  and,  in  spite  of  all  mytrust  in  God,  their  harsh  theology  sometimes  frightened  me.  Thedread  of hell,  which  hitherto  had  had  little  terror  for  me,  graduallydisturbed  my  peace  of  mind,  and,  if mamma  had  not  calmed  myuneasiness,  this  terrible  doctrine  would  have  upset  me  altogether.  _-My confessor,  who  was  also  hers,  did  his  best  to  keep  me  in  a  com-fortable  frame  of mind.  This  confessor  was  a  Jesuit,  named  FatherHemet,  a  good  and  wise  old  man,  whose  memory I shall  alwaysrevere.  Although a Jesuit,  he was  as  simple  as  a  child;  and  his  moral-ity,  rather  gentle  than  lax,  was  exactly  what  I needed  to  counter-balance  the  gloomy  impressions  of Jansenism.  This  simple  old  manand  his  companion,  Father  Coppier,  often  came  to  see  us  at  LesCharmettes,  although  the  road  was  very  rough  and  the journey  longfor  persons  of  their  age.  Their  visits  did  me  great  good:  may  Godrecompense  their  souls!  for  they  were  too  old  at  the  time  for  me  tosuppose  that  they are  still  alive.  I also  went  to  see  them  at  Chambéri.I gradually  became  quite  at  home  in  their  house;  their  library  wasat  my  disposal.  The  memory  of  this  happy  time  is  so  closely  con-nected  with  my  recollection  of the  Jesuits,  that  I love  the  one  for  thesake  of the  other;  and,  although  I have  always  considered  their  doc-trines  dangerous,  I have  never  been  able  to  bring  myself  to  hatethem  cordially.I should  much  like  to  know,  whether  the  same  childish  ideas  everenter  the hearts  of other  men  as  sometimes  enter  mine.  In  the  midstof my  studies,  in  the  course  of  a  life  as  blameless  as  a  man  couldhave  led, the fear  of hell  still  frequently  troubled  me.  I asked  myself:“In  what  state  am  I?  If  I were  to  die  this  moment,  should  I bedamned?”  According  to  my  Jansenists,  there  was  no  doubt  aboutthe  matter;  but,  according  to  my  conscience,  I thought  differently.Always  fearful,  and  a  prey  to  cruel  uncertainty,  I had  recourse  tothe  most  laughable  expedients  to  escape  from  it, for  which  I wouldunhesitatingly  have  anyone  locked  up as  a  madman  if I saw  him  do-ing as  I did.  One  day, while  musing  upon  this  melancholy  subject,  Imechanically  amused  myself  by throwing  stones  against  the  trunksof trees  with  my  usual  good  aim,  that  is to  say,  without  hardly  hit-ting one.  While  engaged  in this  useful  exercise,  it occurred  to  me  todraw  a  prognostic  from  it to  calm  my  anxiety.  I said  to  myself:  “TTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU252will  throw  this  stone  at  the  tree  opposite;  if I hit  it,  I am  saved;  if Imiss  it,  I am  damned.”  While  speaking,  I threw  my  stone  with  atrembling  hand  and a terrible  palpitation  of  the  heart,  but  with  sosuccessful  an  aim  that  it hit  the  tree  right  in  the  middle,  which,  totell  the  truth,  was  no  very  difficult  feat,  for  I had  been  careful  tochoose  a  tree  with  a  thick  trunk  close  at  hand.  From  that  time  I havenever  had  any  doubt  about  my  salvation!  When I recall  this  char-acteristic  incident,  I do  not  know  whether  to  laugh  or  cry  at  myself.You  great  men,  who  are  most  certainly  laughing,  may  congratulateyourselves;  but  do  not  mock  my  wretchedness,  for  I swear  to  youthat  I feel  it deeply.However,  these  troubles  and  alarms,  perhaps  inseparable  frompiety,  were  not  lasting.  As  a  rule  I was  tolerably  calm,  and  the  im-pression  which  the  idea  of  a  speedy  death  produced  upon  my  soulwas  not  so  much  one  of  sadness  as  of  peaceful  resignation,  whicheven  had  its  charm.  I have  just  found,  amongst  some  old  papers,  akind  of  exhortation  addressed  to  myself,  in  which  I congratulatedmyself  upon  dying  at  an  age  when  a  man  feels  sufficient  courage  inhimself  to  look  death  in the face, and  without  having  undergone  anygreat  sufferings,  either  bodily  or  mental,  during  the  course  of  mylife.  My  judgment  was  only  too  correct!  a  presentiment  made  meafraid  of living  only  to  suffer.  It seemed  as  if I foresaw  the  destinywhich  awaited  me  in my  old  age.  I have  never  been  so  near  wisdomas  during  those  happy  days. Without  great  remorse  for  the past,  freefrom  all anxiety  regarding  the  future,  my  dominant  feeling  was  theenjoyment  of  the  present.  The  devout,  as  a  rule,  possess  a  smallamount  of very  lively  sensuality,  which  gives  a  favour  of rapturousenjoyment  to  the  innocent  pleasures  which  are  permitted  to  them.The  worldly  look  upon  this  as  a  crime  on  their  part,  I do not  knowwhy,—or  rather,  I know  quite  well;  they envy  in others  the taste  forsimple  pleasures  which  they  have  lost  themselves.  This  taste  I had,and  I found  it delightful  to  satisfy  it with  a  quiet  conscience.  Myheart,  still  fresh,  abandoned  itself  to  everything  with  a  childishpleasure,  or  rather,  if  I may  venture  to  say  so,  with  angelic  rapture;for, in truth,  these  quiet  enjoyments  possess  the  serene  charm  of thejoys of Paradise.  Dinners  on  the  grass  at  Montagnole,  suppers  in thearbour,  the  gathering  of the fruit,  the  vintage,  the  evenings  spent  inA  HAPPY  EXCURSION253assisting  our  people  to  pull off  the  fibres  of hemp—all  these  were  somany  festivals  for  us,  whéth  afforded  mamma  as  much  pleasure  asmyself.  Solitary  walks  possessed  a  still  greater  charm,  because  theheart  had  greater  freedom  of expansion.  Amongst  others,  I remem-ber one  which  marks  an  epoch in my  memory,  which  we  took  on  oneSt.  Louis’s  day,  after  whom  mamma  was  named.  We  set  out  alone,early  in  the  morning,  after  having  heard  mass  read  by a  Carmeliteat  daybreak  in  a  chapel  attached  to  the  house.  I had  proposed  thatwe  should  stroll  about  the  opposite  side  of the  valley,  which  we  hadnever  yet  visited.  We  had  sent  our  provisions  on  ahead,  for  the  ex-cursion  was  to  last  all  day.  Mamma,  although  somewhat  stout  andfat,  was  a  fairly  good  walker.  We  wandered  from  hill  to  hill,  fromthicket  to  thicket,  sometimes  in the  sun  and  frequently  in the  shade,resting  now  and  again,  forgetting  ourselves  for  hours,  talking  ofourselves,  our  union,  and  our  happy  lot, and  offering  up  prayers  forits continuance,  which  were  not  heard.  Everything  seemed  in’a  con-spiracy  to  enhance  the  happiness  of that  day.  A shower  of rain  hadrecently  fallen;  there  was  no  dust;  the  brooks  were  full  of  runningwater.  A slight,  fresh  breeze  stirred  the  leaves;  the  air  was  pure,  the‘horizon  cloudless;  the  sky was  as  serene  as  our  hearts.  We  took  ourdinner  at  a  peasant’s  house,  and  shared  it  with  his  family,  whoshowered  upon  us  heartfelt  blessings.  What  good  people  these  poorSavoyards  are!  After  dinner,  we  reached  the  shade  of some  tall  trees,where  mamma  amused  herself  with  botanising  amongst  the  under-wood,  while  I collected  some  dry  sticks  to  boil  our  coffee.  Mamma‘pointed  out  to  me  a'thousand  curious‘  things  in  the  structure  of theflowers  which  I had  picked  for  her  on  the  way,  which  greatly  de-lighted  me,  and  should-have  inspired  me  with  a  taste  for  botany;but  the  time  for  that  was  not  yet  come—I  was  too  fully  occupied  byother  studies,  I was  struck  by an  idea  which  diverted  my  mind  fromflowers  and  plants.  My  frame  of mind,  all  that  we  said  and  did  onthat  day,  all  the  objects  which  had  struck  my  attention,  recalled  tome  the dream  which  I had had at  Annecy  seven  or  eight years  before,of which  I have  given  an  account  in  its  proper  place.  The  resem-blance  was  so  striking  that,  when  I thought  of it,  I was  moved  to‘tears,  In’  a  transport  ‘of  ‘emotion  I  embraced.  my  dear  friend.‘“Mamma,  mamma,”  I said passionately,  “this  day  has  long  beenTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU254promised  to  me;  I can  imagine  no  greater  happiness.  My joy, thanksto  you,  is at  its  height.  May  it never  decline;  may  it last  as  long  as  Ifeel  its  charm;  it will  never  end  except  with  my  life!”Thus  passed  my  happy  days;  happier,  since  I saw  nothing  whichcould  disturb  them,  and  I only  conceived  it possible  for  them  to  endwhen  my  own  end  came.  Not  that  the  source  of  my  anxiety  wascompletely  exhausted;  but  I found  that  it  took  a  different  course,which  I did  my  best  to  direct  towards  useful  objects,  that  it mightcarry  its remedy  with  it. Mamma  was  naturally  fond  of the  country,and  this  taste  did  not  cool  while  she  was  with  me.  She  graduallyconceived  a liking  for  country  pursuits.  She  endeavoured  to  makeher  property  a  source  of  profit,  and  she  took  pleasure  in  making  apractical  use  of her  knowledge  of such  matters.  Not  content  with  theland  belonging  to  the  house,  she  rented  a  field  or  a meadow.  Direct-ing her  love  of enterprise  towards  agriculture,  she  soon  bid  fair  tobecome  a  regular  farmer,  instead  of remaining  idle  at  home.  I wasnot  particularly  pleased  to  see  her  enlarging  her  sphere  of  occupa-tion,  and  I opposed  it as  much  as  I could,  feeling  convinced  that  shewould  always  be  disappointed,  and  that  her  generous  and  extrava-gant  disposition  would  always  cause  the  expenditure  to  exceed  thereceipts.  However,  I consoled  myself  with  the  thought  that  thesereceipts  would  amount  to  something,  and  would  help her  to  live.  Ofall the  schemes  she  could  possibly  have  thought  of, this  appeared  tome  tke least  ruinous,  and  without  expecting  any  profit from  it as  shedid,  I saw  in  it a  continuous  occupation,  which  would  protect  herfrom  unlucky  undertakings  and  the  machinations  of swindlers.  Forthis  reason,  I was  eager  to  regain  sufficient  health  and  strength  toenable  me  to  watch  over  her  affairs  and  to  be  her  foreman  or  headworkman;  and  the exercise,  which  this obliged  me  to  take, often  tookme  away  from  my  books  and  diverted  my  thoughts  from  my  condi-tion,  so  that  my  health  was  naturally  improved.[1737-1741.]—The  following  winter  Barillot  returned  from  Italy.He  brought  me  some  books;  amongst  others,  the  “Bontempi”  andthe “Cartella  della  Musica,”  which  gave  me a taste  for the history  ofmusic  and  the  theoretical  investigation  of this  beautiful  art.  Barillotremained  with  us  some  time;  and,  as  I had  attained  my  majoritysome  months  ago,  it  was  agreed  that,  in  the  following  spring,  IHIS  LEGACY255should  go  to  Geneva  to  claim  my  mother’s  fortune,  or,  at  least,  theshare  that  came  to  me,  unail  it should  be  discovered  what  had  be-come  of my  brother.  This  plan was  carried  out as  had been  arranged:I went  to  Geneva,  where  I was  joined  by my  father.  He  had  for  sometime  been  in the habit  of visiting  the place  without  anyone  molestinghim,  although  the  decree  against  him  was  still  in  force;  but,  as  hewas  esteemed  for  his  courage  and  respected  for  his  honesty,  it waspretended  that  his  little  affair  was  forgotten;  and  the  magistratesbusy  with  the  grand  scheme,  which  soon  afterwards  burst  forth  inall its glory,  did  not  desire  to  irritate  the  middle  classes  prematurely,by reminding  them  of  their  former  partisanship  at  an  inopportunemoment.I was  afraid  of  difficulties  being  raised  in  consequence  of  mychange  of religion,  but  found  none.  The  laws  of Geneva  are  iv.  thisrespect  not  so  severe  as  those  of Berne,  where  anyone  who  ch ngeshis  religion  loses,  not  only  his  status,  but  his  property  as  well,  Myclaims  were  not  disputed,  but  the  inheritance  itself,  for  some  rı asonor  other  which  I do not  know,  was  reduced  to  a  very  small  suri.  Al-though  it was  almost  certain  that  my  brother  was  dead,  there  was  nolegal  proof  of this.  I had  not  sufficient  title  to  claim  his  share,  and  Iwillingly  left  it  to  help  to  support  my  father,  who,  as  long  as  helived,  enjoyed  the  use  of  it.  As  soon  as  the  legal  formalities  wereconcluded  and  I received  my  money,  I laid  out  part  of it in  books,and  flew  to  lay the  rest  at  mamma’s  feet.  During  the  journey  myheart  beat  with  joy,  and,  at  the  moment  when I placed  this  moneyin  her  hands,  I was  a  thousand  times  happier  than  when  it  wasplaced  in  mine.  She  received  it with  the  simplicity  of  all  beautifulsouls,  who,  finding  no  difficulty  in  such  actions  themselves,  are  notastonished  when  they  see  them  performed  by  others.  The  moneywas  laid  out  almost  entirely  upon  myself,  with  the  same  simplicity.It would  have  been  employed  in exactly  the  same  manner,  if it hadcome  from  any  other  source.Meanwhile,  my  health  was  not  completely  re-established;  on,  thecontrary,  I was  visibly  wasting  away.  I was  as  pale  as  a  corpse  andthin  as  a  skeleton.  The  beating  of my  veins  was  terrible;  the  palpita-tions  of my  heart  were  more  frequent.  I continually  suffered  fromshortness  of breath,  and  my  weakness  at  length  became  so  gyviat  thatTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU256I could  scarcely  move.  I could  not  walk  fast  without a feeling  of suf-focation;  I could  not  stoop  without  turning  giddy;  I could  not  liftthe smallest  weight;  and  I was  forced  to  remain  inactive,  the greatesttorment  for a  man  as  restless  as  I was.  There  is no  doubt  that  my  ill-ness  was,  to  a great  extent,  attributable  to  hysteria.  This,  which  is theailment  of  happy  people,  was  mine.  The  tears  which  I often  shedwithout  any  cause  for  weeping,  my  lively  charm  at  the  rustling  of aleaf  or  the  chirping  of a  bird,  my  changeable  disposition  amidst  thecalm  of a  most  happy  life—all  these  were  indications  of that  weari-ness  caused  by happiness,  which,  so  to  speak,  leads  to  an  extravagantsensibility.  We  are  so  little  formed  for  happiness  in  this  world,  thatof necessity  the  soul  or  the body must  suffer,  when  they do not  suffertogether,  and  a  happy  condition  of the  one  nearly  always  injures  theother.  When  I might:have  enjoyed  life  heartily,  the  decaying  ma-chinery  of  my  body  prevented  me  without  anyone  being  able  tolocalise  the cause  of the  evil.  Later,  my  body, in spite of my  decliningyears  and  very  real  and  painful  sufferings,  appears  to  have  regainedits  strength,  in  order  to  feel  my  sufferings  more  keenly;  and,  whileĮ am  writing  these  words,  weak  and  almost  sixty  years  of age,  over-whelmed  by pains  of every  description,  I feel  that  I possess  more  lifeand  strength  for  suffering  than  I possessed  for  enjoyment  in  theflower  of my  age  and  in the  bosom  of the  truest  happiness.By way  of  reducing  myself  completely,  after  having  read a littlephilosophy,  I began  the  study  of anatomy,  and  took  a  survey  of thenumber  and  working  of  the  individual  parts  which  composed  mybodily  machine.  Twenty  times  a  day I was  prepared  to  feel  the wholeout  of gear.  Far  from  being  astonished  at  finding  myself  in a  dyingcondition,  I only  felt  surprised  that  I was  still  able  to  live,  and  I be-lieved  that  every  complaint  of which  I read  the  description  was  myown.  I am  convinced  that, if I had  not  been  ill, this  fatal  study  wouldhave  made  me  so.  Finding  in  each  complaint  the  symptoms  of myown,  I thought  that  I was  suffering  from  all; and  thereby  contractedone,  which  was  still  more  cruel  than  all  the  rest,  and  from  which  Ithought  I was  free,—an  eager  desire  to  be cured,  which  it is difficultfor  a  man  to  escape,  when  once  he begins  to  read  medical  books.  Bydint  of research,  reflection,  and  comparison,  I came  to  the conclusionthat  the foundation  of  my  malady  was a polypus  of the  heart,  and‘lucas aa  ale TO  MONTPELLIER257Salomon  himself  seemed  struck  by  this  idea.  These  suppositionsshould  reasonably  have  confirmed  me  in  my  previous  resolutions.But  this  was  not  the case.  I exerted  all my  mental  powers  to  discoverhow  polypus  of  the  heart  could  be  healed,  resolved  to  undertakethis  marvellous  cure.  Anet,  during  a  journey  which  he  made  toMontpellier,  to  visit  the  botanical  gardens  and  the  demonstrator,  M.Sauvages,  had  been  told  that  M.  Fizes  had  cured  such  a  polypus.Mamma  remembered  this, and  mentioned  it to  me.  This  was  enoughto  inspire  me  with  a longing  to  go and  consult  M. Fizes.  The  hope ofbeing cured  restored  my courage,  and  gave  me  strength  to  undertakethe  journey.  The  money  which  I had  brought  from  Geneva  fur-nished  the  means;  and  mamma,  far from  attempting  to  dissuade  me,encouraged  me  to  go.  Behold  me,  then,  on  my  way  to  Montpellier!I had  no  need  to go  so  far  to  find  the physician  I required.  As  ridingfatigued  me  too  much,  I took  a carriage  at  Grenoble.  At Moirans  fiveor  six other  carriages  arrived,  one  after  the other,  after  my  own.  Thistime  it was,  in  truth,  the  story  of  the  sedan-chairs.®°  Most  of  thesecarriages  formed  part  of  the  equipage  of  a  newly-wedded  bride,whose  name  was  Madame  du  Colombier.  She  was  accompanied  byanother  lady,  Madame  de  Larnage,  who  was  younger  and  not  sogood-looking,  but  equally  amiable,  who  intended  to  proceed  fromRomans,  where  Madame  du Colombier  was  stopping,  to  the  town  ofSt.  Andiol,  near  the  Pont-Saint-Esprit.  Considering  my  well-knownshyness,  it will  not  be imagined  that  I readily  made  the acquaintanceof  these  elegant  ladies  and  their  suite;  but  at  last,  as  I travelled  bythe same  route,  stopped  at  the  same  inns, and, under  penalty  of beingconsidered  a  regular  boor,  was  obliged  to  appear  at  the  same  table,it became  impossible  for me  to  avoid  making  the acquaintance.  I didso,  and  even  sooner  than  I could  have  wished,  for  all  this  bustle  wasill-suited  to  a  sick  man,  especially  one  of my  temperament.  But  curi-osity  makes  these  roguish  creatures  so  insinuating,  that,  in  order  tomake  a  man’s  acquaintance,  they begin  by turning  his head.  This  iswhat  happened  to  me.  Madame  du  Colombier  was  too  closely  sur-rounded  by young  dandies  to  have  time  to  make  advances  to  me,and  besides,  it was  not  worth  while,  since  we  were  soon  to  separate;but  Madame  de Larnage,  who  was  not  so  beset  by admirers,  had  to€ From  Scarron’s  Roman  Comique:  see  p.  144.CtTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU28make  provision  for  her  journey.  It  was  Madame  de  Larnage  whoundertook  my  conquest;  and, from  that time, it was  good-bye  to poorJean  Jacques,  or  rather  to  my  fever,  hysteria,  and  polypus—good-byeto  everything,  when  in  her  company,  with  the  exception  of certainpalpitations  of the  heart,  which  remained,  and  of which  she  showedno  inclination  to  cure  me.  The  bad  state  of my  health  was  our  firstsubject  of conversation.  They saw  that  I was  ill; they knew  that I wasgoing  to  Montpellier;  and  my  appearance  and  manners  must  havemade  it clear  that  I was  no  profligate,  for  it was  evident,  from  whatfollowed,  that  they  did  not  suspect  that  I was  going  there  in  orderto  be  cured  of  the  effects  of  debauchery.  Although  ill-health  is  nogreat  recommendation  amongst  women,  it made  me  interesting  invhe eyes  of these  ladies.  In the morning  they sent  to  know  how  I was,and  invited  me  to  take  chocolate  with  them;  and  asked  me  how  Ihad  passed the night. On  one  occasion,  in accordance  with  my  praise-worthy  habit  of  speaking  without  thinking,  I answered  that  I did`  not  know.  This  answer  made  them  think  that  I was  mad.  They  ex-amined  me  more  closely,  and  this  examination  did  me  no  harm.  I“once  heard  Madame  du  Colombier  say  to  her  friend:  “He  has  noinanners,  but  he is amiable.”  This  word  greatly  encouraged  me,  andcaused  me  to  act  up  to  it.As  we  became  more  intimate,  I was  obliged  to  speak  about  my-self; to  say  who I was,  and  where  I came  from.  This  caused  me  someembarrassment,  for I clearly  saw  that the word  “convert”  would  ruinme  in  polite  society  and  amongst  ladies  of  fashion.  I do  not  knowwhat  curious  whim  prompted  me  to  pass  myself  off  as  an  English-man.  I gave  myself  out  as  a  Jacobite.  I called  myself  Dudding,  andthey  called  me  Mr.  Dudding.  A confounded  Marquis  de  Torignan,who  was  with  us,  an  invalid  like  myself,  and  old  and  ill-temperedinto  the bargain,  took  it into  his head  to enter  into  conversation  withMr.  Dudding.  He  talked  to  me  about  King  James,  the  Pretender,and  the  old  Court  of Saint-Germain.  I was  on  thorns:  I knew  noth-ing about  them,  except  the  little  I had  read  in Count  Hamilton  andthe  newspapers;  but  I made  such  good  use  of my  scanty  knowledgethat I got out  of it pretty  well.  Luckily,  no  one  thought  of asking  meabout  the  English  language,  of which  I did  not  understand a singleword.MADAME  DE  LARNAGE259We  got  on  exceedingly  well  together,  and  looked  forward  withregret  to  our  separation.  We  travelled  at  a  snail’s  pace  by day.  OneSunday  we  found  ourselves  at  Saint-Marcellin.  Madame  de  Lar.narge  wanted  to  attend  mass,  and  I accompanied  her,  which  nearlyspoilt  my  game.  I behaved  during  service  as  I had  always.  been  inthe  habit  of  doing.  From  my  modest  and  reserved  behaviour  sheconcluded  that  I was  a  devotee,  which  gave  her  the  worst  possibleopinion  of  me,  as  she  confessed  to  me  two  days  later.  It  requiredgreat  efforts  of gallantry  on  my  part  to  efface  this  unfavourable  im-pression;  or  rather,  Madame  de  Larnage,  like  a  woman  of  expe-rience,  not  being  easily  discouraged,  was  willing  to  run  the  risk  ofmaking  advances  to  see  how  I would  extricate  myself.  She  madethem  so  freely  and  in such  a  manner  that,  since  I thought  nothing  ofmy  personal  appearance,  I believed  she  was  laughing  at  me.  In  thisridiculous  idea,  there  was  no  kind  of folly  that  I did  not  commit:  1was  worse  than  the  Marquis  du  Legs.”  Madame  de  Larnage  stoodher ground;  tried  to  tempt  me  so  often  and  spoke  so  tenderly  to  me,that  a  wiser  man  than  myself  would  have  found  difficulty  in takingit all  seriously.  The  more  she  persisted,  the  more  she  confirmed  mein my  belief;  and  what  tormented  me  still  more  was,  that  I becameseriously  enamoured  of her.  I said,  with  a  sigh, to  myself  and  to  her:“Ah!  if all you  say  were  only true,  I should  be the  happiest  of men.”I believe  that  my  raw  simplicity  only  piqued  her  fancy,  and  that  shewas  unwilling  to  acknowledge  a  defeat.We  had  left  Madame  du Colombier  and  her  suite  at  Romans.  Wecontinued  our  journey,  slowly  and  most  agreeably,—Madame  deLarnage,  the  Marquis  de  Torignan,  and  myself.  The  Marquis,  al-though  an  invalid  and  a  grumbler,  was  a  decent  fellow,  but  was  notbest  pleased  at  seeing  other  people  enjoying  themselves  without  be-ing able  to  do so  himself.  Madame  de Larnage  took  so  little  trouble7  A  character  in  Marivaux’s  comedy,  who  is  in  love  for  the  first  time,  and,being  of an  exceedingly  timid  disposition,  is  afraid  to  make  a  declaration;  whilethe  character  of  the  Countess  is exactly  the  opposite.  The  plot  turns  on  a  legacy(legs):  hence  the  name.8 Manger  son  pain  à la fumée  du  rôti:  literally,  “To  eat  bread  when  he  couldsmell  roast  meat.”THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU260to  conceal  her  fancy  for  me,  that  he  perceived  it  sooner  than  I didmyself,  and  his  malicious  sarcasms  should  at  least  have  given  me  theconfidence  which  I did  not  venture  to  draw  from  the  lady’s  ad-vances,  had  I not  imagined,  in a  spirit of perversity,  of which  I alonewas  capable,  that they had.  come  to  an  understanding  to amuse  them-selves  at  my  expense.  This  foolish  idea  at  last  completely  turned  myhead,  and  made  me  play the  utter  simpleton  in a  situation  in  whichmy  heart,  being  really  smitten,  might have  instructed  me  to  act  a  farmore  distinguished  part.  I cannot  understand  how  it was  that  Ma-dame  de Larnage  was  not  disgusted  with  my  sullenness,  and  did  notdismiss  me  wtih  utter  contempt.  But  she  was  a  clever  woman,  whounderstood  the  people  she  had  to  deal  with,  and  saw  clearly  thatthere  was  more  silliness  than  lukewarmness  in  my  behaviour.She  at  last  succeeded,  with  some  difficulty,  in  making  herselfunderstood.  We  had  reached  Valence  in  time  for  dinner,  and,  ac-cording  to  our  praiseworthy  custom,  remained  there  for  the  rest  ofthe  day. We  put  up  outside  the  town,  at  Saint-Jacques.  I shall  neverforget  this  inn  or  the  room  which  Madame  de  Larnage  occupied.After  dinner  she  wanted  to  go  for  a  walk.  She  knew  that  the  Mar-quis  was  not  fond  of walking.  It was  a  plan  to  secure  for  herself  atéte-a-téte,  which  she  had  resolved  to  make  the  most  of, for  therewas  no  more  time  to  be lost, if any  was  to  be left  to  make  use  of. Wewalked  round  the  town,  along  the  moats.  I recommenced  the  longstory  of my  complaints,  to  which  she  replied  so  tenderly,  sometimespressing  my  arm  to  her  heart,  that  only  stupidity  like  mine  couldhave  prevented  me  from  being  convinced  that  she  spoke  seriously.The  unaccountable  thing  was,  that  I myself  was  greatly  affected.  Ihave  said  that  she  was  amiable;  love  made  her  charming;  it restoredall the  brightness  of her  early youth,  and  she  managed  her  advancesso  cunningly,  that  she  would  have  seduced  a  man  of  the  greatestexperience.  I was  very  ill  at  ease,  and  frequently  on  the  point  oftaking  liberties;  but  the  fear  of offending  or  displeasing  her, and  thestill  greater  dread  of being  derided,  laughed  at,  mocked,  of provid-ing  an  anecdote  for  the  table,  and  being  complimented  upon  mycourage  by the  merciless  Marquis,  kept me  back  and  made  me  feelirritated  at  my  foolish  bashfulness,  and  at  my  inability  to  overcomeit, while  I reproached  myself  with  it.  I was  on  the rack.  I had  alreadyMADAME  DE  LARNAGE261abandoned  my  timid  language,®  the  absurdity  of which  I felt,  nowthat  I was  so  well  on  the  rad;  but  as  I did  not  know  how  to  act  orwhat  to  say,  I held  my  tongue  and  looked  sulky.  In  a  word,  I dideverything  that  was  calculated  to bring upon  me  the treatment  whichI feared.  Happily,  Madame  de  Larnage  was  more  humane.  Sheabruptly  interrupted  the  silence  by putting  her  arm  round  my  neck,while,  at  the  same  time,  her  mouth,  pressed  upon  my  own,  spoketoo  clearly  for  me  to  have  any  further  doubt.  The  crisis  could  nothave  occurred  at  a  more  happy  moment.  I became  amiable.  It wastime.  She had  given  me  the confidence,  the want  of which  has alwaysprevented  me  from  being natural.  For  once  I was  myself:  never  havemy  eyes,  my  senses,  my  heart  and  my  mouth  spoken  so  well;  neverhave  I repaired  my  errors  so  completely;  and  if this  little  conquesthad  cost  Madame  de  Larnage  some  trouble,  I had  reason  to  believethat  she  did  not  regret  it.If I were  to  live  a  hundred  years,  I could  never  think  of this charm-ing woman  without  delight.  I use  the  word  charming,  because,  al-though  she  was  neither  young  nor  beautiful,  and  yet neither  old  norugly,  there  was  nothing  in her  face  to  prevent  her  intellect  and  gracefrom  exercising  their  full  effect.  In  complete  contrast  to  otherwomen,  her  least  freshness  was  in  her  face,  and  I believe  that  theuse  of rouge  had  ruined  it. She  had  reasons  for her easy  virtue:  it wasthe best  way  in which  she  could  assert  all her  charms.  It was  possibleto  look  at  her  without  loving  her;  it was  impossible  to  possess  herwithout  adoring  her.  This  seems  to  me  to  prove  that  she  was  notalways  so  lavish  of her  favours  as  she  was  with  me.  Her  advances  tome  had  been  too  sudden  and  lively  to  be excusable;  but  her  heart  atleast  had  as  much  to  do  with  it as  her  senses,  and,  during  the  briefand  delicious  period  which  I spent  with  her, I had  reason  to  believe,from  the  forced  moderation  which  she  imposed  upon  me,  that,  al-though  sensual  and  voluptuous,  she thought  more  of my  health  thanher  own  pleasure.The  understanding  between  us  did  not  escape  the  Marquis.  Hedid  not,  however,  leave  off chaffing  me,  but, on  the  contrary,  treated? Mes  propos  de  Céladon:  “My  Celadonic  way  of  speaking.”  Céladon  was  oneof the characters  in  the  “Astrée,”  a  celebrated  romance  by Honoré  d'Urfé  (1568-1625),  and  came  to  be  used  for  a  devoted  but  bashful  lover.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU262me  more  than  ever  as  a  bashful  lover,  a  martyr  to  his  lady’s  cruelty.Not  a  word,  not  a  smile,  not  a  look  escaped  him,  which  could  havemade  me  suspect  that  he  had  found  us  out;  and  I should  have  be-lieved  that  he had  been  deceived  by us,  had  not  Madame  de Larnage,who  was  keener  than  I was,  told  me  that  this  was  not  the  case,  butthat  he was  a chivalrous  man;  and, indeed,  no  one  could  have  shownmore  polite  attention,  or  behaved  more  courteously  than  he  alwaysdid,  even  towards  myself,  with  the  exception  of  his  raillery,  espe-cially  after  my  success.  He  perhaps  attributed  the  credit  of it to  me,and  considered  me  not  such a fool  as  I had  appeared  to  be.  He  wasmistaken,  as  has  been  seen:  but  no  matter,  I profited  by his  mistake;and  it is true  that,  since  I now  had  the  laugh  on  my  side,  I enduredhis  epigrams  with  good  heart  and  grace,  and  sometimes  retorted,even  happily,  proud  to  be able  to  exhibit,  in the  presence  of Madamede Larnage,  the wit  with  which  she  had  credited  me.  I was  no  longerthe  same  man.We  were  in a  country  and a season  of good  cheer;  and,  thanks  tothe  Marquis,  we  enjoyed  it to  the  full.  I could  have  dispensed  withhis extending  his attentions  even  to  our  bedrooms;  but he always  senthis  lackey  to  engage  them  in  advance,  and  this  rascal,  either  on  hisown  responsibility  or  by the  Marquis’s  instructions,  always  took  aroom  for  him  next  to  Madame  de Larnage,  while  I was  poked  awayat  the  other  end  of  the  house.  But  this  caused  me  little  embarrass-ment,  and  only  added  piquancy  to  our  rendezvous.  This  delightfullife lasted  four  or  five  days,  during  which  I was  intoxicated  with  thesweetest  pleasures.  They  were  unadulterated  and  lively,  without  theleast  alloy of pain,  the first  and  only pleasures  of the kind  that  I haveenjoyed;  and  I can  only say  that  I owe  it to  Madame  de Larnage  thatI shall  not  leave  the  world  without  having  known  the  meaning  ofpleasure.If my  feeling  for  her  was  not  exactly  love,  it was  at  least  so  tendera  return  for  the  love  which  she  showed  for  me,  it was  a  sensualityso  burning  in  its  satisfaction,  and  an  intimacy  so  sweet  in  its  inter-course,  that  it had  all  the  charm  of  passion  without  that  deliriurnwhich  turns  the  brain  and  spoils  enjoyment.  I have  only  felt  truelove  once  in my  life, and  it was  not  with  her.  Nor  did  I love  her  as  Ihad  loved,  and  still  loved,  Madame  de  Warens;  but  for  that  veryMADAME  DE  LARNAGE263reason  the  possession  of  her  afforded  me  a  hundred  times  greaterenjoyment.  With  mamma,  my  pleasure  was  always  disturbed  by afeeling  of  sadness,  by a  secret  feeling  of  oppression  at  the-heart,which  I found  difficult  to  overcome.  Instead  of congratulating  my-self  upon  possessing  her,  I reproached  myself  with  degrading  her.With  Madame  de Larnage,  on  the contrary,  I was  proud  of my  man-hood  and  my  happiness,  and  abandoned  myself  with  confident  joyto  the  satisfaction  of  my  desires.  I shared  the  impression  which  Iproduced  upon  hers.  I was  sufficiently  master  of myself  to  regard  mytriumph  with  as  much  self-complacency  as  pleasure,  and  to  derivefrom  it the  means  of redoubling  it.I do  not  remember  where  the  Marquis,  who  belonged  to  the  dis-trict,  left  us;  but  we  were  alone  when  we  reached  Montélimar,where  Madame  de  Larnage  made  her  maid  get  into  my  carriage,while  I travelled  in  her  own.  I can  assure  you  that  in  this  mannerwe  did  not  find  the  journey  tedious,  and  I should  have  found  itdifficult  to  describe  the  country  through  which  we  passed.  She  wasdetained  at  Montélimar  three  days on  business,  during  which,  how-ever,  she  only  left  me  for  a  quarter  of an  hour  to  pay a visit,  whichbrought  her  in  return  some  importunate  and  pressing  invitations,which  she  was  by no  means  disposed  to  accept.  She  pleaded  indis-position,  which  did  not,  however,  prevent  us  from  walking  togetheralone  every  day  in  the  most  beautiful  country  and  under  the  mostbeautiful  sky in  the  world.  Oh,  those  three  days!  I have  had  reasonto  regret  them  sometimes!  I have  never  enjoyed  their  like  again!Travelling  amours  cannot  last.  We  were  obliged  to  separate,  andI confess  that  it was  time:  not  that  I was  surfeited,  or  anything  likeit;  I became  more  attached  to  her  every  day;  but, in  spite  of her  dis-cretion,  I had  little  left  except  goodwill,  and,  before  we  separated,  Iwished  to  enjoy  that  little,  which  she  submitted  to,  by way  of pre-caution  against  the  young  ladies  of  Montpellier.  We  beguiled  ourregrets  by forming  plans to  meet  again.  It was  decided  that  I shouldcontinue  the  treatment,  which  did  me  considerable  good,  and  spendthe  winter  at  Saint-Andiol  under  her  superintendence.  I was  to  stayonly  five  or  six  weeks  at  Montpellier,  to  allow  her  time  to  arrangethe  necessary  preliminaries,  to  prevent  scandal.  She  gave  me  full  in-structions  about  what  it was  necessary  for  me  to  know,  what  I wasTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU264to  say,  and  the  manner  in  which  I was  to  behave.  Meanwhile,  wewere  to  write  to  each  other.  She  spoke to  me  long and  seriously  aboutthe  care  of my  health,  advised  me  to  consult  some  clever  physicians,to  follow  their  instructions  carefully,  and  took  upon  herself  to  makeme  carry  out  their  directions,  however  strict  they  might  be, as  longas  I was  with  her.  I believe  that  she  spoke  sincerely,  for  she  lovedme.  Of  this  she  gave  me  numerous  proofs,  more  reliable  than  herfavours.  From  my  style  of  travelling,  she  judged  that  I  was  notrolling  in  money;  and,  although  she  herself  was  by no  means  welloff,  she  wanted  to  make  me  share  the  contents  of her  purse,  whichshe  had  brought  pretty  well  filled  from  Grenoble,  and  I had  thegreatest  difficulty  in making  her  accept  my  refusal.  At last  I left  her,my  heart  full  of her,  and  leaving,  as  I believe,  a  true  attachment  formyself  in  her  own.I finished  my  journey,  while  going  over  it again  in  my  memoryfrom  the  beginning,  and  for  the  moment  I was  very  well  content  tosit  in  a  comfortable  carriage  and  dream  at  my  ease  of the  pleasureswhich  I had  enjoyed  and  of  those  which  were  promised  to  me.  Ithought  of nothing  but  Saint-Andiol,  and  the  delightful  life  whichawaited  me  there.  I saw  nothing  but  Madame  de  Larnage  and  hersurroundings:  the rest  of the world  was  nothing  to  me:  even  mammawas  forgotten.  I employed  myself  in  arranging  in  my  head  all  thedetails  into  which  Madame  de Larnage  had  entered,  in order  to  giveme  beforehand  an  idea  of her house,  her neighbourhood,  her  friends,and  her  manner  of life.  She  had  a  daughter,  of whom  she  had  oftenspoken  to  me  in terms  of most  lavish  affection.  This  daughter  was  inher  sixteenth  year,  lively,  charming,  and  amiable.  Madame  de  Lar-nage  had  promised  me  that  I was  sure  to  be  a  great  favourite  withher.  I had  not  forgotten  the  promise,  and  I was  very  curious  to  seehow  Mademoiselle  de Larnage  would  behave  towards  her  mamma’sgood  friend.  Such  were  the  subjects  of my  reveries  from  Pont-Saint-Esprit  to  Remoulin.  I had  been  told to  go  and  see  the Pont  du Gard,and  did  not  fail  to  do  so.  It  was  the  first  Roman  work  that  I hadseen.  I expected  to  see  a monument  worthy  of the  hands  which  haderected  it; for  once,  and  for the  only time  in my  life, the  reality  sur-passed  the  expectation.  Only  the Romans  could  have  produced  suchan.effect}  su wpti  a aaaATHE  AMPHITHEATRE  AR  NIMES265The  sight of this  simple, yet noble,  work  produced  the greater  im-pression  upon  me,  as  it was  situated  in the  midst  of a  desert,  wheresilence  and  solitude  bring  the  object  into  greater  prominence,  andarouse  a livelier  feeling  of  admiration;  for  this  pretended  bridgewas  nothing  but  an  aqueduct.  One  naturally  asks  what  strength  hastransported  these  enormous  stones  so  far  from  any  quarry,  andunited  the  arms  of  so  many  thousands  of men  in  a  spot  where  notone  of them  dwells.  I went  through  the  three  storeys  of this  superbbuilding,  within  which  a feeling  of  respect  almost  prevented  mefrom  setting  foot.  The  echo  of  my  footsteps  under  these  immensevaults  made  me  imagine  that  I heard  the  sturdy  voices  of those  whohad  built  them.  I felt  myself  lost  like  an  insect  in  this  immensity.  Ifelt,  in  spite  of my  sense  of littleness,  as  if my  soul  was  somehow  orother  elevated,  and  I said  to  myself  with  a  sigh, “Why  was  I not  borna  Roman?”  I remained  there  several  hours  in  rapturous  contempla-tion.  I returned,  distracted  and  dreamy,  and  this  dreaminess was notfavourable  to  Madame  de Larnage.  She  had  been  careful  to  warn  meagainst  the  girls  of Montpellier,  but  not  against  the  Pont  du  Gard.One  never  thinks  of everything!At Nimes  I went  to  see  the amphitheatre.  It is a  far more  magnifi-cent  work  than  the  Pont  du  Gard,  but  it made  far  less  impressionupon  me;  either  the  latter  had  exhausted  my  powers  of admiration,or  the  former,  being  situated  in  the  midst  of  a  town,  was  less  cal-culated  to  arouse  them.  This  vast  and  splendid  circus  is surroundedby ugly  little  houses,  and  the  arena  is filled  with  other  houses,  stillsmaller  and  uglier,  so  that  the  aspect  of the  whole  produces  a  con-fused  and  incongruous  effect,  in which  regret  and  indignation  stiflepleasure  and  surprise.  Since  then  I have  seen  the  Circus  at  Verona,which  is  far  smaller  and  less  imposing,  but  is  kept  and  preservedwith  the  greatest  possible  neatness  and  cleanliness,  and  for  that  veryreason  produced  upon  me  a  more  forcible  and  agreeable  impression.The  French  take  care  of  nothing,  and  have  no  respect  for  monu-ments.  They  are  all  eagerness  to  undertake  anything,  but  do  notknow  how  to  finish,  or  keep  it in repair  when  it is finished.I was  so  changed,  and  my  sensuality,  which  had  been  roused  toactivity,  was  awakened  to  such  a  degree,  that  I remained  for a  whole:day at  the  Pont  du  Lunel,  in order  to  enjoy  its good  cheer  with  theTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU266other  visitors.  This  inn,  the  most  famous  in  Europe,  at  that  timedeserved  its  reputation.  Its  proprietors  had  known  how  to  take  ad-vantage  of its  excellent  position,  in order  to  keep  it abundantly  sup-plied with  choice  provisions.  It was  really  curious  to  find,  in a  lonelyand  isolated  house  in  the  middle  of  the  country,  a  table  furnishedwith  salt  and  fresh-water  fish,  excellent  game,  choice  wines,  servedwith  the  attention  and  civility  which  is only  found  in  the  houses  ofthe  great  and  wealthy—all  for  thirty-five  sous  a  head.  But  the  Pontdu  Lunel  did  not  long  remain  on  this  footing,  and,  by presumingtoo  much  on  its  reputation,  at  length  lost  it altogether.During  my  journey  I had  quite  forgotten  that  I was  ill:  I remem-bered  it when  I arrived  at  Montpellier.  My  attacks  of hysteria  werecertainly  cured,  but  all  my  other  ailments  remained;  and,  thoughfamiliarity  made  me  less  sensitive  to  them,  they  were  enough  tomake  anyone,  who  was  suddenly  attacked  by them,  fancy  himselfat  death’s  door.  In  fact,  they  were  more  alarming  than  painful,  andcaused  more  sufiering  of the  mind  than  of the  body,  the  destructionof which  they  seemed  to  announce.  Hence,  while  distracted  by vio-lent  passions,  I thought  no  more  of the  state  of my  health;  but, as  mycomplaints  were  not  imaginary,  I became  aware  of  them  again  assoon  as  I recovered  my  coolness.  J then  began  to  think  seriously  ofMadame  de  Larnage’s  advice,  and  the  object  of my  journey.  I con-sulted  the  most  famous  physicians,  particularly  M.  Fizes,  and,  byway  of  excessive  precaution,  boarded  with  a  doctor.  He  was  anIrishman,  named  Fitzmorris,  who  took  in a  considerable  number  ofmedical  students;  and  what  made  his  house  more  comfortable  for  aresident  patient  was,  that  he  was  satisfied  with  a  moderate  fee  forboard,  and  charged  his boarders  nothing  for  medical  attendance.  Heundertook  to  carry  out  M.  Fizes’  regulations,  and  to  look  after  myhealth.  As  far  as  diet  was  concerned,  he  acquitted  himself  admira-bly:  none  of his boarders  suffered  from  indigestion;  and,  although  Iam  not  very  sensible  to  privations  of this  kind,  the  opportunities  ofdrawing  comparison  were  so  near,  that  I could  not  help  sometimesthinking  to  myself  that  M.  de Torignan  was a better  purveyor  thanM.  Fitzmorris.  However,  as  we  were  not  absolutely  starved,  andthe young  students  were  very  cheerful,  this  way  of living  really  didBOARDS  WITH  A  DOCTOR26)me  good,  and  prevented  me  from  falling  into  my  former  state  ofdepression.  I spent  the merning  in taking medicines,  especially  somewaters,  which  I believe  came  from  Vals,  although  I am  not  certain,and  in writing  to  Madame  de Larnage;  for  the  correspondence  con-tinued,  and  Rousseau  undertook  to  fetch  his  friend  Dudding’sletters.  At noon  I took  a  walk  to  La Canourge  with  one  of our  youngmessmates,  all  of  whom  were  very  good  lads;  after  which  we  as-sembled  for dinner.  When  this  meal  was  over,  most  of us  engaged  inan  important  occupation  until  evening:  we  went a little  way  out  oftown  to  play  two  or  three  games  of mall  for  our  afternoon  tea.!°  ]did  not  play myself,  as  I possessed  neither  the  requisite  strength  norskill,  but  I betted  on  the  result.  In  this  manner,  interested  in  mywager,  I followed  our  players  and  their  balls  across  rough  and  stonyroads,  and  enjoyed  agreeable  and  healthy  exercise,  which  suited  meadmirably.  We  took  our  tea  at  an  inn  outside  the  city. I need  not  saythat  these  meals  were  very  lively;  but  I may  add  that  there  was  noth-ing  improper  about  them,  although  the  landlord’s  daughters  werevery  pretty.  M.  Fitzmorris,  who  was a great  player  himself,  was  ourpresident;  and  I can  declare  that, in spite of the  bad  reputation  of thestudents,  I found  more  decency  and  propriety  amongst  these  youngmen  than  it would  have  been  easy  to  find  amongst  an  equal  numberof  grown-up  men.  They  were  noisy  rather  than  licentious,  merryrather  than  profligate,  and  I become  so  easily  accustomed  to  anymanner  of life,  when  it is voluntary,  that  I could  have  desired  noth-ing better  than  a  continuance  of it. Amongst  the  students  were  sev-eral  Irish,  from  whom  I tried  to  learn  a  few  words  of  English,  inanticipation  of Saint-Andiol;  for  the time  of my  departure  was  closeat  hand.  Madame  de  Larnage  importuned  me  by every  post,  and  Iprepared  to  obey  her.  It was  clear  that  my  physicians,  who  did  notunderstand  my  complaint  at  all, regarded  it as  existing  only  in  myimagination,  and,  under  those  circumstances,  treated  me  with  theirChinaroot,  their  waters,  and  their  whey.  Physicians  and  philoso-phers, differing  entirely  from  theologians,  only admit  that  to  be truewhich  they  are  able  to  explain,  and  make  their  understanding  the10  Goáter:  a  light meal  between  dinner  and  supper.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU268measure  of what  is possible.  These  gentlemen  understood  nothingabout  my  complaint:  therefore  I was  not  ill at  all; for  of course  doc-tors  knew  everything.  I saw  that  they  were  only  trying  to  humbugme  and  make  me  waste  my  money;  and  as  I thought  that  their  sub-stitute  at  Saint-Andiol  would  do  that  just  as  well  as  they,  but  in  amore  agreeable  manner,  I resolved  to  give  her  the  preference,  and,with  this  wise  resolution,  I left  Montpellier.  I set  out  towards  theend  of November,  after  a  stay  of  six  weeks  or  two  months  in  thatcity, where  I left  behind  me  a  dozen  Jowis  d’or,  without  any  benefiteither  to  my  health  or  understanding,  with  the  exception  of a  courseof anatomy  which  I commenced  under  M.  Fitzmorris,  and  which  Iwas  obliged  to  give  up,  owing  to  the  fearful  stench  of  the  bodieswhich  were  dissected,  and  which  I found  it impossible  to  endure.Feeling  very  ill at  ease  concerning  the  resolution  that  I had  taken,I began  to  reflect  upon  it  as  I continued  my  journey  towards  thePont-Saint-Esprit,  which  was  the  road  to  Chambéri  as  well  as  Saint-Andiol.  The  remembrance  of mamma  and  her  letters,  although  shedid  not  write  to  me  so  often  as  Madame  de Larnage,  again  arousedin my  heart  the  remorse  which  I had  stifled  during  the  first  part  ofmy  journey,  and  which,  on  my  return,  became  so  keen  that,  counter-balancing  the  love  of  pleasure,  it put  me  in  a  condition  to  listen  toreason  alone.  In the  first  place, in the  rôle  of adventurer  which  I wasagain  going  to  play, I might  be less  fortunate  than  I had  been  on  theprevious  occasion:  it  only  needed,  in  the  whole  of  Saint-Andiol,  asingle person  who  had been  in England,  or  who  was  acquainted  withthe  English  manners  or  language,  to  expose  me.  Madame  de  Lar-nage’s  family  might  take  a  dislike  to  me  and  treat  me  with  dis-courtesy.  Her  daughter,  of whom,  in spite of myself,  I thought  morethan  I ought  to  have  done,  also  caused  me  considerable  uneasiness.I trembled  at  the  idea  of falling  in  love  with  her,  and  this  very  ap-prehension  half  finished  the business.  Was  I, by way  of repaying  themother’s  kindness,  to  attempt  to  lead  the  daughter  astray,  to  enterupon  a  most  detestable  connection,  to  bring  dissension,  dishonour,scandal,  even  hell  itself  into  her  house?  This  idea  horrified  me;  Ifirmly  resolved  to  resist  and  defeat  myself,  if this  wretched  inclina-tion  made  itself  felt.  But  why  expose  myself  to  such  a  struggle?What  a  miserable  state  of things  would  it be to  live with  the mother,VIRTUOUS  PRINCIPLES269of whom  I was  tired,  and  to  be burning  with  love  for  the  daughter,without  daring  to  discloSe  the  state  of my  feelings!  What  necessitywas  there  deliberately  to  seek  such  a  position,  to  expose  myself  tomisfortunes,  affronts  and  remorse,  for  the  sake  of  pleasures,  thegreatest  charm  of which  I had  exhausted  in advance?  for it is certain  -that  my  fancy  had  lost  its  early  vivacity.  The  taste  for  pleasure  wasstill  there,  but  not  passion.  With  these  thoughts  were  mingled  re-flections  upon  my  situation  and  my  duty,  and  thoughts  of that  goodand  generous  mamma,  whose  debts,  already  heavy,  were  increasedby my  foolish  expenditure,  who  drained  her  purse  for  my  sake  andwhom  I was  so  unworthily  deceiving.  This  reproach  became  so  livelythat  it finally  turned  the  scale.  When  I had  nearly  reached  the  Pont-Saint-Esprit,  I resolved  to  hasten  past  Saint-Andiol  without  stop-ping.  I carried  out  this  resolution  courageously,  with  a  few  sighs,  Iconfess,  but  also  with  the  inward  satisfaction  that,  for  the  first  timein my  life, I could  say  to  myself:  “I have  a  right to  think  well  of my-self;  I know  how  to  prefer  my  duty  to  my  pleasure.”  This  was  thefirst  real  advantage  for  which  I had  to  thank  my  studies;  they  hadtaught  me  to  reflect  and  compare.  After  the  virtuous  principleswhich  I had  so  recently  adopted,  after  the  rules  of  wisdom  andvirtue  which  I had  drawn  up  for  myself  and  which  I had  felt  suchpride  in  following,  a  feeling  of  shame  at  being  so  little  consistentwith  myself,  of  giving  the  lie  to  my  own  maxims  so  soon  and  soemphatically,  gained  the  victory  over  pleasure.  Perhaps  pride  hadas  much  to  do  with  my  resolution  as  virtue;  but,  if this  pride  is notvirtue  itself,  its  effects  are  so  similar  that  it is excusable  to  confoundthem.One  of the  good results  of virtuous  actions  is, that  they elevate  thesoul  and  incline  it to  attempt  something  even  better;  for  so  great  ishuman  weakness,  that  we  must  reckon  amongst  virtuous  actionsabstention  from  the  evil  which  we  are  tempted  to  commit.  As  soonas  I had  taken  my  resolution,  I became  another  man,  or  rather,  I be-came  the  man  I had  formerly  been,  whom  the  intoxication  of  themoment  had  caused  to  disappear.  Full  of good  sentiments  and  goodresolutions,  I continued  my  journey  with  the  intention  of expiatingmy  error,  thinking  only of regulating  my  future  conduct  by the lawsof virtue,  of devoting  myself  unreservedly  to  the  service  of the  bestTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU270of mothers,  of vowing  to  her  a  loyalty  equal  to  my  attachment,  andof listening  to  no  other  call  but  that  of my  duties.  Alas!  the  sincerityof my  return  to  virtue  appeared  to  promise  a  different  destiny;  butmy  own  was  already  written  and  begun,  and  at  the  moment  whenmy  heart,  full  of  love  for  all  that  was  good  and  honourable,  sawnothing  but  innocence  and  happiness  before  it,  I was  approachingthe  fatal  moment  which  was  destined  to  drag  behind  it  the  longchain  of my  misfortunes.My impatience  to  reach  home  made  me  travel  faster  than  I hadintended.  I had  sent  a  letter  to  mamma  from  Valence,  to  inform  herof the  day and  hour  of my  arrival.  As  I was  half  a  day in advance,  I.  spent  that  time  at  Chaparillan,  in  order  to  arrive  exactly  at  themoment  I had  fixed.  I wanted  to  enjoy  to  the  full  the  pleasure  ofseeing  her again.  I preferred  to  put it off a  little,  in order  to  add  to  itthe  pleasure  of being  expected.  This  precaution  had  always  provedsuccessful:  I had  always  found  my  arrival  celebrated  by a  kind  oflittle  holiday;  I expected-as  much  on  this  occasion,  and  these  atten-tions,  which  I felt  so  much,  were  worth  the  trouble  of procuring.I arrived,  then,  punctual  to  the  moment.  When I was  still  somedistance  off,  I looked  ahead  in  the  hope  of seeing  her  on  the  road;my  heart  beat  more  violently,  the  nearer  I approached.  I arrived  outof breath,  for  I had  left  my  carriage  in  town;  I saw  no  one  in  thecourt,  at  the  door,  or  at  the  window.  I began  to  feel  uneasy  andafraid  that  some  accident  had  happened.  I entered:  everything  wasquiet:  some  workmen  were  eating  in  the  kitchen:  there  were  nosigns  that  I was  expected.  The  maid  appeared  surprised  to  see  me:she  knew  nothing  about  my  coming.  I went  upstairs;  at  last  I sawher,  my  dear  mamma,  whom I loved  so  tenderly,  so  deeply  and  sopurely;  I ran  up to  her, and  threw  myself  at her  feet.  “Ah!”  said  she,embracing  me,  “you  are  back  again  then,  little  one!  have  you  had  apleasant journey?  how are  you?”  This  reception  somewhat  surprisedme.  I asked  her  whether  she  had  received  my  letter.  She  answered,“Yes.”  “I  should  not  have  thought  so,”  I said,  and  the  explanationended  there.  A young  man  was  with  her.  I remembered  having  seenhim  in the  house  before  I left, but  now  he seemed  established  there,as  in fact  he was.  In a  word,  I found  my  place  filled.This young  man  belonged  to the Vaud  country;  his father, namedM.  VINTZENRIED271Vintzenried,  was  keeper,  or,  as  he  called  himself,  Captain  of  theCastle  of Chillon.  The  sen  was  a  journeyman  wig-maker,  and  wastravelling  the  country  in  pursuit  of  his  calling,  when  he  first  pre-sented  himself  to  Madame  de Warens,  who  received  him  kindly,  asshe  received  all  travellers,  especially  those  from  her  own  country.He  was  tall, fair-haired,  insipid,  tolerably  well  set  up,  with  a  face  asdull  as  his  intellect,  and  spoke  like  a  beau  Léandre,"  mingling  allthe airs  and  tastes  of his calling  with  the long story  of his  conquests,and,  according  to  his  own  account,  mentioning  only  half  the  mar-chionesses  with  whom  he  had  slept,  and  boasting  that  he  had  neverdressed  a  pretty  woman’s  head  without  decorating  the  husband  aswell.  Vain,  foolish,  ignorant  and  insolent,  he  was  in  other  respectsthe  best  fellow  in the  world.  Such  was  the substitute  who  replacedme  during  my  absence  and  the  companion  who  was  offered  to  meafter  my  return.If souls,  when  freed  from  their  earthly  bonds,  still  look  down  fromthe bosom  of the  eternal  light upon  that  which  takes  place  upon  thisearth,  pardon  me,  dear  and  honoured  shade,  if  I  show  no  morefavour  to  your  faults  than  my  own,  but  unveil  both  equally  beforethe reader’s  eyes!  I must  and  will  be as  true  for you  as  for myself:  youwill always have  much  less to  lose than  I. Ah!  how  your  amiable  andgentle  character,  your  inexhaustible  goodness  of  heart,  your  frank-ness,  and  all  your  admirable  qualities  atone  for  your  weaknesses,  ifsimple  errors  of judgment  deserve  that  name!  You  erred,  but  youwere  free  from  vice;  your  conduct  was  blameworthy,  but your  heartwas  always  pure.The  new-comer  had  shown  himself  zealous,  diligent  and  carefulin carrying  out  her  numerous  little  commissions,  and  had  appointedhimself  foreman  of  her  labourers.  As  noisy  as  I was  quiet,  he  wasseen  and  heard  everywhere  at  once,  at  the  plough,  in the  hay-loft,  inthe  wood-house,  in  the  stable,  in the  farm-yard.  Gardening  was  theonly  thing  he  neglected,  because  the  work  was  too  quiet,  and  af-forded  no  opportunity  for  making  a  noise.  His  great  delight  was  toload  and  drive  a  waggon,  to  saw  or  chop wood:  he was  always  to  beseen  with  an  axe  or  pick in his  hand,  running,  hustling,  and  shout-1  One  of the  stock  characters  of Italian  comedy,  a  fop  who  takes  great  pride  inhis  personal  appearance,  and  is fond  of  displaying  his  ribbons  and  lace.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU272ing with  all his might.  I do not  know  how  many  men’s  work  he did,but  he  made  noise  enough  for  ten  or  a  dozen.  All  this  noise  andbustle  imposed  on  my  poor  mamma:  she  thought  that  in this  youngman  she  had  found a treasure  to  assist  her  in  business  matters.  Inorder  to  attach  him  to  her,  she  employed  all  the  means  she  thoughtlikely to  produce  this  result—not  forgetting  that  on  which  she placedmost  reliance.The  reader  must  have  gained  some  knowledge  of my  heart,  andof  its  truest  and  most  constant  feelings,  especially  those  whichbrought  me  back  to  her  at  this  moment.  What  a  sudden  and  com-plete  upset  of  my  whole  being!  To  judge  of  it, let  the  reader  puthimself  in my  place.  I saw  all the happy  future  which  I had  depictedto  myself  vanish  in a  moment.  All  the  dreams  of happiness  which  Ihad  so  fondly  cherished  disappeared,  and  I, who  from  my  youth  hadnever  considered  my  existence  except  in  connection  with  hers,  forthe  first  time  found  myself  alone.  This  moment  was  frightful!  thosewhich  followed  were  all  gloomy.  I was  still  young,  but  the  pleasantfeeling  of enjoyment  and  hope  which  animates  youth,  deserted  mefor  ever.  From  that  time  my  sensible  being  was  half  dead.  I sawnothing  before  me  but  the  melancholy  remains  of  an  insipid  life:and,  if now  and  again  an  image  of  happiness  floated  lightly  acrossmy  desires,  this  happiness  was  no  longer  that  which  was  peculiarlymy  own:  I felt that,  even  if I succeeded  in obtaining  it, I should  stillnot  be  really  happy.I was  so  simple,  and  my  confidence  was  so  great  that,  in  spite  ofthe  new-comer’s  familiar  tone,  which  I looked  upon  as  one  of theresults  of  mamma’s  easy-going  disposition,  which  attracted  every-one  towards  her, I should  never  have  suspected  the  real  reason  of it,unless  she had  told  me  herself;  but  she hastened  to  make  this  avowalwith  a  frankness  which  might  well  have  increased  my  rage,  if myheart  had  been  capable  of it. She  herself  considered  it quite a  simplematter,  reproached  me  with  my  carelessness  in  the  house,  and  ap-pealed  to  my  frequent  absences,  as  if  her  temperament  had  beensuch  that it required  the void  to  be filled  as  quickly  as  possible.  “Ah,mamma,”  I said to her, with  a heart  wrung  with  grief, “what  do youdare  to tell me?  What  a reward  for such  devotion  as  mine!  Have  youso  often  saved  my  life,  only  in  order  to  deprive  me  of that  whichGRIEF  AT  BEING  SUPPLANTED273made  it dear  to  me?  It will  kill  me,  but you  will  regret  my  loss.”  Shereplied,  with  a  calmness*calculated  to  drive  me  mad,  that  I was  achild,  that  people  did  not  die  of  such  thngs,  that  I  should  losenothing,  that  we  should  be equally  good  friends,  equally  intimate  inall  respects,  and  that  her  tender  attachment  to  me  could  neither -diminish  nor  end  except  with  her  own  life.  In  short,  she  gave  me  tounderstand  that  all  my  privileges  would  remain  the  same,  and  that,while  sharing  them  with  another,  I should  not  find  them  in any  waycurtailed.  Never  did  the purity,  truth  and  strength  of my  attachmentfor  her, never  did  the  sincerity  and  uprightness  of my  soul  make  it-self  more  plainly  felt  than  at  that  moment.  I threw  myself  at  herfeet, and,  shedding  floods  of tears,  clasped  her  knees.  “No,  mamma,”I exclaimed,  half  distracted,  “I  love  you  too  deeply  to  degrade  you;the possession  of you  is too  precious  for me  to  be able  to  share  it withanother;  the  regrets  which  I felt  when  you  first  bestowed  yourselfupon  me  have  increased  with  my  affection;  I cannot  retain  possessionof you  at  the  same  price.  I shall  always  worship  you:  remain  worthyof it:  I have  still  greater  need  to  respect  than  to  possess  you.  I resignyou  to  yourself;  to  the union  of our  hearts  I sacrifice  all my  pleasures.I would  rather  die  a  thousand  times  than  seek  an  enjoyment  whichdegrades  one  whom I love.”I remained  true  to  this  resolution,  with  a  steadfastness  worthy,  Iventure  to  say,  of the  feeling  which  had  produced  it.  From  that  mo-ment  I only  regarded  this  dear  mamma  with  the  eyes  of a  real  son;and  I must  observe  that,  although  my  resolution  did  not  meet  withher private  approbation,  as  I perceived  only  too  clearly,  she  never  at-tempted  to  make  me  abandon  it,  either  by insinuating  proposals,caresses,  or  any  of  those  clever  allurements  which  women  so  wellknow  how  to’  make  use  of  without  committing  themselves,  andwhich  are  rarely  unsuccessful.Compelled  to  seek  for  myself  a  lot  independent  of her,  and  un-able  even  to  think  of  one,  I soon  fell  into  the  other  extreme,  andsought it entirely  in her. There  I sought it so  completely  that  I almostsucceeded  in  forgetting  myself.  The  ardent  desire  to  see  her  happy,at  whatever  cost,  absorbed  all  my  affections.  It was  useless  for  herto  separate  her  happiness  from  mine;  I looked  upon  it as  my  own,in spite of her.274THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUThus,  together  with  my  misfortunes,  those  virtues  began  to  de-velop,  the  seeds  of  which  were  sown  at  the  bottom  of  my  heart,which  had  been  cultivated  by study,  and  only  waited  for  the  leavenof adversity  in  order  to  bear  fruit.  The  first  result  of this  disinterest-edness  was  the  removal  from  my  heart  of all  feeling  of hatred  andenvy  against  him  who  had  supplanted  me.  On  the contrary,  I desiredin  all  sincerity  to  become  intimate  with  this  young  man,  to  formhis  character,  to  educate  him,  to  make  him  sensible  of  his  happi-ness,  to  make  him  worthy  of it, if possible,  and,  in a  word,  to  do  forhim  all that  Anet  had  formerly  done  for me  in similar  circumstances,But  our  dispositions  were  not  alike.  Although  gentler  and  better  in-formed  than  Anet,  I possessed  neither  his  coolness  nor  firmness,  northat  force  of character  which  inspires  respect,  and  which  would  havebeen  necessary  to  insure  success.  Still  less  did  I find  in  this  youngman  the  qualities  which  Anet  had  found  in  me:  docility,  attach-ment,  gratitude,  and,  above  all,  the  consciousness  that  I needed  hisattention,  and  the  eager  desire  of profiting  by it. All  these  qualitieswere  wanting.  He  whom  I wanted  to  educate  considered  me  asnothing  more  than a tiresome  pedant,  who  could  do nothing  else  butchatter.  On  the other  hand,  he admired  himself  as  a person  of impor-tance  in  the  house;  and,  estimating  the  services  he  thought  he  ren-dered  by the  noise  he  made  about  them,  he  looked  upon  his  axesand  picks as  infinitely  more  useful  than  all my  old books.  In a certainsense,  he  was  right;  but,  starting  from  that,  he  gave  himself  airsenough  to  make  anyone  die  with  laughter.  With  the  peasants  he  at-tempted  to  play  the  country  gentleman.  He  soon  treated  me  in  thesame  way,  and  even  mamma  herself.  As  the  name  Vintzenried  didnot  appear  sufhciently  distinguished,  he  abandoned  it  for  that  ofM. de Courtilles,  by which  name  he was  afterwards  known  at Cham-béri,  and  in Maurienne,  where  he married.In  a  word,  this  illustrious  person  soon  became  everything  in  thehouse, and  I myself nothing.  If I had  the misfortune  to displease  him,it was  mamma,  not  I, whom  he scolded.  For  this  reason,  the  fear  ofexposing  her  to  his brutal  behaviour  rendered  me  subservient  to  allhis  wishes;  and,  whenever  he  chopped  wood—an  occupation  ofwhich  he  was  inordinately  proud—I  was  obliged  to  stand  by,  anidle spectator  and  quiet admirer  of his prowess.  His  disposition  wasESTRANGEMENT;275not,  however,  altogether  bad.  He  loved  mamma  because  no  onecould  help  loving  her;  he showed  no  aversion  even  for  me;  and,  inhis  calmer  moments,  he  sometimes  listened  to  us  quietly  enough,and  frankly  owned  that  he was  only a  fool,  and,  immediately  after-wards,  proceeded  to  commit  fresh  follies.  In  addition  to  this,  his-understanding  was  so  limited  and  his  tastes  so  low,  that  it was  diff-cult  to  reason,  and  almost  impossible  to  feel  at  ease  with  him.  Notcontent  with  the  possession  of a  most  charming  woman,  he  added,by way  of  seasoning,  that  of  an  old,  red-haired,  toothless  waiting-woman,  whose  disgusting  services  mamma  had  the  patience  to  en-dure,  although  it quite  upset  her.  I observed  this  new  intrigue,  andwas  beside  myself  with  indignation;  but at the  same  time  I perceivedsomething  else,  which  affected  me  still  more  deeply,  and  dispiritedme  more  than  anything  else  which  had  as  yet  occurred.  This  was  agrowing  coldness  in  mamma’s  behaviour  towards  me.The privation  which  I had  imposed  upon  myself,  and  of which  shehad pretended  to  approve,  is one  of those  things  which  women  neverpardon,  however  they  pretend  to  take  it; not  so  much  for  the  sakeof  that  of  which  they  are  themselves  deprived,  as  by reason  of  thefeeling  of indifference  which  they consider  it implies.  Take  the mostsensible,  the  most  philosophical,  the  least  sensual  woman:  the  mostunpardonable  crime  that a  man,  for whom  in other  respects  she  caresnothing,  can  be  guilty  of  towards  her,  is not  to  enjoy  her  favourswhen  he  has  the  chance  of doing  so.  There  can  be  no  exception  tothis  rule,  since  a  sympathy,  at  once  so  natural  and  so  deep,  was  im-paired  in  her  in  consequence  of an  abstinence,  the  only  motives  ofwhich  were  virtue,  attachment,  and  esteem.  From  that  moment,  Ino  longer  found  in  her  that  intimacy  of  hearts  which  had  alwaysafforded  the  sweetest  enjoyment  to  my  own.  She  no  longer  un-bosomed  herself  to  me,  except  when  she  had  occasion  to  complain  ofthe new-comer.  When  they  were  on  good  terms,  I was  rarely  admit-ted  to  her  confidence.  At  length,  by degrees,  she  became  entirelyestranged  from  me.  She  still  seemed  pleased  to  see  me,  but  no  longerfound  my  company  indispensable;  even  had  I passed  whole  dayswithout  seeing  her,  she  would  not  have  noticed  it.Insensibly  I felt  myself  isolated  and  alone  in that  house  of whichI had  formerly  been  the  soul,  and  in  which  I led,  so  to  speak,  aTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU276double  life.  I gradually  accustomed  myself  to  disregard  all that  tookplace  in it, and  even  kept aloof  from  those  who  dwelt  in it. In orderto  spare  myself  continual  torment,  I shut  myself  up  with  my  books,or  wept  and  sighed  to  my  heart’s  content  in the  midst  of the woods.This  life  soon  became  unendurable.  I felt  that  the  personal  presenceof  a woman  who  was  so  dear  to  me,  while  I was  estranged  from  herheart,  only  aggravated  my  sorrow,  and  that  I should  feel  the  separa-tion  from  her  less  cruelly  if I no  longer  saw  her.  I therefore  resolvedto  leave  the  house.  I told  her  so,  and,  far  from  offering  any  opposi-tion,  she  approved  of it.  She  had a friend  at  Grenoble,  named  Ma-dame  Deybens,  whose  husband  was  a  friend  of  M.  de  Mably,  theGrand-Prévot  of Lyons.  M.  Deybens  suggested  to  me  that  I shouldundertake  the  education  of  M.  de  Mably’s  children.  I accepted  thepost,  and  set  out  for  Lyons,  without  causing,  almost  without  feeling,the  slightest  regret  at  a  separation,  the  mere  idea  of  which  wouldformerly  have  caused  us  both  the  most  deadly  anguish.I possessed  almost  sufficient  knowledge  for  a  tutor,  and  believedthat  I had  the necessary  qualifications.  During  the year  which  I spentat  M.  de  Mably’s,  I had  ample  time  to  undeceive  myself.  My natu-rally  gentle  disposition  would  have  made  me  well  adapted  for  thisprofession,  had  not  a  violent  temper  been  mingled  with  it. As  longas  all  went  well,  and  I saw  that  my  trouble  and  attention,  of whichI was  not  sparing,  were  successful,  I was  an  angel;  but, when  thingswent  wrong,  I was  a  devil.  When  my  pupils  did  not  understandme,  I raved  like  a  madman;  when  they  showed  signs  of insubordi-nation,  I could  have  killed  them,  which  was  not  the  way  to  makethem  either  learned  or  well-behaved.  They  were  two  in  number,  ofvery  different  dispositions.  One,  between  eight  and  nine  years  old,.  named  Sainte-Marie,  had  a  pretty  face,  was  fairly  intelligent,  lively,giddy,  playful,  and  mischievous,  but  his  mischief  was  always  good-humoured.  The  younger,  Condillac,  who  seemed  almost  stupid,  wasidle  and  lazy,  as  obstinate  as  a  mule,  and  incapable  of learning  any-thing.  It  may  be  imagined  that,  between  the  two,  I had  my  workcut  out.  With  the aid of patience  and  coolness  I might,  perhaps,  havesucceeded;  but,  as  I possessed  neither,  I made  no  progress,  and  mypupils  turned  out  very  badly.  I did  not  lack  assiduity,  but  I wantedevenness  ef temper,  and,  above  all, tact.  I only  knew  three  means  toUNSUCCESSFUL  AS  A  TUTOR277employ,  which  are  always  useless  and  frequently  ruinous  to children;sentiment,  argument,  anger. At  one  time,  with  Sainte-Marie,  I wasmoved  to  tears,  and  attempted  to  arouse  similar  emotions  in him,  asif a  child  could  have  been  capable  of  genuine  feeling.  At  anothertime  I exhausted  myself  in arguing  with  him,  as  if he had been  able  -to  understand  me;  and,  as  he  sometimes  made  use  of  very  subtlearguments,  I seriously  thought  that  he  must  be  intelligent,  becausehe  knew  how  to  argue.  The  little  Condillac  was  still  more  trouble-some,  since  he understood  nothing,  never  made  an  answer,  and  wasnever  affected  by anything.  His  obstinacy  was  immovable,  and  henever  enjoyed  anything  more  than  the  triumph  of putting  me  in  arage.  Then,  indeed,  he  was  the  wise  man  and  I was  the  child.  Irecognised  all  my  faults,  and  was  conscious  of  them.  I studied  mypupils’  characters,  and  fathomed  them  successfully;  and  I do  notbelieve  that  I was  ever  once  taken  in  by their  artifices.  But  whatadvantage  was  it  to  me  to  see  the  evil,  if  I did  not  know  how  toapply  the  remedy?  Although  I saw  through  everything,  I preventednothing,  and  succeeded  in  nothing,  and  everything  that  I did  wasexactly  what  I ought  not  to  have  done.I was  hardly  more  successful  in regard  to  myself  than  my  pupils.Madame  Deybens  had  recommended  me  to  Madame  de Mably,  andhad  requested  her  to  form  my  manners  and  to  give me  the  tone  ofsociety.  She  took  some  pains  about  it, and  wanted  to  teach  me  howto  do  the  honours  of her  house;  but  I showed  myself  so  awkward,  Iwas  so  bashful  and  so  stupid,  that  she  became  discouraged,  and  gaveme  up.  This,  however,  did  not  prevent  me  falling  in  love  with  her,after  my  usual  manner.  I managed  to  make  her  perceive  it, but  Inever  dared  to  declare  my  passion.  She  was  never  disposed  to  makeadvances,  and  all my  ogling  glances  and  sighs were  in vain,  so  that  Isoon  wearied  of them,  seeing  that  they  led  to  nothing.While  with  mamma,  I had  completely  lost  my  inclination  forpetty  thefts,  because,  since  everything  was  mine,  I had  nothing  tosteal.  Besides,  the  lofty  principles  which  I had  laid  down  for  myselfought  to  have  made  me  for  the  future  superior  to  such  meannesses,and  certainly  they have  usually  done  so;  but this  was  not  so  much  theresult  of my  having  learned  to  overcome  my  temptations  as  of hav-ing cut  them  off at the root,  and  I very  much  fear  that  I should  steal,THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU278as  in my  childhood,  if exposed  to  the  same  desires.  I had  a  proof  ofthis  at  M.  de  Mably’s,  where,  although  surrounded  by trifles  whichI could  easily  have  pilfered,  and  which  I did  not  even  look  at,  I tookit into  my  head  to  long for  a  certain  light,  white  Arbois  wine,  whichwas  very  agreeable,  and  for  which  a  few  glasses  I had  drunk  at  tablehad  given  me  a strong  liking.  It  was  a  little  thick.  I prided  myselfupon  my  skill  in clearing  wine.  This  particular  brand  was  intrustedto  me.  I cleared  it, and,  in  doing  so,  spoiled  it, but  only  to  look  at,for  it still  remained  pleasant  to  drink,  and  I took  the  opportunity  ofoccasionally  appropriating  a  few  bottles  to  drink  at  my  ease  by my-self.  Unfortunately,  I have  never  been  able  to  drink  without  eating.How  was  I to  manage  to  get  bread?  It was  impossible  for  me  to  layby a  store;  to  have  sent  the  lackeys  to  buy  it would  have  betrayedme,  and  would  at  the  same  time  have  been  almost  an  insult  to  themaster  of the  house.  I was  afraid  to  buy  any  myself.  How  could  afine  gentleman,  with  a  sword  by his  side,  go  into  a  baker’s  shop  tobuy  a  piece  of bread?  At  length,  I recollected  the  last  resource  of  agreat  princess,  who,  when  told  that  the  peasants  had  no  bread,  re-plied:  “Then  let them  east  pastry.”  But  what  trouble  I had  to  get it!I went  out  alone  for this  purpose,  and sometimes  traversed  the wholetown,  passing  thirty  pastrycooks’  shops  before  entering  one.  It wasnecessary  that  there  should  be  only  one  person  in  the  shop,  andthis  person’s  features  had  to  be  very  attractive,  before  I could  makeup  my  mind  to  take  the  plunge.  But,  when  once  I had  secured  mydear  little  cake,  and,  shutting  myself  up  carefully  in  my  room,fetched  my  bottle  of wine  from  the  bottom  of a  cupboard,  what  de-lightful  little  drinking-bouts  I enjoyed  all by myself,  while  reading  afew  pages  of a novel,  for I have  always  had  a  fancy  for reading  whileeating,  if  I am  alone;  it supplies  the  want  of  society.  I devour  alter-nately  a  page  and  a  morsel.  It seems  as  if my  book  were  dining  withme.I have  never  been  dissolute  or  sottish:  in  fact,  I have  never  beendrunk  in  my  life.  Thus,  my  petty  thefts  were  not  very  indiscreet.However,  they  were  discovered:  the  bottles  betrayed  me.  No  noticewas  taken of it, but  I no  longer  had  the  management  of the  cellar.In all this M.  de Mably  behaved  honourably  and  sensibly.  He  was  avery  upright  man,  who, beneath  a manner  as  harsh  as  his  office, con-LEAVES  HIS  PUPILS279cealed  a  really  gentle  disposition  and  rare  goodness  of heart.  He  wasshrewd,  just,  and  what  weuld  not  have  been  expected  in  an  officerof  the  Maréchaussée,!?  even  kindly.  Sensible  of  his  indulgence,  Ibecame  more  attached  to  him,  and  this  made  me  remain  longer  inhis  house  than  I should  otherwise  have  done.  But,  at  length,  dis-gusted  with  a  profession  for which  I was  ill-adapted,  and  with  a  verytroublesome  situation,  which  had  nothing  agreeable  for  me,  after  ayear’s  trial,  during  which  I had  spared  no  pains,  I resolved  to  leavemy pupils,  feeling  convinced  that  I should  never  succeed  in bringingthem  up properly.  M.  de Mably  saw  this  as  well  as  I did.  However,  Ido not  think  that  he would  ever  have  taken  upon  himself  to  dismissme,  if  I had  not  spared  him  the  trouble,  and  such  excessive  con-descension  in  such  a  case  J cannot  certainly  approve  of.What made  my  present  situation  still  more  insupportable,  was  thecomparison  I continually  drew  with  that  which  I had  left:  the  re-membrance  of my  dear  Charmettes,  of my  garden,  of my  trees,  of myfountain,  of my  orchard,  and,  above  all, of her  for  whom I felt  I wasborn,  who  was  the life and  soul  to  everything.  When  I thought  againof  our  pleasures  and  our  innocent  life,  my  heart  was  seized  by afeeling  of  oppression  and  suffocation,  which  deprived  me  of  thecourage  to  do  anything.  A  hundred  times I felt  violently  temptedto  set  out  instantly  on  foot  and  return  to  Madame  de  Warens.  If Icould  only  see  her  once  again,  I felt  that  I should  have  been  contentto  die  on  the  spot.  At  length  I could  no  longer  resist  those  tenderremembrances,  which  called  me  back  to  her  at  any  cost.  I said  tomyself  that  I had  not  been  sufficiently  patient,  obliging,  or  affec-tionate;  that,  if  I exerted  myself  more  than  I had  hitherto  done,  Imight  still  live  happily  with  her  on  terms  of  tender  friendship.  Iformed  the  most  beautiful  plans  in  the  world,  and  burned  to  carrythem  out.I left everything,  I renounced  everything,  I set  out,  I flew,  and, ar-riving  in  all  the  transports  of  my  early  youth,  found  myself  againat  her  feet.  Ah!  I should  have  died  for  joy,  if I had  found  again  inher reception,  in her  eyes,  in her  caresses,  or,  lastly,  in her  heart,  onequarter  of that  which  I had  formerly  found  there,  and  which  I my-self  still  brought  back  to  her.12 Mounted  police,  replaced  by the  gendarmerie  in  1791.280THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUAlas  for  the  terrible  illusions  of human  life!  She  received  me  withthe same  excellent  heart,  which  could  only die  with  her; but  I soughtin  vain  the  past  which  was  gone,  never  to  return.  I had  scarcely  re-mained  with  her  half  an  hour,  when  I felt  that  my  former  happinesswas  gone  for  ever.  I found  myself  again  in  the  same  disconsolatesituation  from  which  I had  been  obliged  to  flee,  without  being  ableto  fix  the  blame  on  anyone;  for,  at  bottom,  Courtilles  was  not  a  badfellow,  and  he  seemed  more  glad  than  annoyed  to  see  me  again.But  how  could  I bear  to  be  a  supernumerary  with  her  for  whom  Ihad  been  everything,  and  who  would  never  cease  to  be  everythingfor  me?  How  could I live  as  a  stranger  in the  house  of which I feltmyself  the  child?  The  sight  of the  objects  which  had  witnessed  mypast  happiness  made  the  comparison  still  more  painful.  I  shouldhave  suffered  less  in  another  house.  But  the  sight  of  so  many  sweetremembrances,  continually  revived,  only  irritated  the  consciousnessof  my  loss.  Consumed  by  idle  regrets,  abandoned  to  the  blackestmelancholy,  I resumed  my  old  manner  of life  and  remained  alone,except  at  meal-times.  Shut  up  with  my  books,  I sought  to  find  inthem  some  useful  distraction;  and,  feeling  that  the  danger,  which  Ihad  so  long dreaded,  was  imminent,  I racked  my  brains  anew,  in theendeavour  to  find  in  myself  a  means  to  provide  against  it,  whenmamma’s  resources  should  be  exhausted.  I  had  so  managed  herhousehold  affairs,  that  at  least  things  did  not  grow  worse;  but,  sinceI had  left  her,  everything  was  changed.  Her  steward  was  a  spend-thrift.  He  wanted  to  make  a  show  with  a  fine  horse  and  carriage.He  was  fond  of playing  the  noble  in the  eyes  of the  neighbours,  andwas  continually  undertaking  something  about  which  he  knewnothing.  Her  pension  was  swallowed  up  in  advance,  the  quarterlypayments  were  mortgaged,  the  rent  was  in  arrears,  and  debts  ac-cumulated.  I foresaw  that  her  pension  would  soon  be  seized,  and  `perhaps  discontinued  altogether.  In  a  word,  I saw  nothing  but  ruinand  disasters  ahead,  and  the  moment  appeared  so  close,  that  I feltall its horrors  by anticipation.My  dear  little  room  was  my  only  recreation.  After  a  prolongedsearch  for  remedies  against  my  mental  anxiety,  I bethought  myselfof looking  about  for a  remedy  against  the troubles  which  I foresaw;SETS  OUT  FOR  PARIS281and,  returning  to  my  old  ideas,  I suddenly  began  to  build  freshcastles  in  the  air,  in  ordereto  extricate  my  poor  mamma  from  thecruel  extremities  into  which  I saw  her  on  the  point  of falling.  I didnot  feel  myself  sufficiently  learned,  and  I did  not  believe  that  I wassufficiently  talented,  to  shine  in  the  republic  of letters,  or  to  make  afortune  by that  means.  A new  idea,  which  occurred  to  me,  inspiredme  with  the confidence  which  the mediocrity  of my  talents  could  notgive  me.  I had  not  given  up  the  study  of  music  when I left  offteaching  it; on  the contrary,  I had  studied  the  theory  of it sufficientlyto  consider  myself  learned  in  this  department  of  the  art.  Whilstreflecting  upon  the trouble  I had  found  in learning  to read  the notes,and  the great  difficulty I still  felt in singing  at  sight, I began  to  thinkthat  this  difficulty  might  be  due  to  the  nature  of  the  case  as  muchas  to  my  own  incapacity,  especially  as  I knew  that  no  one  finds  it aneasy  task  to  learn  music.  On  examining  the  arrangement  of the  mu-sical  signs,  I found  them  frequently  very  badly  invented.  I had  longthought  of denoting  the  scale  by figures,  to  obviate  the  necessity  ofalways  drawing  the lines  and  staves  when  the most  trifling air had  tobe written.  I had  been  hindered  by the  difficulties  of the  octaves,  tnetime,  and  the  values  of the  notes.  This  idea  again  occurred  to  me,and,  on  reconsidering  it, I saw  that  these  difficulties  were  not  insur-mountable.  I carried  it out  successfully,  and  was  at  length  able  tonote  any  music  whatever  by my  figures  with  the  greatest  exactness,and  also, I may  say,  with  the  greatest  simplicity.From  that  moment,I considered  my  fortune  made;  and,  in  my  eagerness  to  share  itwith  her  to  whom  I owed  everything,  I thought  of  nothing  butsetting  out  for  Paris,  feeling  no  doubt  that,  when  I laid  my  schemebefore  the  Academy,  I should  cause  a  revolution.  I had  brought  alittle  money  back  from  Lyons;  I sold  my  books.  In  a  fortnight  myresolution  was  taken  and  carried  out.At  last,  full  of  the  magnificent  hopes  which  had  inspired  me,being  ever  and  at  all  times  the  same,  I started  from  Savoy  with  mysystem  of  music,  as  I had  formerly  started  from  Turin  with  myheron-fountain.Such  have  been  the  errors  and  faults of my  youth.  I have  relatedthe  history  of them  with  a  fidelity  of which  my  heart  approves.  If,282THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUlater,  I have  honoured  my  riper  years  with  any  virtues,  I shouldhave  declared  them  with  the  same  frankness,  and  such  was  my  in-tention.  But  I must  stop  here.  Time  may  lift  many  a  veil.  If  mymemory  descends  to  posterity,  perhaps  it will  one  day learn  what  Ihad  to  say;  then  it will  be understood  why I am  silent.PART  THE  SECONDBOOK  VII[1741]AFTER  two  years  of silence  and  patience,  in  spite  of my  resolutions,I again  take  up  my  pen.  Reader,  suspend  your  judgment  upon  thereasons  which  force  me  to  do so;  you  cannot  judge  of them  until  youhave  read  the  story  of my  life.You  have  seen  my  peaceful  youth pass  away  in a tolerably  uniformand  agreeable  manner,  without  great  disappointments  or  remark-able  prosperity.  This  absence  of extremes  was  in great  part  the resultof my  passionate  but  weak  disposition,  which,  more  easily  discour-aged than  prompt  to  undertake,  only quitted  its state  of repose  whenrudely  shocked,  but  fell  back  into  it again  from  weariness  and  natu-ral  inclination;  and  which,  while  keeping  me  away  from  great  vir-tues,  and  still  further  from  great  vices,  led  me  back  steadily  to  the  in-dolent  and  peaceful  life  for  which  I felt  Nature  intended  me,  andnever  permitted  me  to  attain  to  greatness  in anything,  either  good orbad.  What  a  different  picture  I shall  soon  have  to  draw!  Destiny,which  for  thirty  years  favoured  my  inclinations,  during  a  secondthirty  thwarted  them,  and  this  continued  opposition  between  myposition  and  inclinations  will  be  seen  to  have  produced  monstrouserrors,  unheard-of  misfortunes,  and  all  the  virtues  that  can  renderadversity  honourable,  with  the exception  of strength  of character.The  first  part  of my  Confessions  was  written  entirely  from  mem-ory,  and  I must  have  made  many  mistakes  in  it.  As  I am  obligedto  write  the  second  part  also  from  memory,  I shall  probably  makemany  more.  The  sweet  remembrances  of  my  best  years,  passed  inequal  innocence  and  tranquillity,  have  left  me  a  thousand  charmingimpressions,  which I love  to  recall  incessantly.  It  will  soon  be  seen283THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU284how  different  are  the  recollections  of  the  remainder  of my  life.  Torecall  them  renews  their  bitterness.  Far  from  increasing  the  pain-fulness  of my  situation  by these  melancholy  retrospects,  I put  themaway  from  me  as  much  as  possible,  and  frequently  succeed  so  well,that  I am  unable  to recall  them  even  when  it is necessary.  This  capac-ity for  easily  forgetting  misfortunes  is a  consolation,  which  Heavenhas bestowed  upon  me  amidst  those  afflictions  which  destiny  was  oneday fated  to  heap  upon  my  head.  My  memory,  which  only  revivesthe  recollection  of agreeable  things,  is the  happy  counterpoise  of myfearful  imagination,  which  causes  me  to  foresee  only  a  cruel  future.All  the  papers  which  I have  collected  to  fill  the  gaps  in my  mem-ory  and  to  guide  me  in  my  undertaking,  have  passed  into  otherhands,  and  will  never  return  to  mine.  I have  only one  faithful  guideupon  which  I can  depend;  the  chain  of  the  feelings  which  havemarked  the  development  of  my  being,  and  which  will  remind  meof the  succession  of events,  which  have  been  either  the  cause  or  theeffect  of these  feelings.  I find  it easy  to  forget  my  misfortunes,  butI cannot  forget  my  faults,  still  less  my  virtuous  feelings,  the  recol-lection  of  which  is too  precious  ever  to  be  effaced  from  my  heart.I may  omit  or  transpose  facts,  I may  make  mistakes  in  dates,  but  Icannot  be deceived  in regard  to  what  I have  felt  or  what  my  feelingshave  prompted  me  to  do;  and  this  is the  chief  subject  under  discus-sion.  The  real  object  of my  Confessions  is, to  contribute  to  an  accu-rate  knowledge  of  my  inner  being  in  all  the  different  situations  ofmy  life.  What  I have  promised  to  relate,  is the  history  of  my  soul;I need  no  other  memoirs  in  order  to  write  it faithfully;  it  is  suff-cient  for me  to enter  again into  my  inner  self as  I have  hitherto  done.Very  luckily,  however,  there  is  an  interval  of  six  or  seven  yearsconcerning  which  I  possess  trustworthy  information  in  a  collec-tion  of  copies  of  certain  letters,  the  originals  of  which  are  in  thehands  of  M.  du  Peyrou.  This  collection,  which  ends  with  the  year1760,  embraces  the whole  period  of my  stay  at the  “Hermitage”  andmy  great  quarrel  with  my  so-called  friends—a  memorable  epoch  ofmy  life, which  was  the origin  of all my  other  misfortunes.  In regardto  any  original  letters  of  more  recent  date,  which  I may  perhapshave  preserved,  and  which  are  only few  in number,  instead  of copy-ing and  adding  them  to  this  collection,  which  is too  voluminous  forREFLECTIONS  CONCERNING  THE  CONFESSIONS285me  to  hope  to  be  able  to  conceal  it from  the  watchful  eyes  of  myArguses,  I will  copy  them#into  this  work  itself,  when  they  seem  tome  to  afford  any  elucidation  of facts,  either  in my  favour  or  againstme;  for  I have  no  fear  that  the  reader,  forgetting  that  I am  writingmy  Confessions,  will  ever  imagine  that  I am  writing  my  Apologia;but  neither  must  he  expect  that  I shall  keep  silence  regarding  thetruth,  when  it speaks in  my  favour.Besides,  this  truth is  all that  this  second  part  has in common  withthe  first,  and  the  only  advantage  it can  claim  over  it is, the  greaterimportance  of the  facts  related.  With  this  exception,  it cannot  fail  tobe inferior  to  it in every  respect.  I wrote  the  first  part  with  pleasureand  gratification,  and  at  my  ease,  at  Wootton  or  in  the  Castle  ofTrye.?  All  the  memories  which  I had  to  recall  were  for  me  so  manyfresh  enjoyments.  I turned  back  to  them  incessantly  with  renewedpleasure,  and  I was  able  to  revise  my  descriptions  until  I was  satisfied.  with  them,  without  feeling  in  the  least  bored.  At  the  presen,time,  my  failing  memory  and  enfeebled  brain  unfit  me  for  almostevery  kind  of work.  I only undertake  my  present  task  under  compul-sion,  with  a  heart  oppressed  by grief.  It offers  me  nothing  but  mis.fortunes,  treachery,  perfidy,  melancholy  and  heartrending  recollec.tions.  I would  give  anything  in  the  world  to  be  able  to  bury  in  thedarkness  of time  what  I have  to  say;  and, while  constrained  to  speakin  spite  of myself,  I am  also  obliged  to  hide  myself,  to  employ  cun;ning, to  endeavour  to deceive,  and  to  lower  myself  to conduct  utterlyat  variance  with  my  nature.  The  roof  under  which  I am  has  eyes,the  walls  around  me  have  ears.  Beset  by  spies  and  watchful  andmalevolent  overlookers,  uneasy  and  distracted,  I hurriedly  scribble  afew  disjointed  sentences,  which  I have  scarcely  time  to  read  over,still  less  to  correct.  I know  that,  in spite of the  barriers  set  up  aroundme  in  ever-increasing  numbers,  my  enemies  are  still  afraid  that  thetruth  may  find  some  loophole  through  which  to  escape.  How  am  Ito  set  about  bringing  it to  the  light?  I am  making  the  attempt  withlittle  hope of success.  It will  be easily  understood,  that  this  is not  thematerial  out  of which  pleasant  pictures  are  made,  or  such  as  is calcu-lated  to  give them  an  attractive  colouring.  I therefore  give  notice  tethose  who  intend  to  read  this  portion  of my  work  that,  in the course1In  the  department  of  the Oise,  belonging  to  the  Prince  of Conti.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU286of  their  reading,  nothing  can  guarantee  them  against  weariness,unless  it be the  desire  of completing  their  knowledge  of a  man,  anda  sincere  affection  for  truth  and  justice.At  the conclusion  of the  first  part  of my  Confessions,  I was  settingout,  much  against  my  wish,  for  Paris,  having  left  my  heart  at  LesCharmettes,  where  I had  built  my  last castle  in the  air, intending  oneday to  return  and  lay at  the  feet  of mamma,  restored  to  her  formerself,  the  riches  I should  have  gained,  and  reckoning  upon  my  sys-tem  of music  as  a  sure  road  to  fortune.I stayed a little  time  at  Lyons,  to  visit  my  acquaintances,  to  getsome  letters  of  introduction  for  Paris,  and  to  sell  my  geometricalbooks  which  I had  taken  with  me.  Everybody  received  me  kindly.  M.and  Madame  de Mably  were  glad to  see  me  again,  and  invited  me  todinner  several  times.  At  their  house  I made  the  acquaintance  of theAbbé  de Mably,  as  I had  previously  made  that  of the  Abbé  de Con-dillac,  both  of whom  were  on a visit  to  their  brother.  The  Abbé  deMably  gave  me  some  letters  for  Paris,  amongst  them  one  for  M.  deFontenelle,  and  another  for  the  Comte  de  Caylus.  I found  themboth  very  agreeable  acquaintances,  especially  the  former,  who,  up  tothe  time  of his  death,  never  ceased  to  show  me  marks  of friendship,and, when  we  were  alone,  gave  me  good  advice,  of which  I ought tohave  made  better  use.I saw  M.  Bordes  again,  an  old  acquaintance  of  mine,  who  hadoften  assisted  me  with  the  greatest  willingness  and  with  genuinepleasure.  On  this  occasion  I found  him  just the  same.  It was  he whoassisted  me  in  disposing  of  my  books,  and  himself  gave  me,  orprocured  from  others,  strongly-worded  letters  of  introduction  forParis.  I saw  the  Intendant  again,  for  whose  acquaintance  I was  in-debted  to  M.  Bordes,  who  also  procured  me  an  introduction  to  theDuc  de  Richelieu,  who  was  staying  in  Lyons  at  the  time.  M.  Pallupresented  me  to  him;  he  received  me  kindly,  and  told  me  to  comeand see  him  in Paris,  which  I did  several  times;  but the acquaintanceof this  distinguished  personage,  of which  I shall  frequently  have  tospeak  in the  sequel,  has  never  been  of the  least  use  to  me.I again  saw  David  the  musician,  who  had  assisted  me  in my  dis-tress  on  one  of my  previous  journeys.  He  had  lent  or  given me  a  capand  a  pair of stockings,  which  he has  never  asked  for, and  which  IVISITS  FRIENDS  IN  LYONS287have  never  returned  to  him, although  we  have  often  seen  each  othersince  then.  However,  I afterwards  made  him  a  small  present,  ofnearly  equal  value.  I should  be  able  to  speak  more  favourably  of  `myself,  if it were  a  question  of what  I ought  to  have  done;  but  it is aquestion  of what  I have  done,  which  unfortunately  is not  the  samething.I again  saw  the  noble  and  generous  Perrichon,  who  again  be-haved  towards  me  with  his accustomed  munificence.  He gave  me  thesame  present as he  had  formerly  given  to  “Gentil-Bernard”;?  hepaid  for  my  seat  in  the  diligence.  I again  saw  Surgeon  Parisot,  thebest  and  most  benevolent  of  men;  I again  saw  his  dear  Godefroi,whom  he kept  for  ten  years,  whose  gentle  disposition  and  goodnessof  heart  were  almost  her  only  merits,  but  whom  no  one  could  seefor  the  first  time  without  sympathy  or  leave  without  emotion,  forshe  was  in  the  last  stages  of consumption,  of  which  she  soon  after-wards  died.  Nothing  shows  a  man’s  true  inclinations  better  thanthe character  of those  whom  he loves.*  Whoever  had  seen  the gentleGodefroi,  had  made  the  acquaintance  of the  worthy  Parisot.Although  I was  greatly  indebted  to  all  these  worthy  people,  Iafterwards  neglected  them  all,  not  certainly  from  ingratitude,  butowing  to  my  unconquerable  idleness,  which  has  often  made  me  ap-pear  ungrateful.  The  remembrance  of  their  kindnesses  has  neverleft  my  heart,  but  it  would  have  been  easier  for  me  to  prove  mygratitude  by deeds  than  to  express  it  continually  in  words.  Regu-larity  in  correspondence  has  always  been  beyond  my  strength:  as2,4  French  poet  (1710-1775).  The  name  “Gentil”  was  given  to  him  byVoltaire.2 Unless  he  is  at  the  outset  deceived  in  his  choice,  or  the  character  of  thewoman  to  whom  he  has  formed  an  attachment  subsequently  changes,  in  conse-quence  of  a  combination  of  extraordinary  circumstances,  which  is  not  absolutelyimpossible.  If  this  principle  were  admitted  without  modification,  Socrates  wouldhave  to  be  judged  by  his  wife  Xantippe,  and  Dion  by  his  friend  Calippus,  ajudgment  which  would  be  the  most  unfair  and  the  most  misleading  that  has  everbeen  passed.  Further,  let  no  one  make  any  insulting  application  of it to  my  wife.She  is  certainly  more  narrow-minded  and  more  easily  deceived  than  I had  im-agined;  but  her  pure,  excellent  and  generous  character  deserves  all  my  esteem,which  it will  enjoy  as  long  as  I live.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU288soon  as  I begin  to  feel  slack,  shame  and a feeling  of  embarrassmentin  repairing  my  fault  make  me  aggravate  it,  and  I leave  off  writ-ing  altogether.  I have  therefore  kept  silence,  as  if  I had  forgottenthem.  Parisot  and  Perrichon  took  no  notice  at  all,  and  I  alwaysfound  them  the  same;  but,  twenty  years  later,  in  the  case  of  M.Bordes,  it  will  be  seen  how  far  the  self-complacency  of  a  wit  canmake  him  carry  his  vengeance,  when  once  he  fancies  himselfslighted.Before  I leave  Lyons,  I must  not  forget to  mention  an  amiable  per-son,  whom  I saw  again with  greater  pleasure  than  ever,  and  who leftin  my  heart  most  tender  remembrances.  This  was  MademoiselleSerre,  of  whom  I have  spoken  in  the  first  part  of  this  work,  andwhose  acquaintance  I had  renewed  while  I was  with  M.  de  Mably.As  I had  more  time  to  spare  on  the  present  occasion,  I saw  more  ofher,  and  conceived  a  most  lively  attachment  to  her.  I had  some  rea-son  to  believe  that  she herself  was  not  unfavourably  disposed  towardsme;  but  she  treated  me  with  a  confidence  which  kept  me  from  thetemptation  to  abuse  it.  She  had  no  means,  neither  had  I. Our  posi-tions  were  too  much  alike  for  us  to  become  united,  and,  with  theviews  which I then  entertained,  marriage  was  far from  my  thoughts.She  told  me  that  a  young  merchant,  M.  Genéve,  seemed  desirous  ofpaying  his  addresses  to  her.  I saw  him  once  or  twice  in  her  com-pany.  He  had  the  reputation  of being,  and  appeared  to  me  to  be, anhonourable  man.  Feeling  convinced  that  she  would  be  happy  withhim,  I wanted  him  to  marry  her, as  he afterwards  did, and,  in ordernot  to  disturb  their  innocent  affection,  I made  haste  to  depart,  offer-ing up  heartfelt  prayers  for  the  happiness  of  this  charming  younglady,  which,  alas!  were  only  listened  to  for  a  short  time  on  thisearth:  for  I afterwards  heard,  that  she  died  after  she  had  been  mar-tied  two  or  three  years.  Filled  with  tender  regrets  throughout  myjourney,  I felt,  and  have  often  felt  since  then,  when  I think  of  itagain,  that,  even  if the  sacrifices  which  are  made  to  duty  and  virtueare  painful  to  make,  they  are  well  repaid  by the  sweet  recollectionswhich  they leave  at  the bottom  of the heart.On  my  previous  journey  I  had  seen  Paris  in  an  unfavourableaspect.  On  the  present  occasion  I saw  it from  a  correspondingly  bril-liant  point of view, not,  however,  in the matter  of lodgings, for, uponARRIVES  IN  PARIS289the recommendation  of M. Bordes,  I put up at  the Hôtel  St. Quentin,in the  Rue  des  Cordiers,  near  the  Sorbonne;  I had  a  wretched  room,in  a  wretched  street  and  a  wretched  hotel,  in  which,  however,  sev-eral  distinguished  persons  had  stayed,  such  as  Gresset,  Bordes,  theAbbés  de Mably  and  de Condillac  and  several  others,  none  of whom,unfortunately  for  me,  were  any  longer  there;  but  I made  the  ac-quaintance  of  a  certain  M.  de  Bonnefond,  a  young  country-squire,who  was  lame,  fond  of litigation,  and  set  up  for  a  purist.  Throughhim  I made  the  acquaintance  of M.  Roguin,  now  my  oldest  friend,who  introduced  me  to  the  philosopher  Diderot,  of  whom  I shallsoon  have  much  to  say.I arrived  at  Paris  in  the  autumn  of  1741,  with  fifteen  louis  d’orin my  pocket,  my  comedy  of Narcissus,  and  my  musical  scheme,  asmy  sole  resource.  I had  therefore  little  time  to  lose  in  trying  tolay them  out  to  the  best  advantage.  I hastened  to  make  use  of  myletters  of introduction.  A young  man,  who  arrives  in  Paris  with  apretty  good  appearance  and  advertises  himself  by  his  talents,  isalways  sure  of being  well  received,  as  I was.  This  procured  me  cer-tain  pleasures,  but  did  not  materially  assist  me.  Only  three  of  thepersons  to  whom  I had  letters  were  of  use  to  me—M.  Damesin,  aSavoyard  gentleman,  at  that  time  the  equerry,  and,  I believe,  thefavourite  of the  Princess  de  Carignan;  M.  de  Boze,  Secretary  of theAcademy  of  Inscriptions  and  keeper  of  the  King’s  collection  ofmedals;  and  Pére  Castel,  a  Jesuit,  the  inventor  of  the  clavecin  ocu-laire  All  these  introductions,  except  that  to  M.  Damesin,  hadbeen  given  to  me  by the  Abbé  de Mably.M.  Damesin  provided  for  my  most  urgent  need  by introducingme  to  M.  de  Gasc,  President®  of  the  Parliament  of  Bordeaux,  whowas  a  very  good  player  on  the  violin,  and  also  to  the  Abbé  de Léon,who  was  then  living  in  the  Sorbonne,  a  young  and  amiable  noble-man,  who  died  in  the  prime  of  life,  after  having  cut  a  brilliant4 An  instrument  with  a  finger-board  and  keys,  with  as  many  octaves  of coloursas  there  were  octaves  of musical  notes  in  the  ordinary  piano  or  harpsichord  of theperiod.  The  seven  primitive  colours  corresponded  to  the  seven  notes  of  music.The  idea  of the  inventor  was  to  produce  sensations  of melody  and  harmony  by acombination  of  colours.5 President  a mortier,  that  is, who  wore  the  mortier,  or  round  black-velvet  cap.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU290figure  in  the  world  for  a  brief  period,  under  the  name  of the  Che-valier  de  Rohan.  Both  of  them  took  a  fancy  to  learn  composition;and  I gave  them  a  few  months’  lessons,  which  to  some  extent  re-plenished  my  purse,  which  was  almost  empty.  The  Abbé  de  Léonconceived  a  friendship  for  me,  and  wanted  me  to  be  his  secretary:but, as  he was  by no  means  rich,  and  could  only  offer  me a salary  of800  francs,  I felt  obliged,  to  my  regret,  to  refuse  his  offer,  as  the  sumwould  not  have  been  sufficient  to  pay  for  my  board  and  lodgingand clothes.M.  de Boze  received  me  very  kindly.  He  had a taste  for  learning,and  was  himself  a  learned  man,  but  somewhat  pedantic.  Madamede  Boze  might  have  been  his  daughter;  she  was  brilliant  and  af-fected.  I sometimes  dined  at  his  house,  and  it would  have  been  im-possible  for  anyone  to  be more  awkward  and  confused  than  I was  inher  presence.  Her  free  and  easy  manner  intimidated  me,  and  mademy  own  more  ridiculous.  When  she  handed  me a dish,  I put out  myfork  and  modestly  took  a  morsel  of what  she offered  me;  whereuponshe  returned  to  her  lackey  the  dish  which  she  had  intended  forme,  at  the  same  time  turning  round  to  hide  her  laughter.  She  hadno  suspicion  that  there  was,  nevertheless,  something  in the  country-bumpkin’s  head.  M.  de  Boze  presented  me  to  his  friend  M.  deRéaumur,  who  dined  with  him  every  Friday,  when  the  Academy  ofSciences  held  its  meeting.  He  spoke  to  him  of  my  scheme,  and  ofmy  wish  to  submit  it to  the  Academy  for  examination.  M.  de  Réau-_mur  undertook  to  bring  my  proposal  forward,  and  it was  accepted.On  the  day  appointed,  I was  introduced  and  presented  by  M.  deRéaumur;  and  on  the  same  day, the  22nd  of August,  1742,  I had  thehonour  of reading  before  the  Academy  the  Essay  which  I had  pre-pared  for  the  purpose.  Although  this  illustrious  assembly  was  cer-tainly  very  imposing,  I felt  much  less  nervous  than  in  the  presenceof  Madame  de  Boze,  and  I managed  to  get  through  my  readingand  examination  with  credit.  The  Essay  was  well  received,  and  Iwas  complimented  upon  it, which  equally  surprised  and  flatteredme,  for  I did  not  imagine  that,  in the  opinion  of an  Academy,  any-one  who  did  not  belong  to  it could  possess  common  sense.  The  com-mission  appointed  to  examine  me  consisted  of MM.  de Mairan,  Hel-lot  and  De  Fouchy,  all  three  certainly  persons  of  ability,  but  notHIS  SYSTEM  OF  NOTATION291one  was  sufficiently  acquainted  with  music,  at  least,  to  be competentto  judge  of my  scheme.#[1742.]—In  the course  of my  conferences  with  these  gentlemen,  Ibecame  convinced,  with  as  much  certainty  as  surprise,  that if learnedmen  are  sometimes  less  prejudiced  than  others,  they  cling  moreclosely,  by way  of revenge,  to  those  prejudices  which  they  do  enter-tain.  However  weak,  however  false  for  the most  part  their  objectionswere—and  although  I answered  them  timidly,  I confess,  and  in ill-chosen  terms,  but  yet  with  decisive  arguments—I  never  once  suc-ceeded  in  making  myself  understood  or  in  satisfying  them.  I wasalways  astounded  at  the  readiness  with  which,  by the  help of a  fewsonorous  phrases,  they refuted  without  having  understood  me.  Theydiscovered,  somewhere  or  other,  that  a monk  named  Souhaitti  hadalready  conceived  the  idea  of  denoting  the  scale  by figures.  Thiswas  enough  to  make  them  uphold  that  my  system  was  not  new.That  may  be; for although  I had never  heard  of Souhaitti—althoughhis  method  of writing  the  seven  notes  of plain-song,  without  payingany  attention  to  the  octaves,  in no  respect  deserved  to  be comparedwith  my  simple  and  convenient  invention  for  noting  all  imaginablekinds  of music,  without  difficulty,  by means  of numbers—keys,  rests,octaves,  measures,  time,  and  value  of  the  notes,  of  which  Souhaittihad  never  even  thought—nevertheless,  it was  quite  true  that,  as  fatas  the  elementary  designation  of  the  seven  notes  is  concerned,  hewas  the  first  inventor.  But  they  not  only  attributed  to  this  primitiveinvention  more  importance  than  it deserved,  but  did  not  stop  there;and,  as  soon  as  they  attempted  to  speak  of  the  fundamental  prin-ciples  of  the  system,  they  did  nothing  else  but  talk  nonsense.  Thegreatest  advantage  of my  system  was,  that  it  did  away  with  trans:positions  and  keys,  so  that  the  same  piece  could  be noted  and  trans-posed  at  will  into  whatever  key  one  pleased,  by means  of  the  sup-posed  change  of  a  single  initial  letter  at  the  beginning  of  the  air.These  gentlemen  had  heard  it said  by Parisian  strummers  that  themethod  of playing  a  piece  of music  by transposition  was  worthless.Starting  from  this,  they  turned  the  most  distinct  advantage  of  mysystem  into  an  insuperable  objection  against  it, and  they came  to  thedecision  that  my  system  of notation  was  good  for  vocal,  but  unsuit-able  for  instrumental,  music,  instead  of  deciding,  as  they  shouldTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU292have  done,  that  it  was  good  for  vocal  and  better  for  instrumentalmusic.  As  the  result  of their  report,  the  Academy  granted  me a cer-tificate  full  of high-flown  compliments,  between  the  lines  of  whichit was  easy  to  read  that,  as  a  matter  of fact,  it considered  my  systemto  be  neither  new  nor  useful.  I did  not  feel  under  any  obligation  toadorn  with  such  a  document  my  work  entitled,  “A  Treatise  onModern  Music,”  in which  I made  my  appeal  to  the  public.I had  reason  to  observe  on  this  occasion  how,  even  in  the  case  ota  person  of limited  intelligence,  an  exclusive  but  thorough  knowl-edge  of  anything  is  more  likely  to  enable  him  to  judge  of  it  cor-rectly  than  all the  learning  acquired  by scientific  culture,  unless  it iscombined  with a special  study  of the  subject  in  question.  The  onlysolid  objection  which  could  be  made  to  my  system  was  made  byRameau.  No  sooner  had I explained  it to  him  than  he  saw  its  weakside.  “Your  signs,”  he  said,  “are  very  good,  in  so  far  as  they  deter-mine  simply  and  clearly  the  value  of the  notes,  accurately  representthe intervals,  and  always  show  the  simple  way  in the  double  notes—things  which  the  ordinary  system  does  not  do;  they  are  bad,  in thatthey  require  a  mental  operation,  which  cannot  always  follow  therapidity  of the  execution.  The  position  of our  notes,”  he  continued,“is  represented  to  the  eye  without  the  assistance  of  this  operation.When  two  notes,  one  very  high  and  the  other  very  low,  are  unitedby a series®  of  intermediate  notes,  I can  see  at  the  first  glance  thegradual  progress  from  one  to  the  other;  but  according  to  your  sys-tem,  in  order  to  make  sure  of  this  series,  I am  obliged  to  spellthrough  all your  figures  in  succession;  a  general  glance  is unable  tosupply  any  deficiency.”  The  objection  appeared  to  me  unanswer-able,  and  I immediately  admitted  the force  of it; although  it is simpleand  striking,  it is one  that  only great  experience  in the art  could  sug-gest,  and  it is not  to  be  wondered  at  that  it occurred  to  none  of themembers  of the  Academy,  but  it is to  be  wondered  at  that  all  thesegreat  scholars,  who  know  so  many  things,  so  little  understand  thatcach  should  only  pass  judgment  upon  matters  connected  with  hisown  special  branch  of study.My  frequent  visits  to  my  examining  board  and  other  Academi-ine3Tirade:  passage  que  fait  la voix  ou  l'instrument  dans  l'intervalle  d’une  notea  une  autre  par  les  notes  diatoniques  de  cette  intervalle  distinctement  articulées.E;;HIS  SYSTEM  PUT  TO  THE  TEST293cians  put it within  my  reach  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  all  themost  distinguished  literarf men  in  Paris;  thus  their  acquaintancewas  already  made  when,  later,  I suddenly  found  myself  enrolledamongst  them.  For  the  moment,  entirely  absorbed  in  my  musicalsystem,  I persisted  in  my  design  of  bringing  about  a  revolution  inthe  art,  and  by  this  means  attaining  to  a  celebrity  which,  whenacquired  in the  fine  arts  in Paris,  is always  accompanied  by fortune.I shut  myself  up  in my  room  and  worked  with  indescribable  zeal  fortwo  or  three  months,  in  order  to  revise  the  pamphlet  which  I hadread  before  the Academy,  and  make  it into  a  work  fit for publication.The  difficulty  was  to  find  a  publisher  who  would  accept  my  manu-script,  as  some  outlay  would  have  been  necessary  for  the  new  char-acters,  and  publishers  are  not  in  the  habit  of throwing  their  moneyat  the  heads  of beginners,  although  it seemed  to  me  only  fair,  thatmy  work  should  bring  me  back  the bread  which  I had  eaten  while  Iwas  writing  it.Bonnefond  found  me  the  elder  Quillau,  who  made  an  agreementwith  me  on  terms  of half  profits,  without  reckoning  the  privilege,’fof which  I had  to  pay  myself.  The  aforesaid  Quillau  managed  theaffair  so  badly,  that  the  money  I paid  for  my  privilege  was  wasted,and  I never  made  a  farthing  by  my  publication,  which  probably.enough  had  only  a  small  sale,  although  the  Abbé  Desfontaines  hadpromised  to  push  it, and  the  other  journalists  had  spoken  fairly  wellof it.The  greatest  impediment  to a trial  of my  system  was  the  fear  that,if it were  not  adopted,  the  time  spent  in  learning  it would  be  lost.My reply  to  this  was,  that  practice  in my  method  of notation  wouldmake  the  ideas  so  clear  that, in learning  music  by means  of the  ordi-nary  signs,  time  would  still  be  gained  by commencing  with  mine.To put  it to  the  test,  I gave  lessons  in music  for  nothing  to  a  youngAmerican  lady,  named  Mademoiselle  des  Roulins  whose  acquaint-ance  I had  made  through  M.  Roguin.  In  three  months  she  was  ableto  read  any  kind  of  music  according  to  my  notation,  and  even  tosing  at  sight,  better  than  myself,  any  piece  that  did  not  present  toomany  difficulties.  This  success  was  striking,  but  did  not  become7  Privilege:  the  exclusive  right  granted  by  the  King  to  a  publisher  to  print  awork.294THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUknown.  Anyone  else  would  have  filled  the  newspapers  with  it; but,although  I possessed  some  talent  for  making  useful  discoveries,  Iwas  never  capable  of turning  them  to  account.Thus  my  heron-fountain  was  again  broken;  but,  on  this  secondoccasion,  I was  thirty  years  old,  and  I was  in  the  streets  of  Paris,where  one  cannot  live  for  nothing.  The  resolution  which  I came  toin  this  extremity  will  astonish  none  but  those  who  have  not  atten-tively  read  the  first  part  of these  Memoirs.After  the  great  and  fruitless  exertions  I  had  recently  made,  Ineeded a little  rest.  Instead  of abandoning  myself to  despair,  I quietlyabandoned  myself  to  my  usual  idleness  and  the  care  of Providence;and,  in  order  to  give  the  latter  time  to  do  its  work,  I proceeded  toconsume,  in  a  leisurely  manner,  the  few  louis  which  I still  had  left.I regulated  the  expense  of  my  careless  pleasures,  without  entirelygiving  them  up.  I only  went  to  the  café  every  other  day,  and  to  thetheatre  twice  a  week.  As  for  money  spent  on  women,  there  was  noneed  for  retrenchment,  for  I have  never  in  my  life  laid  out  a  sow  inthis  manner,  except  on  one  occasion,  of which  I shall  have  to  speakpresently.The  calmness,  delight  and  confidence  with  which  I abandonedmyself  to  this  indolent  and  solitary  life, although  I had  not  sufficientmeans  to  continue  it for  three  months,  is one  of the  peculiarities  ofmy  life  and  one  of the  oddities  of  my  character.  The  great  need  ofsympathy  which I felt, was  the very  thing  which  deprived  me  of thecourage  to  show  myself;  and  the  necessity  of paying  visits  to  peoplemade  them  so  unendurable,  that  I even  gave  up  going  to  see  theAcademicians  and  other  men  of letters,  with  whom  I was  already  onmore  or  less  intimate  terms.  Marivaux,  the Abbé  de Mably,  and  Fon-tenelle  were  almost  the  only  persons  whom I still  continued  to  visit.I even  showed  my  comedy  of  Narcisse  to  the  first.  He  was  pleasedwith  it, and  was  kind  enough  to  touch  it up.  Diderot,  who  was  notso  old, was  about  my  own  age.  He  was  fond  of music,  and acquaintedwith  the  theory  of it; we  talked  about  it, and  he also  spoke  to  me  ofhis  own  literary  projects.  This  resulted  in  a  most  intimate  connec-tion  between  us,  which  lasted  fifteen  years,  and  would  probablyhave  still  continued,  if  I had  not,  unfortunately,  and  by his  ownfault,  been  thrown  into  the  same  profession  as  himself.INDOLENT  LIFE  AT  PARIS295No  one  would  guess  how  I employed  this  brief  and  precious  in-terval,  which  still  remained to me  before  I was  compelled  to  beg mybread.  I learned  by heart  passages  from  the  poets  which  I had  al-ready  learnt  a  hundred  times  and  forgotten.  Every  morning,  aboutten  o'clock,  I used  to  walk  in the  Luxembourg  Gardens  witha  Virgilor  Rousseau®  in my  pocket,  and,  until  dinner-time,  I recommitted  tomemory  a  sacred  ode  or  an  eclogue,  without  being  discouraged  bythe  fact  that,  while  going  over  the  task  of the  day,  I was  sure’  to  for-get  what  I had  learnt  the  day  before.  I remembered  that,  after  thedefeat  of Nicias  at  Syracuse,  the Athenian  prisoners  supported  them-selves  by reciting  the  poems  of  Homer.  The  lesson  which  I drewfrom  this  specimen  of erudition,  in  order  to  prepare  myself  againstpoverty,  was  to  exercise  my  admirable  memory  in  learning  all  thepoets  by heart.I possessed  an  equally  solid  expedient  in  chess,  to  which  I regu.larly devoted  my  afternoons  at  the  Café  Maugis,  on  the  days  when  |did  not  go  to  the  theatre.  I there  made  the  acquaintance  of  M.  deLégal,  M.  Husson,  Philidor,  and  all  the  great  chess-players  of  theday, without  making  any  progress  myself.  However,  I had  no  doubtthat  in  the  end  I should  become a better  player  than  any  of  them;and  this,  in  my  opinion,  was  enough  for  my  support.  Whenever  Ibecame  infatuated  with  any  fresh  folly,  I always  reasoned  about  it inthe  same  manner.  I said  to  myself,  “Anyone  who  excels  in  some-thing,  is always  sure  of being  sought  after.  Let  me,  therefore,  excelin  something,  no  matter  what:  I shall  be sought  after;  opportunitieswill  present  themselves,  and  my  own  merits  will  do  the  rest.”  Thischildishness  was  not  the  sophism  of my  reason,  but  of my  indolence.Frightened  at  the  great  and  rapid  efforts  which  would  have  beennecessary  to  make  me  exert  myself,  I endeavoured  to  flatter  my  idle-ness,  and  concealed  its disgrace  from  myself  by arguments  worthy  ofIt.eThus,  I quietly  waited  until  my  money  should  be  exhausted;  andI believe  that  I should  have  come  to  my  last  sou  without  any  furtheruneasiness,  had  not  Father  Castel  whom  I sometimes  went  to  see  onmy  way  to  the  café,  roused  me  from  my  lethargy.  He  was  mad,  but,after  all,  a good fellow.  He  was  sorry  to  see  me  wasting  my  time  and8 Jean  Baptiste  Rousseau,  the  French  lyric  poet.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU296abilities  without  doing  anything.  He  said  to  me,  “Since  musiciansand  savants  will  not  sing together  with  you,  change  your  string  andtry  the  women;  perhaps  you  will  succeed  better  in  that  quarter.  Ihave  spoken  about  you  to  Madame  de  Beuzenval;  go  and  see  her,and  mention  my  name.  She  is a  good woman,  who  will  be pleased  tosee  a  countryman  of her  son  and  husband.  At  her  house  you  willmeet  her  daughter,  Madame  de  Broglie,  who  is a  clever  and  accom-plished  woman.  Madame  Dupin  is  another  lady  to  whom  I havespoken  of you;  take  your  work  to  her;  she  is anxious  to  see  you  andwill  receive  you  kindly.  No  one  can  do  anything  in  Paris  withoutthe  women;  they  are  like  the  curves,  of which  clever  people  are  theasymptotes;  they  constantly  approach,  but  never  touch.”After  having  repeatedly  put  off  these  terrible  tasks,  I at  lengthsummoned  up  courage  and  went  to  call  upon  Madame  de  Beuzen-val,  who  received  me  affably.  Madame  de  Broglie  happening  toenter  the  room,  she  said  to  her,  “My  daughter,  this  is M.  Rousseau,of  whom  Father  Castel  spoke  to  us.”  Madame  de  Broglie  compli-mented  me  upon  my  work,  and,  conducting  me  to  her  piano,showed  me  that  she  had  paid  some  attention  to  it. Seeing  that  it wasnearly  one  o'clock,  I wanted  to  retire,  but  Madame  de  Beuzenvalsaid  to  me,  “It  is a  long  way  to  your  quarter;  stop  and  dine  here.”  Ineeded  no  pressing.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  later  I understood,  fromsomething  she  said,  that  the  dinner  to  which  she  invited  me  was  inthe  servants’  hall.  Although  Madame  de  Beuzenval  was  undoubt-edly a  very  good  woman,  she was  of limited  understanding,  and, toofull  of  her  illustrious  Polish  nobility,  had  little  idea  of  the  respectdue  to  talent.  Even  on  this  occasion,  she  judged  me  more  by mymanner  than  by dress,  which,  although  simple,  was  very  respectable,and  by no  means  indicated  a man  who  ought  to  be invited  to  dine  atthe  servants’  table.  I had  too  long  forgotten  the  way  there,  to  desireto  learn  it again.  Without  showing  all  the  annoyance  I felt,  I toldMadame  de Beuzenval  that  I remembered  I was  obliged  to  return  tomy  quarter  on  business,  and  J again  prepared  to  leave.  Madame  deBroglie  went  up  to  her  mother  and  whispered  a  few  words  in  herear,  which  had  their  effect.  Madame  de Beuzenval  rose  to  detain  me,and  said,  “T hope you  will  do  us  the  honour  of dining  with  us.”  Be-lieving  that  to  show  pride  would  be  to  play  the  fool,  I stayed.  Be-MADAME  DE  BROGLIE297sides,  Madame  de Broglie’s  kindness  had  touched  me,  and  renderedher  attractive  to  me.  I wafvery  glad  to  dine  with  her, and  I hopedthat,  when  she  knew  me  better,  she  would  have  no  cause  to  regrethaving  procured  me  this  honour.  The  President  of  Lamoignon,  agreat  friend  of the  family,  dined  there  on  the  same  occasion.  LikeMadame  de  Broglie,  he  was  familiar  with  the  small-talk  jargon  ofParis,  which  consisted  of petits  mots  and  delicate  little  allusions.  Inthis  poor  Jean  Jacques  had  little  chance  of  shining.  I had  the  goodsense  not  to  try  to  play  the  wit,  when  Minerva  was  not  agreeable,and  I held  my  tongue.  Would  that  I nad  always  been  as  wise!—Ishould  not  be  in the  abyss  in  which  I find  myself  to-day.I was  deeply  grieved  at  my  own  dulness,  and  also  because  I wasunable  to  justify,  in  the  eyes  of  Madame  de  Broglie,  what  she  haddone  in my  behalf.  After  dinner,  I bethought  myself  of my  usual  re-source.  I had  in  my  pocket a letter  in  verse,  which  I had  written  toParisot  during  my  stay  at  Lyons.  This  fragment  was  not  wanting  infire,  to  which  I added  by my  manner  of  reciting,  and  I moved  allthree  to  tears.  Whether  my  own  vanity  or  the  truth  made  me  so  in-terpret  it,  I thought  I saw  that  Madame  de Broglie’s  eyes  said  to  hermother,  Well,  mamma,  was  I wrong  in  telling  you,  that  this  man.  was  more  fitted  to  dine  with  you  than  with  your  waiting-women?Until  this  moment  my  heart  had  been  somewhat  heavy,  but  after  Ihad  thus  avenged  myself,  I was  satisfied.  Madame  de Broglie  pushedher  favourable  opinion  of  me a little  too  far,  and  believed  that  Ishould  cause  a  sensation  in  Paris  and  become  a  favourite  with  theladies.  To  guide  my  inexperience,  she  gave  me  the  “Confessions  ofthe  Comte  de.” “This  book,”  said  she  to  me,  “is  a  Mentor,  ofwhich  you  will  have  need  in  the  world;  you  will  do  well  to  consultit sometimes.”  I have  kept this  copy  for  more  than  twenty  years,  outof  a  feeling  of  gratitude  to  the  hand  from  which I received  it, al-though I often  laugh  at  the  opinion  which  this  lady  appeared  to  en-tertain  of my  capacities  for gallantry.  Directly  I had  read  the  work,  Idesired  to  gain  the  friendship  of  the  author.  This  inspiration  wasjustified  by the event.  He  is the  only true  friend  I have  had  amongstmen  of letters.®?I  was  so  long  and  so  firmly  convinced  of  this,  that  it was  to  him  that  I in-trusted  the  manuscript  of my  Confessions  after  my  return  to  Paris.  The  distrust-298THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUFrom  that  time,  I felt  confident  that  Madame  de  Beuzenval  andMadame  de  Broglie,  considering  the  interest  they  had  shown  in  me,would  not  long leave  me  without  resources,  and  I was  not  mistaken.Let  me  now  speak  of my  introduction  to  Madame  Dupin,  the  conse-quences  of which  were  more  lasting.As  is  well  known,  Madame  Dupin  was  the  daughter  of  SamuelBernard  2nd  Madame  Fontaine.  There  were  three  sisters,  who  mightbe called  the three  Graces—Madame  de la Touche,  who  ran  away  toEngland  with  the  Duke  of Kingston;  Madame  d’Arty,  the  mistressand,  what  was  more,  the  friend,  the  only  true  friend,  of the  Princede Conti—a  woman  worthy  to  be adored  as  much  for  the  gentlenessand  goodness  of her  charming  character  as  for  her  pleasant  wit  andthe  unalterable  cheerfulness  of  her  disposition;  lastly,  MadameDupin,  the  most  beautiful  of  the  three,  and  the  only  one  of  themwho  has  never  been  reproached  with  any  irregularity  of  conduct.She  was  the  reward  of the  hospitality  of M.  Dupin,  upon  whom  hermother  bestowed  her, together  with  a  post  as  farmer-general  of taxesand  an  immense  fortune,  out  of gratitude  for  the  kindly  manner  inwhich  he  had  received  her  in  his  province.  When  I saw  her  for  thefirst  time,  she  was  still  one  of  the  most  beautiful  women  in  Paris.She  received  me  while  she  was  dressing  herself.  Her  arms  were  bare,her  hair  dishevelled,  and  her  dressing-gown  disarranged.  Such  anintroduction  was  quite  new  to  me;  my  poor  head  could  not  stand  it;I was  troubled  and  confused;  in short,  I fell  madly  in love  with  her.My confusion  did  not  appear  to  create  a  bad  impression:  she  tookno  notice  of it.  She  received  the  book  and  the  author  kindly,  spoketo  me  about  my  system  like  one  who  knew  all  about  it, sang,  accom-panied  herself  on  the  piano,  made  me  stay  to  dinner,  and  gave  measeat  at  table  by her  side.  This  was  more  than  enough  to  turn  myhead  completely,  and  it did  so.  She  gave  me  permission  to  call  uponher, which  permission  I used  and  abused.  I went  to  her  house  nearlyevery  day, and  dined  there  two  or  three  times  a week.  I was  dying  todeclare  myself,  but  did  not  dare.  Several  reasons  increased  my  natu-ral  shyness.  The  entry  into  a  wealthy  house  was  an  open  door  to  for-tune;  in my  present  position,  I was  unwilling  to  run  the  risk  of shut-  .ful  Jean  Jacques  has  never  been  able  to  believe  in  treachery  and  falschood  until_  he  has  been  their  victim.MADAME  DUPIN299ting it against  myself.  Madame  Dupin,  with  all  her  amiability,  wasserious  and  cold;  I found  mothing  in  her  behaviour  sufficiently  en-couraging  to  embolden  me.  Her  house,  which  at  that  time  was  asbrilliant  as  any  in Paris,  was  the  rendezvous  of a society,  which,  if ithad  only been a little  less  numerous,  would  have  contained  the  pickof all  persons  of distinction.  She  was  fond  of gathering  around  herall  who  made  any  stir  in  the  world—great  personages,  men  of  let-ters,  and  handsome  women.  Only  dukes,  ambassadors  and  knightsof the blue  ribbon?®  were  seen  at  her house.  Madame  la Princesse  deRohan,  Madame  la Comtesse  de Forcalquier,  Madame  de Mirepoix,Madame  de  Brignolé  and  Lady  Hervey  might  be  considered  herfriends.  M.  de  Fontenelle,  M.  de  Fourmont,  M.  de  Bernis,  M.  deBuffon,  M.  de  Voltaire,  the  Abbé  de Saint-Pierre  and  the  Abbé  Sal-lier  were  members  of her  circle  and  were  invited  to  her  table.  If herreserved  manner  did  not  attract  a  large  number  of  young  people,the  society  which  assembled  at  her  house  was  the  more  select  and,consequently,  more  imposing;  and  the  poor  Jean  Jaques  could  notflatter  himself  with  the idea  of making  a  brilliant  figure  in the  midstof such  surroundings.  I therefore  did  not  venture  to  speak,  but,  be-ing unable  to  keep  silence  any  longer,  I ventured  to  write.  She  keptthe  letter  for  two  days  without  saying  anything  to  me  about  it.  Onthe third  day she returned  it to  me,  with  a  few  words  of admonition,spoken  in a tone  of coldness  which  froze  my  blood.  I tried  to  speak,the  words  died  upon  my  lips;  my  sudden  passion  was  extinguishedwith  my  hope,  and,  after  a  forma!  declaration  of  my  love,  I con-tinued  to  visit  her  as  before,  without  saying  a  word  more,  even  withmy  eyes.I believed  that  my  folly  was  forgotten:  I was  wrong.  M.  de Fran-cueil,  her  stepson,  was  about  the  same  age  as  myself  and  his  step-mother.  He  was  witty,  and  a  man  of handsome  person,  who  mighthave  looked  high.  It was  reported  that  he  aspired  to  the  favours  ofMadame  Dupin,  perhaps  simply  because  she  had  procured  him  avery  ugly but  at  the  same  time  very  gentle  wife,  and  lived in  perfectharmony  with both.  M.  de  Francueil  admired  talent in  others  and1  Knights  of ihe Holy  Ghost,  so  called  from  the  colour  of  the  ribbon  worn  bythem.  But  cordons  bleus  may  simply  mean  here  “distinguished  persons”  gener-ally.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU300cultivated  it. Music,  which  he understood  well,  was  a  bond  of unionbetween  us.  I saw  him  frequently,  and  became  intimate  with  him.Suddenly,  he gave  me  to  understand  that  Madame  Dupin  found  myvisits  too  frequent,  and  requested  me  to  discontinue  them.  Such  acompliment  would  not  have  been  out  of  place  when  she  gave  meback  my  letter;  but,  eight  or  ten  days  after,  without  any  further  ap-parent  reason  for  it, it seemed  to  me  inopportune.  What  made  thesituation  still  more  curious  was,  that  I was  made  no  less  welcome  atM.  and  Madame  de Francueil’s  house  than  before.  However,  I wentthere  less  frequently;  and  I should  have  discontinued  my  visits  alto-gether,  had  not  Madame  Dupin,  actuated  by  another  unforeseencaprice,  begged  me  to  undertake  for  eight  or  ten  days  the  charge  ofher  son,  who  was  changing  his  tutor,  and  was  left  to  himself  duringthe interval.  I spent  these  eight days in a  state  of torture,  which  noth-ing but the pleasure  of obeying  Madame  Dupin  could  render  endur-able;  for  poor  Chenonceaux  already  displayed  the  evil  dispositionwhich  nearly  brought  dishonour  upon  his  family,  and  caused  his.death  in the  Isle  de Bourbon.  As long as  I was  with  him,  I preventedhim  from  doing  harm  to  himself  or  others,  and  that  was  all;  be-sides,  it was  no  easy  task,  and  I would  not  have  undertaken  it foreight  days longer,  even  had  Madame  offered  herself  by way  of pay-ment.M.  de  Francueil  conceived  a  friendship  for  me:  we  worked  to-gether,  and  began a course  of chemistry  with  Rouelle.  In order  to  benear  him, I left  my  Hôtel  St.  Quentin,  and  went  to  lodge  at  the  Ten-nis  Court  in  the  Rue  Verdelet,  which  adjoins  the  Rue  Platriére,where  M.  Dupin  lived.  In consequence  of a  neglected  cold,  I was  at-tacked  by an  inflammation  of the lungs,  of which  I nearly  died.  Dur-ing  my  youth  I  frequently  suffered  from  inflammatory  diseases,pleurisy,  and,  especially,  quinsy,  to  which  I was  very  subject,  andothers,  of which  I need  not  here  give a list, which  have  all  broughtme  sufficiently  near  death  to  familiarise  me  with  its  appearance.During  the  period  of convalescence,  I had  time  to  reflect  upon  mycondition  and  to  lament  my  timidity,  my  weakness,  gnd  my  indo-lence,  which,  in spite  of the  fire  by which I felt  myself  inflamed,  leftme  to  vegetate  in mental  idleness  at  the  gate  of misery.  The  day be-fore  I fell  ill,  I had  gone  to  see  an  opera  by Royer,  which  was  being:COMPOSES  AN  OPERA301played  at  the  time,  the  name  of which  I have  forgotten.  In  spite  ofmy  prejudice  in  favour  of the  talents  of  others,  which  has  alwaysmade  me  so  mistrustful  of my  own,  I could  not  prevent  myself  fromthinking  the  music  feeble,  cold,  and  wanting  in  originality.  I evensometimes  said  to  myself:  It seems  to  me  that  I could  do better  thanthat.  But  the  awe-inspiring  idea  I had  formed  of the composition  ofan  opera,  the  importance  which  I heard  specialists  attach  to  such  anundertaking,  immediately  discouraged  me,  and  made  me  blush  forhaving  ventured  to  entertain  the  idea.  Besides,  where  was  I to  findanyone  who  would  be  willing  to  supply  me  with  the  words  and  totake  the  trouble  to  cast  them  according  to  my  liking?  These  ideas  ofmusic  and  an  opera  returned  to  me  during  my  illness,  and  in  myfeverish  delirium  I composed  songs,  duets,  and  choruses.  I am  cer-tain  that  I composed  two  or  three  pieces,  di  prima  intenzione,'which  perhaps  would  have  been  worthy  of  the  admiration  of  themasters,  if they  had  heard  them  performed.  If it were  only  possibleto  keep  a  record  of  the  dreams  of one  sick  of  the  fever,  what  greatand  lofty  things  would  sometimes  be  seen  to  result  from  his  de-lirium!The  same  subject  occupied  my  attention  also  during  my  conva-lescence,  but  I was  calmer.  After  long,  and  often  involuntary,  think-ing about  the  matter,  I determined  to  satisfy  myself,  and  to  attemptto  compose  an  opera,  words  and  music,  without  any  assistance  fromothers.  This  was  not  altogether  my  first  attempt.  At Chambéri  I hadcomposed a tragic  opera,  entitled  [phis  and  Anaxarete,  which  I hadhad  the  good  sense  to  throw  into  the  fire.  At Lyons  I had  composedanother,  The  Discovery  of the  New  World,  which,  after  I had  readit to  M.  Bordes,  the  Abbé  de  Mably,  the  Abbé  Trublet  and  others,  Itreated  in  the  same  manner,  although  I had  already  written  themusic  of the  prologue  and  the  first  act,  and  David,  when  he  saw  themusic,  had  told  me  that  it contained  passages  worthy  of  Buonon-cini.!?1  Of-hand,  in  a  moment  of  inspiration;  tout  d'une  haleine  is  the  interpretastion  given  to  the  equivalent  French  phrase,  when  used  in  reference  to  a  musicalcomposition..12  There  were  three  famous  Italian  musicians  of this  name,  a  father  and  his  twosons.  The  younger  son,  who  stayed  some  time  in  England,  had  the  greatest  repu-tation.302THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUThis  time,  before  putting  my  hand  to  the  work,  I gave  myselftime  to  think  over  my  plan.  I sketched  an  epic ballet,  with  three  dif-ferent  subjects,  in three  separate  acts,  each  set  to  music  of a  differentcharacter,  and  taking  for  the  subject  of each  the  amours  of a poet.  Icalled  the  opera  Les  Muses  Galantes.  My  first  act,  in  the  powerfulstyle,  was  Tasso;  the  second,  in the  tender  style,  was  Ovid;  the  third,entitled  Anacreon,  was  intended  to  breathe  the  gaiety  of  the  dithy-ramb.  I first  tried  my  skill  on  the  first  act,  and  devoted  myself  to  itwith  a  zeal  which,  for  the  first  time,  enabled  me  to  taste  the  charmof enthusiasm  in  composition.  One  evening,  just  as  I was  going  toenter  the  opera-house,  I felt  myself  so  overmastered  and  tormentedby my  ideas,  that  I put  my  money  back  into  my  pocket,  ran  homeand  shut  myself  in.  I went  to  bed,  having  first  drawn  the  curtainsclose  to  prevent  the  daylight  entering,  and  there,  entirely  abandon-ing myself  to  the  poetical  and  musical  inspiration,  in  seven  or  eighthours  I rapidly  composed  the  greater  part  of the  act.  I may  say  thatmy  love  for the  Princess  of Ferrara—for  I was  Tasso  for the  moment—and  my  noble  and  haughty  feelings  in  the  presence  of  her  unjustbrother,  made  me  pass  a  night a  hundred  times  more  delightful  thanif I had  spent  it in  the  arms  of the  Princess  herself.  In  the  morning,only  a  very  small  portion  of  what  I had  composed  remained  in  myhead;  but  this  little,  almost  obliterated  by weariness  and  sleep,  never-theless  bore  evidence  of  the  vigour  of  the  whole,  of  which  it onlyrepresented  the  remains.This  time  I did  not  carry  on  my  work  to  any  great  extent,  as  I wasdiverted  from  it by other  matters.  While  I was  attached  to  the  houseof Dupin,  Madame  de  Beuzenval  and  Madame  de  Broglie,  whom  Istill  saw  occasionally,  had  not  forgotten  me.  The  Comte  de  Mon-taigu,  a  captain  in  the  guards,  had  just been  appointed  ambassadorat  Venice.  He  owed  his  ambassadorship  to  Barjac,  to  whom  he  as-siduously  paid  court.  His  brother,  the  Chevalier  de  Montaigu,  gen-tulhomme  de la manche”?  to  the Dauphin,  was  acquainted  with  thesetwo  ladies,  and  with  the Abbé  Alary,  of the French  Academy,  whomI also  saw  sometimes.  Madame  de Broglie,  knowing  that  the  ambas-13Gentlshommes  de  la  manche  was  the  name  given  to  noblemen  who  at-Stended  on  the  French  princes  until  they  had  finished  their  education.QUARANTINE  AT  GENOA303sador  was  looking  out  for  a  secretary,  proposed  me.  We  entered  intonegotiations.  I asked  fitty*ouzs  as  salary,  which  was  little  enough  fora  post  in  which  it was  necessary  to  keep  up  an  appearance.  He  onlyoffered  a  hundred  pistoles,*  and  I was  to  pay  my  own  travelling  ex-penses.  The  proposal  was  ridiculous.  We  were  unable  to  come  toterms.  M.  de Francueil,  who  did  his  utmost  to  prevent  me  from  go-ing, in the  end  prevailed.  I remained,  and  M.  de Montaigu  departed,taking  with  him  another  secretary,  named  M.  Follau,  who  had  beenrecommended  to  him  at  the  Foreign  Office.  No  sooner  had  they  ar-rived  at  Venice  than  they  quarrelled.  Follau,  seeing  that  he  had  todo with  a  madman,  left  him  in the  lurch;  and  M.  de Montaigu,  hav-ing no  one  but  a  young  abbé  named  de  Binis,  who  wrote  under.  thesecretary’s  instruction,  and  was  not  in a  position  to  fill the  place,  wasobliged  to  have  recourse  to  me  again.  The  chevalier,  his  brother,  aman  of intelligence,  by giving  me  to  understand  that  there  were  cer-tain  privileges  connected  with  the  post  of secretary,  succeeded  in in-ducing  me  to  accept  the  thousand  francs.  I received  twenty  Jouts  formy  travelling  expenses,  and  set  out.[1743-1744.|—At  Lyons,  I should  have  liked  to  take  the route  byway  of  Mont  Cenis,  in  order  to  pay  a  passing  visit  to  my  poormamma;  but  I went  down  the  Rhône,  and  took  ship  at  Geneva  forToulon,  on  account  of the war  and  for  the  sake  of economy,  and  alsoin  order  to  procure  a  passport  from  M.  de  Mirepoix,  at  that  timecommander  in Provence,  to  whom  I had  been  directed.  M.  de  Mon-taigu,  finding  himself  unable  te  do  without  me,  wrote  me  letterafter  letter  to  hasten  my  journey.  An  incident  delayed  it.It  was  the  time  of  the  plague  at  Messina.  The  English  fleet  wasanchored  there,  and  visited  the  felucca  on  which  I was.  On  our  ar-rival  at  Genoa,  after  a  long  and  tedious  passage,  we  were  subjectedto  a  quarantine  of  twenty-one  days.  The  passengers  were  allowedthe  choice  of performing  it on  board  or  in  the  lazaretto,  where  wewere  warned  that  we  should  find  nothing  but  the  four  walls,  sincethere  had  been  no  time  to  furnish  it. All chose  the felucca  except  my-self.  The  insupportable  heat,  the  confined  space,  the  impossibility  oftaking  exercise,  and  the  vermin  on  board,  made  me  prefer  the  laza-1  A louis  was  then  worth  twenty-four  francs,  a  pistole  ten.304THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUretto  at  all hazards.  I was  conducted  into  a  large  two-storeyed  build-ing,  absolutely  bare,  in  which  I found  neither  windows,  nor  table,nor  bed,  nor  chair—not  even  a stool  to  sit  upon,  nor  a  bundle  ofstraw  to  lie  on.  They  brought  me  my  cloak,  my  travelling  bag,  andmy  two  trunks;  the  heavy  doors  with  huge  locks  were  shut  uponme,  and  I remained  at  liberty  to  walk  as  I pleased,  from  room  toroom  and  from  storey  to  storey,  finding  everywhere  the  same  soli-tude  and  the  same  bareness.In  spite  of all  this,  I did  not  regret  having  chosen  the  lazaretto  inpreference  to  the  felucca;  and,  like  a  second  Robinson  Crusoe,  I be-gan  to  make  the  same  arrangements  for  my  twenty-one  days  as  Ishould  have  done  for  my  whole  life.  At  first,  I had  the  amusementof  hunting  the  lice  which  I had  picked  up  in  the  felucca.  When,after  frequent  changes  of  clothing  and  linen,  I had  at  length  suc-ceeded  in  getting  myself  clean,  I  proceeded  to  furnish  the  roomwhich  I had  chosen.  I made  myself  a  good  mattress  out  of my  waist-coats  and  shirts,  some  sheets  out  of  a  number  of  napkins  which  Isewed  together,  a  blanket  out  of my  dressing-gown,  a  pillow  out  ofmy  cloak  rolled  up.  I made a seat  of one  of my  trunks  laid  flat,  anda  table  of  the  other  set  on  end.  I took  out  an  inkstand  and  somepaper;  and  arranged  about  a  dozen  books  which  I had  by way  of alibrary.  In  short,  I made  myself  so  comfortable  that,  with  the  excep-tion  of  windows  and  curtains,  I was  almost  as  well  lodged  in  thisabsolutely  bare  lazaretto  as  in my  Tennis  Court  in the  Rue  Verdelet.My meals  were  served  with  much  ceremony.  Two  grenadiers,  withfixed  bayonets,  accompanied  them;  the  staircase  was  my  dining-room,  the  landing  did  duty  for  a  table,  the  bottom  step  for a seat,and, as  soon  as  my  dinner  was  served,  they retired,  after  having  runga  bell,  to  inform  me  that  I might  sit  down  to  table.  Between  mymeals,  when  I was  not  reading,  writing,  or  working  at  my  furnish-ing, I went  for  a  walk  in  the  Protestant  cemetery,  which  served  meas  a  courtyard,  or  I ascended  a turret,  from  which  I could  see  theships entering  and  leaving  the  harbour.  In  this  manner  I spent  four-teen  days;  and  I could  have  spent  the  whole  twenty-one  there  with-out  a  moment’s  weariness,  had  not  M.  de  Jonville,  the  French  am-bassador,  to whom  I managed  to  send  a letter  saturated  with  vinegar,perfumed,  and  half-burnt,  procured  me  a  remission  of  eight  days,which  I spent  at  his  house,  where,  I confess,  I found  myself  moreARRIVES  AT  VENICE305,comfortably  lodged  than  at  the  lazaretto.  He  treated  me  with  verygreat  kindness.  Dupont,  Iffs  secretary,  was  a  good  fellow,  who  intro-duced  me  to  several  houses,  both  in Genoa  and  in the country,  wherewe  were  agreeably  entertained.  We  became  very  good  friends,  andkept up  a  correspondence  for  a  long time  afterwards.  I had a pleas-ant  journey  through  Lombardy.  I visited  Milan,  Verona,  Brescia,and  Padua,  and  at  length  reached  Venice,  where  the  ambassadorwas  impatiently  expecting  me.I found  heaps  of despatches  from  the  Court  and  the  other  ambas-sadors,  of  which  he  had  been  unable  to  read  the  parts  written  incipher,  although  he possessed  the  key. As  I had  never  worked  in anyoffice,  and  had  never  in  my  life  seen  a  government  cipher,  I was  atfirst  afraid  of  finding  myself  perplexed;  but  I found  that  nothingcould  be more  simple,  and  in less  than  a  week  I had  deciphered  thewhole,  which  certainly  was  not  worth  the  trouble,  for  the  embassyat  Venice  has  seldom  much  to  do,  and,  besides,  the  governmentwould  not  have  cared  to  intrust  the  most  trifling  negotiation  to  aman  like  M.  de  Montaigu.  Until  my  arrival  he  had  found  himselfin great  difficulties,  since  he did  not  know  how  to  dictate  or  to  writelegibly.  I was  very  useful  to  him;  he was  aware  of it, and  treated  mewell.  He  had  another  reason  for  this.  After  the  departure  of  hispredecessor,  M.  de  Fronlay,  who  had  gone  out  of  his  mind,  theFrench  consul,  M.  le  Blond,  had  taken  over  the  affairs  of  the  em-bassy,  and  eyen  after  the  arrival  of  M.  de  Montaigu,  continued  tomanage  them  until  he  had  familiarised  the  latter  with  the  routine.M.  de Montaigu,  in his  jealousy  at  the  performance  of his  duties  byanother,  although  he  himself  was  incapable  of  them,  conceived  anaversion  to  the  consul,  and, as  soon  as  I arrived,  deprived  him  of thefunctions  of ambassadorial  secretary,  in order  to  hand  them  over  tome.  These  functions  being  inseparable  from  the  title,  he  told  me  toassume  it. As long as  I remained  with  him, he never  sent  anyone,  ex-cept  myself,  under  this  name  to  the  Senate  or  persons  sent  by it toconfer  with  him,!®  and  really,  it  was  very  natural  that  he  shouldprefer  to  have  as  ambassadorial  secretary  a  person  attached  to  him-self  than  a  consul  or  office-clerk  appointed  by the  Court.This  made  my  situation  tolerably  agreeable  and  prevented  his1  Conférent:  the  dignitary  sent  by  the  Senate  of  the  Republic  of  Venice  toconfer  with  foreign  ambassadors.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU306noblemen,  who,  like  his  pages  and  most  of his  people,  were  Italians,from  disputing  precedence  with  me  in the  house.  I successfully  madeuse  of the  authority  attached  to  it to  maintain  his  droit  de liste,  thatis to  say,  the freedom  of his quarter,  against  the attempts  which  wereseveral  times  made  to  infringe  it, and  which  his  Venetian  officerswere  unwilling  or  unable  to  resist.  But  I never  allowed  banditti  totake  refuge  there,  although  I might  thereby  have  gained  consider-able  profit,  which  his  Excellency  would  not  have  disdained  to  share.He  even  presumed  to  lay claim  to  part  of  the  perquisites  of  thesecretaryship,  which  were  called  the  chancellerie.  Although  it wasin time  of war,  a  number  of passports  had  to  be made  out.  For  eachof these  passports  a  sequin!®  was  paid to  the  secretary  who  drew  outand  countersigned  them.  All  my  predecessors  had  been  in the  habitof  demanding  this  sequin  from  Frenchmen  and  foreigners  alike.This  practice  appeared  to  me  unfair,  and,  although  I was  not  aFrenchman,  I abolished  it in  the  case  of  the  French;  but  I exactedmy  perquisite  so  rigorously  from  everyone  else  that,  when  the  Mar-quis  Scotti,  the  brother  of the  favourite  of the  Queen  of  Spain,  hadsent  a  messenger  to  me  for  a  passport  without  my  perquisite,  I sentto  ask  him  for  it—a  piece  of audacity  which  the  revengeful  Italiandid  not  forget.  As  soon  as  the  reform  which  I had  introduced  in  re-gard  to  the  taxing  of passports  became  known,  nothing  but  crowdsof pretended  Frenchmen  presented  themselves  in  order  to  procurethem,  who, in a  fearful  jargon,  called  themselves  Provençals,  Picardsand  Burgundians.  As  I have  a  tolerably  keen  ear,  I was  rarely  takenin, and  I do not  believe  that  a  single  Italian  ever  did  me  out  of my  se-quin,  or  that  a  single  Frenchman  paid it. I was  foolish  enough  to  tellM.  de Montaigu,  who  knew  nothing  about  anything,  of what  I haddone.  The  word  sequin  made  him  open  his  ears,  and,  without  ex-pressing  any  opinion  upon  the  suppression  of the fees  for  the French,he demanded  that  I should  settle  with  him  on  account  of the  others,promising  me  other  equivalent  advantages  in  return.  Indignant  atthis  meanness,  rather  than  influenced  by feelings  of  self-interest,  Iscornfully  rejected  his  proposal.  He  persisted;  I grew  warm.  “No,monsieur,”  I said  to  him  in a decided  tone,  “let your  Excellency  keepwhat  belongs  to  you,  and  leave  me  what  is mine;  I will  never  give1!  Worth  from  nine  to  twelve  francs.STUPIDITY  OF  M.  DE  MONTAIGU307up  a  sou.”  When  he saw  that  he could  gain  nothing  by this  means,he  adopted  another  planyeand  had  the  effrontery  to  say  to  me  thatsince  I drew  the  perquisites  of his chancellerie,  it was  only fair  that  Ishould  bear  the  expenses  of it. I did  not  care  to  squabble  about  sucha  trifle,  and  from  that  time  I provided  my  own  ink,  paper,  sealing-wax,  candles,  ribbon  and  even  the  seal,  which  I had  repaired,  with-out  receiving  a  farthing  from  him  by way  of  reimbursement.  Thisdid not  prevent  me  from  making  over  a  small  share  of the fees  to  theAbbé  de Binis,  who  was  a  good fellow,  and  never  attempted  to  claimit. If he was  civil  to  me,  I was  equally  straightforward  with  him, andwe  always  got on  very  well  together.I found  the  performance  of my  duties  less  difficult  than  I had  ex-pected,  seeing  that  I had  no  experience,  and  was  associated  with  anambassador  who  was  equally  inexperienced,  whose  ignorance  andobstinacy,  in  addition,  seemed  to  delight  in  thwarting  everythingthat  good  sense  and  some  little  knowledge  suggested  to  me  as  likelyto  be useful  for the  King’s  service  and  his own.  His  most  sensible  actwas  to  form  a connection  with  the Marquis  de Mari,  the  Spanish  am-bassador,  a  clever  and  shrewd  person,  who  could  have  led  him  bythe nose  if he had  been  so  minded,  but  who,  out  of consideration  forthe  common  interests  of the  two  Courts,  usually  gave  him  good  ad-vice,  which  was  rendered  useless  by M.  de  Montaigu,  who  alwaysintruded  some  of  his  own  ideas  when  carrying  it  out.  The  onlything  they had  to  do in common  was  to  induce  the  Venetians  to  ob-serve  neutrality.  The  latter,  who  continually  protested  their  faithfulobservance  of  it, nevertheless  publicly  supplied  the  Austrian  troopswith  ammunition,  and  even  with  recruits,  under  the  pretence  thatthey were  deserters.  M.  de Montaigu,  who,  I believe,  desired  to  gainthe  goodwill  of the  Republic,  in  spite  of my  representations,  invari-ably made  me  give assurances  in all his  despatches  that  there  was  nofear  that  the  Venetians  would  ever  violate  the  conditions  of neutral-ity.  The  obstinacy  and  stupidity  of  this  poor  man  made  me  everymoment  write  and  commit  absurdities,  of which  I was  obliged  to  bethe  agent  since  he  so  desired  it, but  which  sometimes  rendered  theperformance  of  my  duties  unendurable  and  even  almost  impracti-cable.  For  instance,  he  insisted  that  most  of  his  despatches  to  theKing and  the Minister  should  be written  in cipher,  although  neitherTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU308the  one  nor  the  other  contained  anything  at  all which  rendered  sucha  precaution  necessary.  I represented  to  him  that,  between  Friday,when  the  despatches  from  the  Court  arrived,  and  Saturday,  whenour  own  were  sent  off,  there  was  not  sufficient  time  for  so  muchwriting  in  cipher  and  the  large  amount  of correspondence  which  Ihad  to  get  ready  for  the  same  courier.  He  discovered  an  admirableplan: this was,  to  begin  on  Thursday,  to  write  the answers  to  the  des-patches  which  were  due  on  the  following  day.  This  idea  appearedto  him  so  happy  that,  in  spite  of all  I could  say  to  the  impossibilityand  absurdity  of carrying  it out,  I was  obliged  to  resign  myself  to  it.For  the  rest  of the  time  that  I remained  with  him,  after  having  keptnote  of a  few  words  uttered  by him  at  random  during  the  week,  andof  some  trifling  pieces  of  information  which  I picked  up  here  andthere,  provided  with  these  scanty  materials,  I never  failed  to  bringhim  on  Thursday  morning  the  rough  draft  of the  despatches  whichhad  to  be  sent  off  on  Saturday,  with  the  exception  of a  few  hurriedadditions  or  corrections  which  were  rendered  necessary  by the  des-patches  which  arrived  on  Friday,  to  which  ours  were  intended  to  bethe  reply.  Another  very  amusing  whim  of his, which  made  his  cor-respondence  indescribably  ridiculous,  was  to  send  back  each  item  ofnews  to  its  source,  instead  of making  it follow  its course.  He  sent  thenews  from  the  Court  to  M.  Amelot,  the  news  from  Paris  to  M.  deMaurepas,  the  news  from  Sweden  to  M.  d’Havrincourt,  the  newsfrom  St.  Petersburg  to  M.  de  la  Chetardie;  and  sometimes  he  sentback  to  each  of  these  the  news  which  came  from  him,  after  I hadslightly  altered  it. As  he  only glanced  through  the  despatches  to  theCourt,  out  of all  that  I put  before  him  to  sign,  and  signed  those  tothe  other  ambassadors  without  reading  them,  this  gave  me a littlemore  liberty  to  revise  the  latter  in my  own  way,  and  at  least  I madethe information  cross.  But  it was  impossible  for me  to  give a  sensibleturn  to  the important  despatches.  I thought  myself  lucky  when  it didnot  occur  to  him  to  interlard  them  with  some  impromptu  lines  out  ofhis  own  head,  which  obliged  me  to  return,  in order  to  transcribe,  inall  haste,  the  despatch  adorned  with  this  new  piece  of  imbecility,which  was  obliged  to  be  honoured  with  the  cipher,  otherwise  hewould  not  have  signed  it.  I was  often  tempted,  out  of regard  for  hisreputation,  to  cipher  something  different  from  what  he  had  dic-=ROUSSEAU  ACTS.AS  AMBASSADOR309tated,  but  feeling  that  nothing  could  justify  such  a  breach  of goodfaith,  I let him  rave  at  his@wn  risk,  content  with  frankly  expressingmy  opinion,  and,  at  any  rate,  fulfilling  my  duty  while  I was  in hisservice.This  I always  did  with  an  honesty,  a  zeal, and  a courage  which  de-served  on  his  part  a  different  reward  from  that  which I received  inthe  end.  It  was  time  that  I should  for  once  be  what  Heaven,  whehad  bestowed  upon  me a happy  disposition,  and  what  the education,which  I had  received  from  the  best  women,  and  that  which  I hadgiven  myself,  had  intended  me  to  be, and  that  I was  then.  Left  tomyself,  without  friends,  without  advisers,  without  experience,  in  aforeign  land,  in  the  service  of  a  foreign  nation,  surrounded  by acrowd  of rascals,  who,  for  the  sake  of their  own  interest  and  in orderto  remove  the  stumbling-block  of a  good  example,  urged  me  to  imiztate  them—in  spite  of all  this,  far  from  doing  anything  of the  kind,I faithfully  served  France,  to  whom  I owed  nothing,  and, as  was  onlyright,  her  ambassador  even  more  faithfully,  in  all  that  dependedupon  myself.  Irreproachable  in  a  position  which  was  sufficientlyopen  to  observation,  I deserved  and  obtained  the  esteem  of the  Re-public  and  of all the  ambassadors  with  whom  we  corresponded,  andthe  affection  of all  the  French  residents  in  Venice,  not  even  except-ing  the  consul,  whom,  to  my  regret,  I supplanted  in  the  perform-ance  of  duties  which  I knew  rightly  belonged  to  him,  and  whichbrought  me  more  trouble  than  pleasure.M.  de  Montaigu,  completely  under  the  control  of  the  MarquisMari,  who  did  not  trouble  himself  about  the  details  of his  duty,  neg-lected  his  own  to  such  an  extent,  that  the  French  who  lived  in  Ven-ice  would  never  have  known  that  there  was  a  French  ambassadorresident  in  the  city,  had  it not  been  for  me.  Being  always  dismissedwithout  a  hearing,  whenever  they  sought  his  protection,  they  be-came  disgusted,  and  none  of them  were  ever  seen  in  his  suite  or  athis  table,  to  which,  in fact,  he never  invited  them.  I frequently  tookit upon  myself  to  do  what  he  ought  to  have  done:  I did  all  I couldfor  the  French  who  applied  to  him  or  me.  In  any  other  country  Iwould  have  done  more,  but  as,  by reason  of  my  official  capacity,  Icould  not  see  anyone  who held  any  position,  I was  frequently  obligedto  refer  to  the  consul,  who,  being  settled  in  the  country  with  hisTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU310family,  was  obliged  to  be  careful,  which  prevented  him  from  doingas  much  as  he, would  have  liked.  Sometimes,  however,  when  hehung  back  and  did  not  venture  to  speak,  I was  emboldened  to  takedangerous  steps,  which  generally  proved  successful.  I remember  oneinstance  which  even  now  makes  me  laugh.  It would  hardly  be  sus-pected  that  it is to  me  that  the  theatre-goers  of Paris  are  indebted  forCoralline  and  her  sister  Camille;  but  nothing  is more  true.  Veronese,their  father,  had  accepted  an  engagement  for  himself  and  his  chil-dren  in the  Italian  company,  and,  after  having  received  2,000  francsfor travelling  expenses,  instead  of starting  for France,  quietly  enteredinto  an  engagement  at  the  thédtre  de  Saint-Luc™  in  Venice,  whereCoralline,  although  quite  a  child,  attracted  large  audiences.  M.  leDue  de  Gesvres,  as  lord  high  chamberlain,  wrote  to  the  ambassadorto  claim  the  father  and  daughter.  M.  de  Montaigu  handed  me  theletter,  and  simply  said  “See  to  this,”  without  giving  me  any  furtherinstructions.  I went  to  M.  le Blond,  and  begged  him  to  speak  to  thepatrician  to  whom  the  theatre  belonged,  who  was,  I believe,  a  Gius-tiniani,  and  persuaded  him  to  dismiss  Veronese,  as  being  engaged  inthe  King’s  service.  Le  Blond,  who  was  not  very  eager  to  accept  thecommission,  performed  it badly.  Giustiniani  had  recourse  to  varioussubterfuges,  and  Veronese  was  not  discharged.  I felt  annoyed.  It wasthe  time  of the  Carnival.  I took  a  domino  and  a  mask  and  rowed  tothe  palace  Giustiniani.  All  who  saw  my  gondola  arrive  with  the  am-bassador’s  livery  were  astounded;  such  a  thing  had  never  been  seenin Venice.  I entered,  and  ordered  myself  to  be announced  as  “a ladyin  a  mask.”  As  soon  as  I was  introduced,  I removed  my  mask  andannounced  myself.  The  senator  turned  pale,  and  stood  astounded.“Monsieur,”  I said  to  him  in Venetian,  “I regret  to  trouble  your  Ex-cellency  with  this  visit,  but  you  have  at  your  theatre  a  man  namedVeronese,  who  is  engaged  in  the  King’s  service,  who  has  beenclaimed  from  you,  but  without  success.  I come  to  demand  him  inHis  Majesty’s  name.”  This  brief  speech  took  effect.  No  sooner  hadI left,  than  Giustiniani  ran  to  give  an  account  of the  incident  to  theState  Inquisitors,  who  reprimanded  him  severely.  Veronese  was  dis-I am  not  sure  that  it  was  not  Saint-Samuel.  I never  can  remember  propera::names.CAPTAIN  OLIVET31Imissed  the  same  day. I sent  him  a  message  that, if he did not  start  ina  week,  I would  have  hifi  arrested,  and  he  set  out  without  delay.On  another  occasion,  by my  own  efforts  and  almost  without  any-one’s  assistance,  I extricated  the  captain  of  a  merchant  ship  from  adifficulty.  He  was  a  Marseillais,  named  Olivet.  I have  forgotten  the  .name  of the  ship.  A  quarrel  had  broken  out  between  his  crew  andthe  Slavonians  in  the  service  of  the  Republic.  Acts  of  violence  hadbeen  committed,  and  the  vessel  had  been  placed  under  such  strictembargo  that  no  one,  with  the  exception  of the  captain,  was  allowedto  go  on  board  or  leave  it without  permission.  He  appealed  to  theambassador,  who  told  him  to  go  to  the  devil.  Next  he applied  to  theconsul,  who  told  him that  it was  not  a commercial  matter,  and  thathe could  not  interfere.  At his wits’  end,  he came  to  me.  I representedto  M.  de  Montaigu,  that  he  ought  to  allow  me  to  present  a  note  onthe  subject  to  the  Senate.  I do not  know  whether  he gave  me  permis-sion,  and  whether I did  so,  but  I well  remember  that,  as  my  attemptsproved  ineffectual  and  the  embargo  was  not  removed,  I resolvedupon  a  course  of  action  which  proved  successful.  I inserted  an  ac-count  of the  affair  in a  despatch  to  M.  de Maurepas,  although  I hadgreat  difficulty  in persuading  M.  de  Montaigu  to  allow  it to  stand.  Iknew  that  our  despatches,  although  they  were  hardly  worth  thetrouble,  were  opened  at  Venice.  I had  proof  of this:  for  I found  pas-sages  from  them  reproduced  word  for  word  in  the  “Gazette”—abreach  of  faith  of  which  I had  vainly  endeavoured  to  induce  theambassador  to  complain.  My  object,  in  speaking  of  this  annoyingcircumstance  in the  despatch,  was  to  make  use  of the curiosity  of theVenetians,  in order  to  frighten  them  and  induce  them  to  release  thevessel;  for  if it had  been  necessary  to  wait  for  an  answer  from  theCourt  upon  the matter,  the captain  would  have  been  ruined  before  itarrived.  I did  more.  I went  on  board  to  question  the  crew.  I tookwith  me  the  Abbé  Patizel,  chancellor  of the  consulate,  who  only  ac-companied  me  with  reluctance,  for  all  these  poor  creatures  weregreatly  afraid  of offending  the  Senate.  Being  unable  to  go  on  board,on  account  of the  prohibition,  I remained  in  my  gondola  and  drewup my  report,  interrogating  all the crew  in a  loud  voice,  one  after  theother,  and  framing  my  questions  in  such  a  manner  as  to  obtain  re-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU312plies  which  might  be to  their  advantage.  I wanted  to  induce  Patizelto  put  the  questions  and  draw  up  the  report  himself,  which,  in  fact,was  more  his  business  than  mine,  but  he  refused.  He  never  said  aword,  and  would  scarcely  consent  to  sign the  report  after  me.  How-ever,  this  somewhat  bold  course  proved  successful,  and  the  vesselwas  released  long  before  the  minister’s  answer  arrived.  The  captainwanted  to  make  me  a  present.  Without  showing  any  displeasure,  Islapped  him  on  the  shoulder  and  said,  “Capitaine  Olivet,  do  youthink  that  a  man  who  does  not  demand  from  the  French  the  fee  forpassports,  which  he finds  established  as  a  right,  is likely  to  sell  themthe  protection  of the  King?”  He  asked  me  at  least  to  dine  on  board.I accepted  the  invitation,  and  took  with  me  Carrio,  the  secretary  tothe  Spanish  embassy,  an  amiable  and  talented  man,  who  has  sinceheld  a  similar  position  at  Paris,  as  well  as  that  of chargé  d'affaires,and  with  whom I had  formed  an  intimacy,  after  the  manner  of ourambassadors.I should  have  been  happy  if, when  I was  doing  all the  good  I wasable  to  do  with  the  most  absolute  disinterestedness,  I had  knownhow  to  introduce  sufficient  order  and  accuracy  into  all  my  triflingaffairs,  so  as  to  avoid  being  taken  in myself  and  serving  others  at  myown  expense!  But, in positions  such  as  that  which  I held,  in whichthe  slightest  mistakes  are  not  without  consequences,  I exhausted  allmy  attention  in  the  effort  not  to  commit  any  errors  detrimental  tomy  service.  In  all  that  concerned  the  essential  duties  of my  office,  Iwas  to  the  last  most  regular  and  exact.  With  the  exception  of a  fewerrors,  which  excessive  haste  caused  me  to  make  in  ciphering,  ofwhich  M.  Amelot’s  clerks  once  complained,  neither  the  ambassadornor  anyone  else  had  ever  to  reproach  me  with  carelessness  in the per-formance  of any  of my  duties,  which  was  remarkable  for  a  man  socareless  and  thoughtless  as  I am:  but  I was  sometimes  forgetful  andcareless  in  the  conduct  of  special  commissions  which  I undertook,and  my  love  of justice  always  made  me  take  the  blame  upon  myselfof my  own  accord,  before  anyone  thought  of making  a  complaint.  Iwill  merely  mention  one  instance,  which  has  reference  to  my  depar-p: from  Venice,  and  of  which  I subsequently  felt  the  effects  inaris.Our  cook,  named  Rousselot,  had  brought  from  France  an  oldA  TROUBLESOME  AFFAIR313two-hundred-franc  bill, which  a  wig-maker  of his  acquaintance  hadreceived  from  a  Venetian fioble,  Zanetto  Nani,  in payment  for  somewigs  supplied.  Rousselot  brought  this  bill  to  me,  and  begged  me  tosee  whether  anything  could  be  made  out  of  it  by arrangement.  Iknew,  and  he knew,  also,  that  it is the  regular  practice  of Venetiannobles  never  to  pay  debts  contracted  in a  foreign  country  when  oncethey have  returned  home;  if any  attempt  is made  to  compel  them  todo so,  they wear  out  the  unhappy  creditor  with  so  many  delays,  andput  him  to  such  expense,  that  he  becomes  disheartened,  and  finallyabandons  his  claim  altogether,  or  accepts  the  most  trifling  composi-tion.  I asked  M. le Blond  to  speak to  Zanetto,  who  acknowledged  thebill,  but  refused  to  pay.  After  a  long  struggle  he  promised  to  paythree  sequins.  When  Le  Blond  took  him  the  bill,  the  three  sequinswere  not  ready,  and  there  was  nothing  for it but to  wait.  During  theinterval  occurred  my  quarrel  with  M.  de  Montaigu  and  my  retire-ment  from  his service.  I left the ambassador’s  papers  in perfect  order,but  Rousselot’s  bill  could  not  be found.  M.  le Blond  assured  me  thathe had  returned  it to  me.  I knew  his  honourable  character  too  wellto  doubt  his  word,  but  I was  utterly  unable  to  recall  to  mind  whathad  become  of  the  bill.  As  Zanetto  had  acknowledged  the  debt,  Ibegged  Le Blond  to  try and  get the  three  sequins  by giving  him a re-ceipt,  or  to  induce  him  to  renew  the  bill  in  duplicate;  but  Zanetto,when  he  knew  that  the  bill  was  lost,  refused  to  do  either.  I offeredthe three  sequins  to  Rousselot  out  of my  own  pocket,  in order  to  dis-charge  the bill.  He  refused  to  take  them,  and  told  me  to  arrange  thematter  with  the  creditor  in  Paris,  whose  address  he  gave  me.  Butthe wig-maker,  who  knew  what  had  happened,  demanded  his bill  orpayment  in full.  In my  indignation,  what  would  I not  have  given  tofind  the  accursed  bill!  I paid  the  two  hundred  francs  myself,  andthat  at  a  time  when  I was  greatly  pressed  for  money.  Thus,  the  lossof  the  bill  procured  for  the  creditor  payment  of  the  debt  in  full,whereas  if, unfortunately  for him, it had  been  found,  he would  haveexperienced a difficulty  in  getting  the  ten  crowns  promised  by hisExcellency  Zanetto  Nani.The  capacity  for  my  employment,  which  I believed  I possessed,made  my  work  agreeable;  and,  with  the  exception  of the  society  ofmy  friend  Carrio,  and  the  excellent  Altuna  (of whom I shall  speakTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU314presently),  the  very  innocent  recreations  of  the  theatre  and  thePiazza  di San  Marco,  and  a  few  visits  which  we  nearly  always  paidtogether,  I found  my  only pleasure  in the  performance  of my  duties.Although  my  work  was  not  very  laborious,  especially  as  I had  theassistance  of  the  Abbé  de  Binis,  I was  always  tolerably  busy,  sinceour  correspondence  was  very  extensive  and  war  was  going  on.  Everyday I worked  for  the  greater  part  of the  morning,  and  on  post-dayssometimes  until  midnight.  I devoted  the  remainder  of  my  time  tothe  study of the  profession  which  I was  entering  upon,  and  in whichI hoped,  in consequence  of my  successful  début,  to  be appointed  to  amore  lucrative  post.  In  fact,  there  was  only  one  opinion  concerningme,  beginning  with  that  of  the  ambassador,  who  was  thoroughlysatished  with  my  services,  and  never  made a single  complaint.  Hissubsequent  rage  arose  from  the fact  that,  finding  that  my  complaintswere  not  listened  to,  I demanded  my  discharge.  The  ambassadorsand  ministers  of the  King,  with  whom  we  were  in correspondence,paid  him  compliments  upon  the  efficiency  of  his  secretary,  whichought  to  have  been  flattering  to  him,  but  which  produced  quite  thecontrary  effect  in his  perverse  head.  One  compliment,  in particular,which  he  received  on  a special  occasion,  he  never  forgave  me.  Thecircumstances  deserve  explanation.He  was  so  little  capable  of imposing  any  constraint  upon  himself,that  even  on  Saturday,  the  day on  which  nearly  all the  couriers  left,he could  not  wait  till  the  work  was  finished  before  going  out;  and,incessantly  urging  me  to  finish  the  despatches  for  the  King  and  theministers,  he hurriedly  signed  them  and  ran  off I know  not  whither,generally  leaving  the  rest  of  the  letters  unsigned.  This  obliged  me,when  there  was  nothing  but  news,  to  throw  them  into  the  form  of abulletin;  but  when  it was  a  question  of affairs  relating  to  the  serviceof the  King,  someone  was  obliged  to  sign  them,  and I did  so.  I didthis in the case  of an  important  despatch,  which  we  had  just receivedfrom  M. Vincent,  the King’s chargé  d’affaires  at Vienna.  This  was  atthe  time  when  the  Prince  de  Lobkowitz  was  marching  to  Naples,and  the  Comte  de  Gages  carried  out  that  memorable  retreat,  thefinest  military  achievement  of the  century,  which  attracted  too  littleattention  in  Europe.  The  information  that  reached  us  was,  that  aman,  of whom  M.  Vincent  sent  us  the  description,  was  setting  outHIS  DEVOTION  TO  DUTY315from  Vienna,  with  the intention  of secretly  passing by way  of Veniceto  the Abruzzi,  in order  tg bring  about a rising  of the people  in thatquarter,  on  the  approach  of  the  Austrians.  In  the  absence  of M.  deMontaigu,  who  took  no  interest  in anything,  I sent  on  to  M.  le Mar-quis  de Hopital  this  information,  which  was  so  opportune,  that  itis perhaps  to  the  much-abused  Jean  Jacques  that  the  house  of Bour-bon  owes  the  preservation  of the  kingdom  of  Naples.The  Marquis  de  l’ Hôpital,  as  was  proper,  thanked  his  colleague,and  spoke  to  him  about  his  secretary  and  the  service  which  he  hadjust rendered  to  the  common  cause.  The  Comte  de  Montaigu,  whohad  to  reproach  himself  with  carelessness  in the matter,  thought  thathe saw  in this  a  reproof  intended  for  himself,  and  spoke to  me  some-what  angrily  about  it.  I had  had  occasion  to  do  the  same  for  theComte  de  Castellane,  ambassador  at  Constantinople,  although  in  aless  important  matter.  As  there  was  no  other  communication  withConstantinople  except  the  couriers  sent  by the  Senate,  from  time  totime,  to  its  Baile,!8  notice  of  the  departure  of  these  couriers  wasgiven  to  the  French  ambassador,  in order  that  he might  take  the  op-portunity  of writing  to  his  colleague,  if he  thought  fit.  This  noticewas  usually  given  a  day or  two  beforehand,  but  so  little  was  thoughtof M.  de  Montaigu,  that  it was  considered  sufficient  to  send  to  himan  hour  or  two  before  the courier’s  departure,  merely  for form’s  sake,so  that  I frequently  had  to  write  the  despatch  in  his  absence.  M.  de`  Castellane,  in replying,  made  honourable  mention  of me.  M.  de Jon-ville,  at  Genoa,  did  the  same:  and  each  token  of their  good  opinionof  me  became a fresh  cause  for  grievance.I confess  that  I did  not  try  to  avoid  the  opportunity  of  makingmyself known,  but neither  did I seek  it unbecomingly.  It appeared  tome  only  fair  that  I should  look  for  the  natural  reward  of  valuableservices,  that  is to  say,  the  esteem  of  those  who  are  in  a  position  toestimate  and  reward  them.  I do  not  know  whether  my  assiduity  inthe  fulfilment  of  my  duties  afforded  the  ambassador  a  legitimatereason  for complaint,  but  I certainly  know  that  it was  the only  com-plaint  that  he uttered  up  to  the  day of our  separation._His  house,  which  he  had  never  put  upon  a  proper  footing,  wasalways  full  of  rabble.  The  French  were  badly  treated;  the  Italians18  The  title  of  the  Venetian  ambassador  at  Constantinople.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU316had  the  upper  hand;  and,  even  amongst  them,  those  good  servantswho  had  long  been  attached  to  the  embassy  were  all  rudely  dis-charged,  amongst  them  his  first  gentleman,  who  had  already  heldthat  position  with  the  Comte  de Fronlay,  whose  name,  I believe,  wasthe  Comte  Peati,  or  something  very  like  it.  The  second  gentieman,whom  he had  chosen  himself,  was  a  bandit  from  Mantua,  by nameDomenico  Vitali,  whom  the  ambassador  intrusted  with  the  care  ofhis house,  and  who, by dint  of toadying  and  sordid  stinginess,  gainedhis  confidence  and  became  his  favourite,  to  the  detriment  of the  fewhonest  persons  who  were  still  around  him,  and  of the  secretary  whowas  at  their  head.  The  honest  eye  of an  upright  man  always  makesrogues  uneasy.  This  alone  would  have  been  enough  to  make  himhate  me,  but  there  was  yet  another  reason  for  his  hatred,  which  ag-gravated  it considerably.  I must  state  what  this  reason  was,  and  I amwilling  to  be condemned  if I was  wrong.According  to  long-established  custom,  the  ambassador  had  a  boxat each  of the five  theatres.  Every  day at  dinner  he named  the theatreto  which  he intended  to  go;  I had  the next  choice,  and  his gentlemendisposed  of the  other  boxes  between  them.  As  I went  out,  I took  thekey of the  box  which  I had  chosen.  One  day, as  Vitali  was  not  there,I commissioned  the  lackey  who  attended  upon  me  to  bring  me  mykey to  a  house  which  I named  to  him.  Vitali,  instead  of sending  methe  key,  said  that  he  had  disposed  of it.  I was  the  more  incensed,  asthe  footman  gave  me  an  account  of his  errand  before  everybody.  Inthe  evening,  Vitali  tried  to  utter  a  few  words  of apology,  to  which  Irefused  to  listen.  “Sir,”  said  I to  him,  “you  will  come  to-morrow,  ata  stated  time,  to  the  house  in  which  I received  the  insult,  and  willmake  your  apologies  to  me  in the presence  of those  who  witnessed  it;otherwise,  the day after  to-morrow,  whatever  happens,  I declare  thateither  you  or  I will  leave  this  house.”  My resolute  tone  inspired  himwith  respect.  He  came  to  the  house  at the  appointed  time,  and  apolo-gised  publicly,  in  an  abject  manner  worthy  of him;  but  he  laid  hisplans  at  leisure,  and,  while  cringing  to  me  in  public,  in  secret  heworked  so  successfully  in  true  Italian  fashion,  that,  although  hecould not  persuade  the  ambassador  to  dismiss  me,  he obliged  me  toresign  my  position  myself.Such  a  wretch  was  certainly  not  capable  of understanding  me,  butA  HOUSE  OF  DISSOLUTENESS317he knew  enough  of me  to  serve  his  own  ends.  He  knew  that  I wasgood-natured  and  mild  t@ excess  in  enduring  involuntary  injustice,proud  and  hasty  when  insulted  with  malice  aforethought,  a  lover  ofdecency  and  dignity  on  proper  occasions,  and  no  less  exacting  in therespect  that  was  due  to  me,  than  careful  in  showing  to  others  therespect  that  I owed  to  them.  He  resolved  to  take  advantage  of  thisto  disgust  me,  and  succeeded.  He  turned  the house  upside  down,  andbanished  from  it the  regularity,  subordination,  order,  and  decency,which  I had  endeavoured  to  maintain  there.  An  establishment  with-out  a  woman  at  its  head  requires  a  somewhat  severe  discipline,  inorder  to  introduce  the rule  of decency  which  is inseparable  from  dig-nity.  He  soon  made  ours  a  house  of dissoluteness  and  debauchery,  ahaunt  of  rogues  and  profligates.  Having  procured  the  dismissal  ofthe  second  gentleman,  he  bestowed  his  place  upon  another  pimplike  himself,  who  kept  a  public  brothel  at  the  “Maltese  Cross”;  andthese  two  rascals,  who  understood  each  other  perfectly,  were» asshameless  as  they  were  insolent.  With  the  exception  of  the  ambas-sador’s  room,  and  even  that  was  not  in  very  good  order,  there  wasnot  a  corner  in the  house  endurable  for a  respectable  man.As  his  Excellency  did  not  take  supper,  the  gentlemen  and  myselfhad a special  meal,  of which  the  Abbé  de  Binis  and  the  pages  alsopartook.  In  the  commonest  beershop  one  would  have  been  servedwith  more  cleanliness  and  decency,  and  provided  with  cleaner  table-linen  and  better  food.  We  had  nothing  but  one  small  dirty  tallowcandle,  pewter  plates,  and  iron  forks.  I might  have  endured  whatwent  on  in  private;  but  I was  deprived  of  my  gondola.  Of  all  theambassadorial  secretaries,  I was  the  only  one  who  was  obliged  tohire  one  or  to go on  foot;  and  I was  only attended  by his Excellency’sservants  when  I went  to  the  Senate.  Besides,  all  that  went  on  in  thehouse  was  known  in the  city.  All  the  ambassador’s  officials  cried  outloudly.  Domenico,  who  was  the  sole  cause  of  all, cried  the  loudest,since  he  knew  well  that  the  indecent  manner  in  which  we  weretreated  affected  me  more  than  all  the  rest.  I was  the  only  person  inthe  house  who  said  nothing  outside,  but  I complained  loudly  to  theambassador,  not  only  of what  went  on,  but  also  of himself;  and  he,being secretly  urged on  by his evil genius,  daily put some  new  affrontupon  me.  Being  obliged  to  spend  a  considerable  sum  in  order  to318‘THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUkeep on a level  with  my  colleagues,  and  to  live  in a  manner  befittingmy  position,  I could  not  save  a  sou  out  of  my  salary;  and,  when  Iasked  him  for  money,  he  talked  to  me  of his  esteem  and  of his  con-fidence in  me,  as  if that  ought  to  have  been  enough  to  m my  purseand  provide  for  all  my  wants.These  two  bandits  at  length  succeeded  in completely  turning  theirmaster’s  head,  which  was  already  weak  enough.  They  ruined  himby continual  dealings  in old curiosities,  and  induced  him  to  concludebargains,  in  which  he  was  always  taken  in,  but  which  they  per-suaded  him  were  marvels  of  sharpness.  They  made  him  rent  a  pal-ace  on  the  Brenta  for  twice  as  much  as  it was  worth,  and  shared  thesurplus  with  the proprietor.  The  rooms  were  inlaid  with  mosaic,  andadorned  with  pillars  and  columns  of beautiful  marble,  after  the  fash-ion  of the country.  M.  de Montaigu  had  all this  covered  with  a  mag-nificent  fir  panelling,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  rooms  in  Parisare,wainscoted  in this  manner.  For  a  similar  reason,  he was  the  onlyambassador  in  Venice  who  deprived  his  pages  of  their  swords  andhis  footmen  of their  sticks.  Such  was  the  man  who,  perhaps  for  thesame  reason,  took  a  dislike  to  me,  solely  because  I served  him  faith-fully.I patiently  endured  his  neglect,  his  brutality  and  ill-treatment  aslong as  I thought  I saw  in it i bad  temper,  and  no  signs of hatred;but  as  soon  as  I saw  that  the  design  had  been  formed  of  diiame  of the  consideration  I deserved  for  my  faithful  services,  I deter-mined  to  resign  my  post.  The  first  proof  of his  ill-will  which  I re-ceived  was  on  the  occasion  of a  dinner,  which  he intended  to  give tothe  Duke  of Modena  and  his  family,  who  were  at  Venice,  at  whichhe informed  me  that  I could  not  be present.  I answered,  with  someannoyance  but  without  anger,  that,  as  I had  the  honour  of  diningthere  every  day, if the  Duke  of Modena,  when  he arrived,  requiredthat  I should  not  be  present,  it would  be  a  point  of honour  for  hisExcellency  and  a  duty  for  me,  not  to  yield  to  his  request.  “What!”said  he, in  a  rage,  “does  my  secretary,  who  is not  even  a  gentleman,claim  to  dine  with  a  Sovereign,  when  my  gentlemen  do not?”  “Yes,sir,”  I replied;  “the  post  with  which  your  Excellency  has  honouredme  confers  such  high rank  upon  me,  as  long as  I hold  it, that  I eventake  precedence  of  your  gentlemen  or  those  who  call  themselves=M.  DE  MONTAIGU’S  CONDUCT319such,  and  I am  admitted  where  they cannot  appear.  You  are  awarethat,  on  the  day when  youemake  your  public  entry,  I am  requiredby etiquette  and  immemorial  custom  to  follow  you  in  state  robes,and  have  the  honour  of dining  with  you  in  the  palace  of St.  Mark;and  I do not  see  why.a  man,  who  is allowed  and  required  to  dine  inpublic  with  the  Doge  and  Senate  of  Venice,  should  not  be allowedto  dine  in private  with  the  Duke  of  Modena.”.  Although  my  argument  was  unanswerable,  the  ambassador  would  not  give in; but  wehad  no  occasion  to  renew  the  dispute,  for  the  Duke  of Modena  didnot  come  to  dinner.From  that  time  he  never  ceased  to  cause  me  annoyance,  and  totreat  me  with  injustice,  by doing  his  utmost  to  deprive  me  of  thetrifling  privileges  attached  to  my  post,  in  order  to  hand  them  overto his  dear  Vitali;  and  I am  sure  that,  if he had  dared  to  send  him  tothe Senate  in my  place,  he would  have  done  so.  He  usually  employedthe  Abbé  de  Binis  to  write  his  private  letters  in  his  study;  he  com-missioned  him  to  write  an  account  of the  affair  of Capitaine  Olivetto  M.  de  Maurepas,  in  which,  without  making  any  mention  of me,who  alone  had  interfered  in the  matter,  he even  deprived  me  of thehonour  of the  report,  of which  he  sent  him  a  duplicate,  and  gave  thecredit  of it to  Patizel,  who  had  not  said  a  single  word.  He  wanted  toannoy  me  and  please  his  favourite,  without,  however,  getting  rid  ofme.  He  felt  that  it would  not  be  so  easy  to  find  a  successor  to  me  asto  M. Follau,  who  had  already  spread  abroad  what  kind  of a  man  hewas.  A  secretary  who  knew  Italian  was  absolutely  necessary  to  him,on  account  of  the  answers  from  the  Senate;  one  who  was  able  towrite  all his  despatches,  and  manage  all his  affairs  without his inter-ference;  who  combined  with  the  merit  of serving  him faithfully  themeanness  of  playing  the  agreeable  to  his  contemptible  gentlemen,He accordingly  desired  to  keep me  and  mortify me  at the  same  time,by keeping  me  far from  my  country  and  his own, without  money  toreturn;  and  he  would  perhaps  have  succeeded  if he  had  set  about  itmore  prudently.  But  Vitali,  who  had  other  views,  and  wanted  toforce  me  to  make  up  my  mind,  succeeded.  As  soon  as  I saw  that Iwas  wasting  my  trouble,  that  the  ambassador  regarded  my  servicesas  crimes,  instead  of being  grateful  to  me for them,  that  I had  noth-ing more  to  look  for, as  long as  I was  with  him, but annoyance  in  theTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU320house  and  injustice  outside,  and  that,  amidst  the  general  discreditwhich  he  had  brought  upon  himself,  the  harm  he  attempted  to  dome  might  injure  me  more  than  his  good  offices  could  benefit  me,  Imade  up  my  mind  and  asked  permission  to  resign,  giving  him  time,however,  to  provide  himself  with  another  secretary.  Without  sayingyes  or  no,  he continued  to  behave  as  before.  Seeing  that  matters  didnot  improve,  and  that  he  took  no  steps  to  find  another  secretary,  Iwrote  to  his  brother  and,  telling  him  my  reasons,  begged  him  to  ob-tain  my  dismissal  from  his  Excellency,  adding  that,  in  any case,  itwas  impossible  for  me  to  remain.  I waited  for  some  time,  but  re-ceived  no  answer.  I was  beginning  to  feel  greatly  embarrassed,  whenthe  ambassador  at  length  received a letter  from  his  brother.  It musthave  been  very  outspoken,  for,  although  he was  subject  to  most  vio-lent  outbreaks  of  rage,  I never  saw  him  so  furious  before.  After  atorrent  of horrible  abuse,  not  knowing  what  else  to  say,  he  accusedme  of having  sold  the  key of his cipher.  I began  to  laugh,  and  askedhim,  scoffingly,  if he  thought  that  there  was  in  all  Venice  a  manwho  would  be  fool  enough  to  give  him  a  crown  for  it. This  answermade  him  foam  with  rage.  He  made a pretence  of  calling  his  serv-ants,  as  he  said,  to  throw  me  out  of the  window.  Until  then  I hadbeen  very  quiet,  but,  at  this  threat,  anger  and  indignation  got  themastery  of me  in my  turn.  I rushed  to  the  door,  and,  having  drawnthe  bolt  which  fastened  it inside,  I gravely  went  up  to  him  and  said,“No,  Monsieur  le Comte,  your  people  shall  not  interfere  in this  mat-ter;  be good enough  to  allow  it to  be settled  between  ourselves.”  Thisaction  on  my  part  and  my  demeanour  calmed  him  at  once;  his wholeattitude  betrayed  surprise  and  alarm.  When I saw  that  he had  recov-ered  from  his  frenzy,  I bade  him  adieu  in  a  few  words,  and  then,without  waiting  for him  to  answer,  I opened  the  door,  left  the room,and  walked  quietly  through  the  ante-room  in  the  midst  of his  peo-ple, who  rose  as  usual,  and  who, I really  believe,  would  rather  haveassisted  me  against  him  than  him  against  me.  Without  going  up  tomy  room  again,  I immediately  went  downstairs,  and  left  the  palace,never  to  enter  it  again.I went  straight  to  M.  le Blond  to  tell  him  what  had  taken  place.He  was  not  much  surprised;  he knew  the  man.  He  kept me  to  din-ner.  The  dinner,  though  impromptu,  was  splendid.  Ali  the  FrenchTHE  AMUSEMENTS  OF  VENICE324in Venice  who  were  of any  importance  were  present.  There  was  nota  single  person  at  the  amb&ssador’s.  The  consul  related  my  case  tothe  company.  At  the  recital,  all  cried  out  with  one  voice,  but  not  infavour  of his  Excellency.  He  had  not  settled  my  account,  and  hadnot  given  me  a  sou;  and,  reduced  to  a  few  Jouis  which  I had  in  mypurse,  I did  not  know  how I was  to  pay  the  expenses  of my  return.Everyone  offered  me  the  use  of his purse.  I borrowed  twenty  sequinsfrom  M. le Blond,  and  the  same  amount  from  M.  de Saint-Cyr,  withwhom,  next  after  him,  I was  most  intimate.  I thanked  the  others,and,  until  I left,  I lodged  with  the  chancellor  of  the  consulate,  inorder  to  prove  to  the  public,  that  the  nation  had  no  share  in the  un-just behaviour  of the  ambassador.  The  latter,  enraged  at  seeing  meféted  in  my  misfortune,  while  he, in  spite  of being  an  ambassador,was  neglected,  lost  his  head  altogether  and  behaved  like  a madman.He  so  far forgot himself  as  to  present  a  written  memorial  to  the  Sen-ate  demanding  my  arrest.  The  Abbé  de Binis  having given me  a hintof this,  I decided  to  remain  another  fortnight,  instead  of leaving  onthe  second  day,  as  I had  intended.  My  conduct  had  been  seen  andapproved.  I was  universally  esteemed.  The  Seigneurie  did  not  evencondescend  to  reply  to  the  ambassador’s  extravagant  memorial,  andinformed  me,  through  the  consul,  that  I could  remain  in  Venice  aslong as  I pleased,  without  troubling  myself  about  the  vagaries  of amadman.  I continued  to  visit  my  friends.  I went  to  take  leave  of theSpanish  ambassador,  who received  me  very  kindly,  and  of the Comtede  Finochietti,  the  Neapolitan  minister,  whom  I did  not  find  athome.  I wrote  to  him,  however,  and  received  a  most  courteous  replyfrom  him.  At  last  I set  out,  and,  in  spite  of my  difficulties,  I left  noother  debts  than  the  loans  of  which  I have  just  spoken,  and  aboutfifty  crowns,  which  I owed  to  a  merchant  named  Morandi,  whichCarrio  undertook  to  pay,  and  which  J have  never  returned  to  him,although  we  have  often  seen  each  other  since  then.  As  for  the  twoloans,  I punctually  repaid  them  as  soon  as  it was  in  my  power  todo  so.I must  not  leave  Venice  without  saying  a  few  words  about  thefamous  amusements  of this  city, or,  at  least,  the  small  share  of themwhich  I enjoyed  during  my  stay.  The  reader  has  seen  how little  Isought  after  the  pleasures  of youth,  or,  at  least,  those  which  are  soTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU322called.  My tastes  underwent  no  alteration  at  Venice,  but  my  occupa-tions,  which  would  have  prevented  me  from  seeking  them,  gave  agreater  relish  to  the  simple  pleasures  which  I allowed  myself.  Fore-most  and  most  delightful  of  these  was  the  company  of  persons  ofdistinction,  such  as  MM.  le Blond,  de Saint-Cyr,  Carrio,  Altuna,  anda  Forlan!®  gentleman,  whose  name,  to  my  great  regret,  I have  for-gotten,  and  whose  amiability  I cannot  recall  without  emotion:  ofall  the  men  whose  acquaintance  I have  ever  made,  he  was  the  onewhose  heart  most  resembled  my  own.  We  had  also  become  intimatewith  two  or  three  witty  and  well-educated  Englishmen,  who  were  aspassionately  fond  of  music  as  ourselves.  All  these  gentlemen  hadtheir  wives  or  female  friends  or  mistresses;  the  latter  were  nearly  allwomen  of education,  at  whose  houses  music  and  dancing  took  place.A  little  gambling  also  went  on;  but  our  lively  tastes,  talents,  andfondness  for the  theatre  rendered  this  amusement  insipid.  Gamblingis  only  the  resource  of  those  who  do  not  know  what  to  do  withthemselves.  I had  brought  with  me  from  Paris  the  national  prejudiceagainst  Italian  music,  but  Nature  had  also  endowed  me  with  thatfine  feeling  against  which  such  prejudices  are  powerless.  I soon  con-ceived  for  this  music  the  passion  which  it inspires  in  those  who  arecapable  of judging  it correctly.  When  I heard  the barcarolles,?°  I dis-covered  that  I had  never  heard  singing  before;  and  I soon  became  soinfatuated  with  the  opera  that,  tired  of chattering,  eating,  and  play-ing  in  the  boxes,  when  I only  wanted  to  listen,  I often  stole  awayfrom  the  company  in  order  to  find  another  seat,  where,  quite  alone,shut  up  in my  box,  in  spite  of the  length  of the performance,  I aban-doned  myself  to  the  pleasure  of enjoying  it, without  being  disturbed,until  it was  over.  One  day,  at  the  theatre  of  St.  Chrysostom,  I fellasleep  more  soundly  than  I could  have  done  in  my  bed.  The  noisyand  brilliant  airs  failed  to  wake  me;  but  it would  be  impossible  todescribe  the  delightful  sensation  produced  upon  me  by the  sweetharmony  and  angelic  music  of  the  air  which  finally  aroused  me.°  Forlan:  from  the  country  of  Frioul,  part  of  which  is  now  included  in  theAustrian  States  and  part  in  the  kingdom  of  Italy.  It  has  given  name  to  a  dance(forlane).2  The  gondbliers’  songs.THE  MUSIC  OF  THE  SCUOLE323What  an  awaking!  what  rapture!  what  ecstasy,  when  I opened,  atthe same  moment,  my  eyes  and  my  ears!  My first  idea  was  to  believemyself  in Paradise.  This  delightful  piece,  which  I still  recollect,  andwhich  I shall  never  forget  while  I live,  began  as  follows:“Conservami  la bellaChe  si m’  accende  il cor.”I wanted  to  have  the music.  I procured  it and  kept it for a  long time,but  it was  not  the  same  on  paper  as  in my  memory.  The  notes  werecertainly  the  same,  but  it was  not  the  same  thing. This  divine  air canonly  be  performed  in  my  head,  as  it  was  really  performed  at  thetime  when  it awoke  me.The  music,  which,  according  to  my  taste,  is far  superior  to  thatof the  opera,  and  which  has  not  its like,  either  in Italy  or  the  rest  ofthe world,  is that  of the scuole.  The  scuole  are  charitable  institutions,founded  for  the  education  of  young  girls  without  means,  who  aresubsequently  portioned  by the  Republic  either  for  marriage  or  forthe cloister.  Amongst  the  accomplishments  cultivated  in these  younggirls music  holds  the  first  place.  Every  Sunday,  in the church  of eachof  these  scuole,  during  Vespers,  motets  are  performed  with  fullchorus  and  full  orchestra,  composed  and  conducted  by  the  mostfamous  Italian  masters,  executed  in  the  latticed  galleries  by younggirls only,  all  under  twenty  years  of age.  I cannot  imagine  anythingso  voluptuous,  so  touching  as  this  music.  The  abundant  art,  the  ex-quisite  taste  of the  singing,  the  beauty  of the  voices,  the  correctnessof the execution—everything  in these  delightful  concerts  contributesto  produce  an  impression  which  is certainly  not  “good  style,”  butagainst  which  I doubt  whether  any  man’s  heart  is proof.  Carrio  andmyself  never  missed  going  to  Vespers  in  the  Mendicanti,  and  wewere  not  the  only  ones.  The  church  was  always  full  of  amateurs;even  operatic  singers  came  to  form  their  taste  after  these  excellentmodels.  What  drove  me  to  despair  was  the  confounded  gratings,which  only  allowed  the  sounds  to  pass  through,  and  hid  from  sightthe  angels  of  beauty,  of  whom  they  were  worthy.  I could  talk  ofnothing  else.  While  speaking  about  it one  day,  at  M.  le Blond’s,  hesaid, “If you  are  so  curious  to  see  these  young  girls, it is easy  to  satisfyyou.  I am  one  of the  directors  of the institution.  I will  take  you  toa..THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU324collation?!  with  them.”  I did  not  give  him  a  moment's  peace  untilhe kept his  word.  When  we  entered  the  salon  which  confined  theselonged-for  beauties  I felt  an  amorous  trembling,  which  I had  neverbefore  experienced.  M.  le Blond  presented  these  famous  singers  tome  one  after  the  other,  whose  names  and  voices  were  all that  I knew.  she  was  a  horrible  fright.  Come,about  them.  Come,  Sophie  .Cattina  ..  she  had  only  one  eye.  Come,  Bettina  ..  she  wasdisfigured  by  small-pox.  Hardly  one  of  them  was  without  somenoticeable  defect.  The  cruel  wretch  laughed  at  my  painful  surprise.Two  or  three,  however,  appeared  passable;  they  only  sang  in  thechorus.  I was  in  despair.  During  the  collation  we  teased  them,  andthey  became  quite  lively.  Ugliness  does  not  exclude  certain  graces,which  I found  they  possessed.  I said  to  myself,  they  could  not  singso  delightfully  without  soul;  they must  possess  one.  At  last,  the  feel-ing with  which  I regarded  them  was  so  altered  that  I left  the  roomalmost  in  love  with  all these  ugly creatures.  I hardly  ventured  to  re-turn  to  their  Vespers:  I had  reason  to  feel  that  the  danger  was  over.I continued  to  find  their  singing  delicious,  and  their  voices  lent  sucha  fictitious  charm  to  their  faces  that,  as  long  as  they  were  singing,  Ipersisted  in  thinking  them  beautiful,  in  spite  of my  eyes..Music  in Italy  costs  so  little,  that  it is not  worth  while  for  anyonewho  is fond  of it to  deprive  himself  of it.  I hired  a  piano,  and  for  acrown  I engaged  four  or  five  symphonists  to  come  to  my  rooms,with  whom,  once  a  week,  I practised  the  pieces  which  had  affordedme  most  pleasure  at  the  opera.  I also  made  them  try  some  syinpho-nies  from  my  Muses  galantes.  Either  because  they  really  pleased,  orbecause  he wanted  to  flatter  me,  the  ballet-master  of St.  John  Chry-sostom  asked  me  for  two  of them,  which  I had  the  pleasure  of hear-ing performed  by this  admirable  orchestra;  they  were  danced  by alittle  Bettina,  a  pretty  and  amiable  girl, who  was  kept by one  of ourfriends,  a  Spaniard  named  Fagoaga,  at  whose  house  we  often  spentthe  evening.As  for  women,  it is not  in  a  city like  Venice  that  a  man  abstainsfrom  them.  Have  you  no  confessions  to make  on  this point?  someonemay  ask.  Yes,  I have  something  to  tell, and  I will  make  this  confes-sion  as  frankly  as  the  rest."  Goiiter:  a  light  meal  between  dinner  and  supper.OTHER  AMUSEMENTS325I have  always  disliked  common  prostitutes;  however,  at  Venice.  there  was  nothing  else  within  my reach,  since  my  position  excludedme  from  most  of the  distinguished  houses  in the  city.  M.  le Blond’sdaughters  were  very  amiable,  but  very  reserved:  besides,  I had  toomuch  respect  for  their  father  and  mother  even  to  think  of desiringthem.A  young  person  named  Mademoiselle  de  Catanéo,  daughter  ofthe  agent  of the  King  of Prussia,  would  have  been  more  to  my  taste;but  Carrio  was  in love  with  her—even  marriage  had  been  talked  of.He  was  well-to-do,  while  I had  nothing;  his  salary  was  a  hundredlouis,  mine  only a  hundred  pistoles:  and,  not  to  mention  that  I hadno  wish  to  poach  on a friend’s  preserves,  I knew  that  a  man  had  noright  to  enter  upon  affairs  of  gallantry  with  a  poorly-filled  purse,wherever  he  was,  especially  in  Venice.  I had  not  lost  the  pernicioushabit  of satisfying  my  wants,  and,  being  too  much  occupied  to  feelkeenly  those  which  the climate  causes,  I lived  nearly  a  year  in Veniceas  chastely  as  I had  lived  in Paris,  and I left  it at  the  end  of eighteenmonths,  without  having  had  anything  to  do  with  women,  excepttwice,  in consequence  of special  opportunities,  which  I will  mention.The  first  was  provided  for  me  by  that  honourable  gentlemanVitali,  some  time  after  the  formal  apology  which  I forced  him  tomake  to  me.  At table,  the  conversation  turned  upon  the  amusementsof Venice.  The  company  reproached  me  for  my  indifference  to  themost  piquant  of all, and  extolled  the  graceful  manners  of the  Vene-tian  women,  declaring  that  they  had  not  their  equals  in  the  world.Domenico  said  that  I must  make  the  acquaintance  of the  most  ami-able  of all; he expressed  himself  ready  to  introduce  me,  and  assuredme  that  I should  be  delighted  with  her.  I began  to  laugh  at  thisobliging  offer,  and  Count  Peati,  an  old  man  of high character,  said,with  greater  frankness  than  I should  have  expected  from  an  Italian,that  he considered  me  too  sensible  to  allow  myself  to  be taken  to  seea  woman  by my  enemy.  In  fact,  I had  neither  the  intention  nor  theinclination;  but, in spite of this, by one  of those  inconsistencies  whichI can  hardly  understand  myself,  I ended  by allowing  myself  to  bedragged  there,  against  my  inclination,  heart  and  reason,  and  evemagainst  my  will,  simply  from  weakness  and  shame  of  exhibitingmistrust,  and,  in the  language  of the  country,  per  non  parer  troppaTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU326coglione2  The  padoana,  to  whose  house  we  went,  was  good-look-ing, even  handsome,  but  her  beauty  was  not  of the  kind that  pleasedme.  Domenico  left  me  with  her.  I-sent  for  sorbetti,  asked  her  to  singto  me,  and, at the  end  of half  an  hour,  I put  a  ducat  on  the  table,  andprepared  to  go.  But  she  was  so  singularly  scrupulous,  that  she  re-fused  to  take  it without  having  earned  it, and,  with  equally  singularfoolishness,  I satisfied  her  scruples.  I returned  to  the  palace,  feelingso  convinced  that  I had  caught  some  complaint,  that  the  first  thingI did  was  to  send  for  the  physician  and  ask  him  to  give  me  somemedicine.  Nothing  can  equal  the  feeling  of  depression  from  whichI suffered  for  three  weeks,  without  any  real  inconvenience,  or  theappearance  of any  symptoms  to  justify  it.  I could  not  imagine  that  itwas  possible  to  get off  unscathed  from  the  embraces  of the  padoana.Even  the  physician  had  the  greatest  trouble  imaginable  to  reassureme.  He  only  succeeded  by persuading  me  that  I was  formed  in  apeculiar  manner,  which  lessened  the  chance  of  infection;  and,  al-though  I have  perhaps  exposed  myself  to  this  risk  less  than  any  otherman,  the  fact  that  I have  never  suffered  in  this  respect  seems  toprove  that  the  physician  was  right.  However,  this  belief  has  nevermade  me  imprudent;  and,  if  Nature  has  really  bestowed  this  ad-vantage  upon  me,  I can  declare  that  I have  never  abused  it.My other  adventure,  although  with  a  woman  also,  was  of a  verydifferent  kind,  both  in its origin  and  consequences.  I had  mentionedthat  Capitaine  Olivet  invited  me  to  dinner  on  board,  and  that  I tookwith  me  the  secretary  of the  Spanish  embassy.  I expected  a  salute  ofcannon.  The  crew  received  us,  drawn  up  in line,  but  not  a  grain  ofpriming  was  burnt.  This  mortified  me  greatly,  on  account  of Carrio,who  I saw  was a little  annoyed  at  it.  Certainly,  on  merchant  ships,people  by no  means  as  important  as  ourselves  were  received  with  asalute  of cannon,  and  besides,  I thought  that  I had  deserved  somemark  of  distinction  from  the  captain.  I was  unable  to  conceal  myfeelings,  a thing  which  I have  never  been  able  to  do;  and  althoughthe  dinner  was  a  very  good  one,  and  Olivet  did  the  honours  admi-rably,  I began it in an  ill-humour,  eating little, and  speaking  still  less.When  the  first  health  was  drunk,  I expected  at  least  a  volley.Nothing  of the  kind!  Carrio,  who  read  my  thoughts,  laughed  to  see2  In  order  not  to  appear  too  great  a  blockhead.JA OR 1G a  UN327me  sulking  like  a  child.  Before  the  dinner  was  half  over,  I saw  agondola  approaching.  “Faith!”  said  the  captain  to  me,  “take  care  ofyourself;  here  comes  the  enemy.”  I asked  him  what  he  meant,  andhe answered  with  a jest. The  gondola  lay to, and  I saw  a  dazzlinglybeautiful  young  woman  step  out,  coquettishly  dressed  and  verynimble.  In  three  bounds  she  was  in the cabin  and  seated  at  my  side,before  I perceived  that  a  place  had  been  laid  for  her.  She  was  abrunette  of twenty  years  at  the  most,  as  charming  as  she  was  lively.She  could  only  speak  Italian.  Her  accent  alone  would  have  beenenough  to  turn  my  head.  While  eating  and  chatting,  she  fixed  hereyes  upon  me,  and  then,  exclaiming,  “O  holy  Virgin!  O  my  dearBrémond,  how  long  is  it  since  I saw  you!”  she  threw  herself  intomy  arms,  pressed  her  lips close  to  mine,  and  squeezed  me  almost  tosuffocation.  Her  large,  black,  Oriental  eyes  darted  shafts  of fire  intomy heart,  and  although  surprise  at first  caused  me  some  disturbance,my  amorous  feelings  so  rapidly  overcame  me  that,  in  spite  of  thespectators,  the  fair  enchantress  was  herself  obliged  to  restrain  me.  Iwas  intoxicated,  or  rather  delirious.  When  she  saw  me  worked  upto  the  pitch  she  desired,  she  moderated  her  caresses,  but  not  herliveliness;  and,  when  she  thought  fit to  explain  to  us  the  true  or  pre-tended  reason  of her  forwardness,  she  told  us  that  I was  the  veryimage  of  one  M.  de  Brémond,  a director  of  the  Tuscan  custom-house;  that  she  had  been,  and  still  was,  madly  in love  with  him;  thatshe  had  left  him,  because  she  was  a  fool;  that  she  took  me  in  hisplace;  that  she  wanted  to  love  me,  since  it suited  her;  that,  in  likemanner,  I must  love  her  as  long  as  it suited  her,  and,  when  she  leftme  in the lurch,  bear  it patiently,  as  her  dear  Brémond  had  done.  Nasooner  said  than  done.  She took  possession  of me  as  if I had  belongedto  her, gave  me  her  gloves  to  take  care  of, her  fan,  her  girdle,”*  andher  headgear.  She  ordered  me  to  go  here  and  there,  to  do  this  andthat,  and  I obeyed.  She  told  me  to  send  back  her  gondola,  becauseshe  wanted  to  use  mine,  and  I did  so.  She  told  me  to  change  placeswith  Carrio,  because  she  had  something  to  say  to  him,  and  I did  so.They  talked  together  for  a  long  time  in  a  low  voice,  and  I did  notdisturb  them.  She  called  me:  I went  back  to  her.  “Listen,  Zanetto,”she said  to me;  “I do not  want  to  be loved  in French  fashion;  indeed,233  Another  interpretation  suggested  is “bouquet.”THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU,328it would  lead  to  no  good.  The  moment  you  are  tired,  go.  But  do notstop  half-way,  I warn  you.”  After  dinner  we  went  to  see  the  glassmanufactory  at  Murano.  She  bought several  little  knicknacks,  whichwithout  ceremony  she  left  us  to  pay  for;  but  she  everywhere  gaveaway  in  gratuities  much  more  than  we  spent  altogether.  From  thecarelessness  with  which  she  threw  away  her  money  and  allowedus  to  throw  away  our  own,  it was  easy  to  see  that  she  attached  novalue  to  it. When  she demanded  payment  for herself,  I believe  it wasmore  out  of vanity  than  greed.  She  was  flattered  by the  price  menput  upon  her  favours.In  the  evening,  we  escorted  her  back  to  her  apartments.  Whilewe  were  talking,  I noticed  two  pistols  on  her  dressing-table.  “Ah!”said  I, taking one  up,  “here  is a beauty-spot  box  of new  manufacture;may  I ask  what  it is used  for?  I know  you  have  other  weapons,  whichfire  better  than  these.”  After  some  pleasantries  of the  same  kind,  shesaid,  with  an  ingenuous  pride  which  made  her  still  more  charming,“When  I am  good-natured  to  those  for  whom I have  no  affection,  Imake  them  pay  for the  weariness  which  they cause  me;  nothing  canbe  fairer;  but,  although  I endure  their  caresses,  I will  not  enduretheir  insults,  and  I shall  not  miss  the  first  man  who  shall  showhimself  wanting  in  respect  to  me.”When I left  her,  I made  an  appointment  for  the  next  day.  I didnot  keep her  waiting.  I found  her  in a  more  than  wanton  déshabillé,which  is  only  known  in  southern  countries,  and  which  I will  notamuse  myself  with  describing,  although  I remember  it only too  well.I will  only  say  that  her  ruffles  and  tucker  were  edged  with a silkborder,  ornamented  with  rose-coloured  bows,  which  appeared  tome  to  set  off  a  very  beautiful  skin.  I discovered  later  that  this  wasthe  fashion  at  Venice;  and  the  effect  is so  charming,  that  I am  sur-prised  that  it has  never  been  introduced  into  France.  I had  no  ideaof  the  pleasures  which  awaited  me.  I have  spoken  of  Madame  deLarnage,  in  the  transport  which  the  recollection  of her  sometimesstill  awakens  in me;  but how  old, ugly, and  cold  she  was,  comparedto  my  Zulietta!  Do  not  attempt  to  imagine  the  charms  and  gracesof this  bewitching  gir!; you  would  be far from  the truth.  The  youngvirgins  of the cloister  are  not  so  fresh,  the  beauties  of the  harem  arenot  so  lively,  the  houris  of paradise  are  not  so  piquant.  Never  wasZULIETTAF329such  sweet  enjoyment  offered  to  the heart  and  senses  of mortal  man.Ah,  if I had  only  known  how  to  taste  of it in  its  full  completeness,at least, for a single moment!  I tasted  it, it is true,  but without  charm;I dulled  all its  delights;  I killed  them,  as  it were,  intentionally.  No!Nature  has  not  created  me  for  enjoyment.  She  has  put  into  mywretched  head  the  poison  of that  ineffable  happiness,  the  desire  forwhich  he  has  planted  in my  heart.If there  is  one  circumstance  in  my  life  which  well  describes  nycharacter,  it is that  which  I am  about  to  relate.  The  vividness  withwhich  at  this  moment  I recall  the  purpose  of my  book  will,  in  thisplace,  make  me.  forget  the  false  feeling  of delicacy  which  wouldprevent  me  from  fulfilling  it.  Whoever  you  may  be, who  desire  toknow  the  inmost  heart  of a  man,  have  the  courage  to  read  the  nexttwo  or  three  pages;  you  will  become  thoroughly  acquainted  withJean  Jacques  Rousseau.I entered  the  room  of a  courtesan  as  if it had  been  the  sanctuaryof love  and  beauty;  in  her  person  I thought  I beheld  its  divinity.  Ishould  never  have  believed  that,  without  respect  and  esteem,  I couldhave  experienced  the  emotions  with  which  she  inspired  me.  Nosooner  had  I recognised,  in  the  preliminary  familiarities,  the  valueof her  charms  and  caresses  than,  for  fear  of losing  the  fruit  of themin  advance,  I was  anxious  to  make  haste  to  pluck  it.  Suddenly,  inplace  of  the  flame  which  consumed  me,  I felt  a  deathly  chill  runthrough  my  veins;  my  legs trembled  under  me;  and,  feeling  readyto  faint,  I sat  down  and  cried  like  a  child.Who  would  guess  the  reason  of  my  tears,  and  the  thoughts  thatpassed  through  my  head  at  that  moment?  I said  to  myself:  Thisobject,  which  is at my  disposal,  is the masterpiece  of nature  and  love;its mind  and  body,  every  part  of it perfect;  she  is as  good and  gener-ous  as  she  is  amiable  and  beautiful.  The  great  ones  of  the  worldought  to  be her  slaves;  sceptres  ought  to  be laid  at  her  feet.  And  yetshe  is  a  miserable  street-walker,  on  sale  to  everybody;  a  merchantcaptain  has the disposal  of her;  she  comes  and  throws  herself  at  myhead,  mine,  although  she  knows  that  I am  poor,  while  my  realmerits,  being  unknown  to  her, can  have  no  value  in her  eyes.  In thisthere  is something  incomprehensible.  Either  my  heart  deceives  me,dazzles  my  senses,  and  makes  me  the  dupe  of  a  worthless  slut,  orTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU330some  secret  defect,  with  which  I am  unacquainted,  must  destroy  theeffect  of her  charms,  and  render  her  repulsive  to  those  who  wouldotherwise  fight  for  the  possession  of  her.  I began  to  look  for  thisdefect  with  a  singular  intensity  of mind,  and  it never  occurred  to  methat  the  possible  consequences  of  having  anything  to  do  with  hermight  possibly  have  something  to  do  with  it.  The  freshness  of herskin, her  brilliant  complexion,  her  dazzlingly  white  teeth,  the  sweet-ness  of  her  breath,  the  general  air  of  cleanliness  about  her  wholeperson,  so  completely  banished  this  idea  from  my  mind,  that,  beingstill  in  doubt  as  to  my  condition  since  my  visit  to  the  padoana,  Irather  felt  qualms  of conscience  as  to  whether  I was  in  sufficientlygood  health  for  her,  and  I am  quite  convinced  that  I was  not  de-ceived  in  my  confidence.These  well-timed  reflections  so  agitated  me  that  I  shed  tears.Zulietta,  for  whom  this  was  certainly  quite  a  novel  sight  under  thecircumstances,  was  astounded  for  a  moment;  but,  after  havingwalked  round  the room  and  looked  in her  glass,  she understood,  andmy  eyes  convinced  her,  that  dislike  had  nothing  to  do  with  thiswhimsical  melancholy.  It was  an  easy  matter  for her to  drive  it away,and  to  efface  the  slight  feeling  of shame;  but, at  the  moment  when  Iwas  ready to  sink  exhausted  upon  a  bosom,  which  seemed  to  permitfor the  first  time  the contact  of a  man’s  hand  and  mouth,  I perceivedthat she had  only one  nipple.  I smote  my  forehead,  looked  attentivelyand  thought  I saw  that  this  nipple  was  not  formed  like  the  other.  Iimmediately  began  to  rack  my  brains  for  the reason  of such a defect,and,  feeling  convinced  that  it was  connected  with  some  remarkablenatural  imperfection,  by brooding  so  long  over  this  idea,  I saw,  asclear  as  daylight,  that,  in the  place of the  most  charming  person  thatI could  picture  to  myself,  I only held  in my  arms  a  kind  of monster,the  outcast  of nature,  of mankind  and  of love.  I pushed  my  stupidityso  far  as  to  speak  to  her  about  this  defect.  At  first  she  took  it as  ajoke, and  said  and  did  things  in her  frolicsome  humour,  which  wereenough  to  make  me  die  of love;  but  as  I was  unable  to  conceal  fromher that I still  felt  a certain  amount  of uneasiness,  she at  last blushed,adjusted  her  dress,  got  up,  and,  without  saying  a  word,  went  andseated  herself  at  the  window.  I wanted  to  sit  by her  side,  but  shemoved,  sat  down  on  a  couch,  got  up  immediately  afterwards,  and,LIFTLE  ANZOLETTA331walking  about  the room  and  fanning herself,  said to me  in a cold  anddisdainful  tone,  “Zanetto,  lascia  le donne,  et studia  la matematica.” 24Before  I left,  I begged  her  to  grant  me  another  interview  on  thefollowing  day.  She  postponed  it till  the  third  day,  adding,  with  anironical  smile,  that  I must  want  rest.  I spent  this  interval  very  ill  atease,  my  heart  full  of  her  charms  and  graces,  sensible  of my  folly,with  which  I reproached  myself,  regretting  the  moments  which  Ihad  so  ill employed,  which  it had  only  rested  with  myself  to  makethe  sweetest  moments  of my  life,  awaiting  with  the  most  lively  im-patience  the  time  when  I might  repair  their  loss,  but,  nevertheless,still  uneasy,  in spite of myself,  how  I should  reconcile  the perfectionsof this  adorable  girl with  her  unworthy  manner  of life.  I ran—I  flewto  her  at  the  appointed  hour.  I do  not  know  whether  her  ardenttemperament  would  have  been  more  satisfied  with  this  visit.  Herpride  at  least  would  have  been  flattered:  and  I enjoyed  in  anticipa-tion  the  delight  of proving  to  her, in every  respect,  that  I knew  howto  repair  my  errors.  She  spared  me  the  test.  The  gondolier,  whom  Isent  to  her  apartments  on  landing,  informed  me  that  she  had  setout  for Florence  on  the  previous  evening.  If I had  not  felt  my  wholelove  for her  when  I had  her  in my  arms,  I felt  it cruelly  now,  whenI had  lost  her.  My foolish  regret  has  never  left  me.  Amiable  and  en-chanting  as  she  was  in my  eyes,  I could  have  consoled  myself  for theloss of her; but I confess  that  I have  never  been  able  to console  myselffor  the  thought  that  she  only carried  away  a  contemptuous  recollec-tion  of me.Such  were  my  two  adventures.  The  eighteen  months  which I spentat Venice  have  left me  no  more  to  tell, with  the exception  of a  merelyprojected  amour.  Carrio,  who  was  very  fond  of  women,  tired  ofalways  visiting  those  who  belonged  to  others,  took  it into  his  head  -to  keep one  himself;  and, as  we  were  inseparable,  he proposed  to  mean  arrangement,  common  enough  in  Venice,  that  we  should  keepone  between  us.  I agreed.  The  difficulty  was  to  find  one  with  whomwe  should  run  no  risk.  He  was  so  industrious  in his  researches,  thathe  unearthed a little  girl  between  eleven  and  twelve  years  of  age,whom  her  unworthy  mother  wanted  to  sell.  We  went  together  tosee  her.  My compassion  was  stirred  at the  sight of this  child.  She  was24 Give  up  the  ladies,  and  study  mathematics.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU332fair and  gentle  as  a lamb;  no  one  would  have  taken  her for an  Italian.Living  costs  little  at  Venice.  We  gave  the  mother  some  money,  andmade  arrangements  for  the  daughter’s  keep.  She  had  a  good  voice,and, in order  to  provide  her  with  a  means  of livelihood,  we  gave  hera  spinet  and  engaged  a  singing  master  for  her.  All  this  scarcely  costus  two  sequins  a  month,  and  saved  more  in  other  expenses;  but,  aswe  were  obliged  to  wait  until  she was  of a  riper  age,  this  was  sowinga  long time  before  we  could  reap.  However,  we  were  content  to  passour  evenings,  to  chat  and  play  innocently  with  this  child,  andamused  ourselves  perhaps  more  agreeably  than  if we  had  possessedher, so  true  is it that  what  most  attaches  us  to  women  is not  so  muchsensuality,  as  a  certain  pleasure  which  is caused  by living  with  them.My heart  became  insensibly  attached  to  the  little  Anzoletta,  but  thisattachment  was  paternal.  My senses  had  so  little  to  do with  it that, inproportion  as  it increased,  the  possibility  of  allowing  them  to  haveany  influence  in  like  manner  diminished.  I felt  that  I should  havedreaded  connection  with  this  child,  after  she  had  grown  up,  as  anabominable  incest.  I saw  that  the  worthy  Carrio’s  feelings,  unknownto  himself,  took  the  same  direction.  We  procured  for ourselves,  with-out  thinking  of  it,  pleasures  as  delightful,  though  very  differentfrom  those  we  had  originally  contemplated;  and  I am  convincedthat,  however  beautiful  she  might  have  grown,  far  from  being  thecorrupters  of her  innocence,  we  should  have  been  its protectors.  Thesubsequent  change  in  my  affairs,  which  took  place  shortly  after-wards,  did  not  leave  me  time  to  take  part  in  this  good  work,  and  Ihave  nothing  for  which  to  commend  myself  in  this  matter  exceptthe  inclinations  of my  heart.  Let  me  now  return  to  my  journey.My  first  intention,  on  leaving  M.  de  Montaigu,  was  to  retire  toGeneva,  until  happier  circumstances  should  have  removed  the  obsta-cles  which  prevented  me  from  rejoining  my  poor  mamma.  But  thestir  which  our  quarrel  had  caused,  and  the  ambassador’s  folly  inwriting  to  the  Court  about  it, made  me  resolve  to  go  there  in personto  give  an  account  of  my  own  conduct  and  to  lodge  a  complaintagainst  that  of  a madman.  From  Venice  I communicated  my  resolu-tion  to  M.  du  Theil,  who,  after  M.  Amelot’s  death,  had  been  provi-sionally  charged  with  the  conduct  of foreign  affairs.  I set  out  imme-diately  after  my  letter,  travelling  by way  of  Bergamo,  Como,  andRETURNS  TO  PARIS332Duomo  d’Ossola,  and  crossing  the  Simplon.  Arrived  at  Sion,  M.  deChaignon,  the  French  chargé  d'affaires,  gave  me  a  most  kindly  re-ception;  at  Geneva  M.  de  la Closure  did  the  same.  I there  renewedmy  acquaintance  with  M.  de  Gauffecourt,  from  whom  I had  to  re-ceive  some  money.  I had  passed  through  Nyon  without  seeing  myfather;  not  that  it did  not  cost  me  a  severe  pang,  but  I had  been  un-able  to  make  up my mind  to  present  myself  to  my  stepmother  aftermy  ill-luck,  feeling  sure  that  she  would  condemn  me  unheard.  Du-villard,  an  old  friend  of my  father,  reproached  me  severely  for  thisneglect.  I explained  the reason  of it, and, in order  to  repair  it withoutexposing  myself  to  the  risk  of meeting  my  stepmother,  I hired a car-riage,  and  we  went  to  Nyon  together  and  got  down  at  the  inn.  Du-villard  went  to  fetch  my  poor  father,  who  came  in  all  haste  to  em-brace  me.  We  supped  together,  and,  after  having  spent  a  most  de-lightful  evening,  I returned  on  the  following  morning  to  Genevawith  Duvillard,  to  whom  I have  always  felt  grateful  for  the  kindness  which  he  showed  me  on  this  occasion.My shortest  route  was  not  by way  of Lyons,  but  I wanted  to  passthrough  it, in order  to  satisfy  myself  in  regard  to  a  very  mean  trickof M.  de  Montaigu.  I had  had  a  small  chest  sent  to  me  from  Paris,containing  a  gold-embroidered  waistcoat,  some  pairs  of ruffles,  andsix pairs  of white  silk  stockings;  that  was  all.  On  his  own  proposal,I ordered  this  chest,  or  rather  box, to  be added  to  his luggage.  In theapothecary’s  bill,  which  he  wanted  to  make  me  take  in payment  ofmy  salary,  and  which  he  had  written  out  himself,  he  had  set  downthe  weight  of this  box,  which  he  called  a  bale,  as  eleven  hundred-weight,  and  had  charged  the carriage  of it to me  at an  enormous  rate.Thanks  to  the  exertions  of M.  Boy  de la Tour,  to  whom I had  beenrecommended  by his  uncle,  M.  Roguin,  it was  proved,  from  the  cus-tom-house  registers  of Lyons  and  Marseilles,  that  the bale  in questiononly  weighed  forty-five  pounds,  and  that  the  carriage  had  beencharged  accordingly.  I added  this  authentic  extract  to  M.  de  Mon-taigu’s  bill, and,  armed  with  this  and  other  evidence  equally  strong,I repaired  to  Paris,  full  of impatience  to  make  use  of it. During  thewhole  of this long journey,  I had  little  adventures  at  Como  in Valais,and  other  places.  Amongst  other  things,  I saw  the  Borromean  Is-lands,  which  are  worth  describing;  but  time  presses—I  am  sur-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU334rounded  by spies,  and  I am  obliged  to  accomplish,  inefficiently  andin  haste,  a  task  which  would  require  peace  of  mind  and  leisurewhich  I do not  enjoy.  Should  Providence  ever  deign  to  cast  its  eyesupon  me,  and  at  last  grant  me a less  troubled  existence,  I am  deter-mined  to  employ  it in  recasting  this  work,  if possible,  or,  at  least,  inadding  a  supplement,  which, I feel,  it greatly  needs.7>The  report  of  my  story  had  preceded  me;  and,  on  my  arrival,  Ifound  that  everyone,  both  in  the  offices  and  in  public,  was  scandal-ised  at  the  ambassador’s  follies.  But,  in  spite  of  this,  in  spite  of thepublic  outcry  in Venice,  in spite  of the  unanswerable  proofs  which  Iproduced,  I was  unable  to  obtain  justice.  In  fact,  far  from  gettingeither  satisfaction  or  reparation,  I was  even  left to  the  tender  merciesof the ambassador  for my  salary,  simply  because,  not  being  a  French-man,  I had  no  claim  to  the  protection  of the  nation,  and  it was  a  pri-vate  matter  that  concerned  only  our  two  selves.  Everyone  agreedwith  me  that  I was  insulted,  injured,  and  unfortunate;  that  the  am-bassador  was  outrageously  foolish,  cruel,  and  unjust,  and  that  thewhole  affair  was  a  lasting  disgrace  to  him.  But—he  was  the  ambas-sador;  I was  only the  secretary.  Good  order,  or  that  which  is so called,required  that  I should  not  obtain  justice,  and  I did  not  obtain  it.I imagined  that,  by continued  complaints,  and  by publicly  treatingthis  fool  as  he deserved,  I should  at  last  make  people  tell  me  to  holdmy  tongue,  which  was  just  what  I was  waiting  for,  since  I wasfirmly  resolved  not  to  obey  until  I had  obtained  justice.  But  at  thattime  there  was  no  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.  Others  permitted,even  encouraged,  me  to  make  an  outcry,  and  joined  in  the  chorus;but the matter  never  proceeded  further,  until  at length,  tired  of beingalways  in  the  right,  and  never  obtaining  justice,  I became  disheart-ened,  and  let it drop.The  only person  who  received  me  coldly,  and  from  whom I shouldleast  have  expected  this  unfair  treatment,  was  Madame  de  Beuzen-val.  With  her head  full  of the privileges  conferred  by rank  and  nobil-ity,  she  could  not  understand  that  an  ambassador  could  ever  bewrong  in his  dealings  with  his  secretary.  The  manner  of her  recep-tion  was  in  accord  with  this  prejudice.  I was  so  annoyed  at  it that,after  leaving  her  house,  I wrote  to  her  one  of the  strongest  and  most21I  have  now  abandoned  this  idea.THE  END  OF.M.  DE  MONTAIGU335violent  letters  that  I have  perhaps ever  written,  and  I never  went  toher  house  again.  Father  Castel  made  me  more  welcome,  but,  at  thebottom  of his Jesuitical  wheedling,  I saw  that  he followed  faithfullyone  of  the  grand  principles  of  his  society—always  to  sacrifice  theweaker  to the  stronger.  The  lively  consciousness  of the justice  of mycause  and  my  natural  pride did not  allow  me  to  endure  this  partisan-ship  patiently.  I gave  up  visiting  Father  Castel,  and,  consequently,the  Jesuits,  amongst  whom  I knew  no  one  but  himself.  Besides,  thetyrannical  and  intriguing  disposition  of his  colleagues,  so  differentfrom  the amiability  of good Father  Hemet,  caused  me  to  feel  such  anaversicn  to  their  society,  that,  since  then,  I have  never  seen  any  ofthem  except  Father  Berthier,  whom  I met  two  or  three  times  at  M.Dupin’s,  together  with  whom  he was  working  with  all his  might  atthe refutation  of Montesquieu.Let  me  finish,  once  for  all, what  I still  have  to  say  concerning  M.de  Montaigu.  I had  told  him,  in  the  course  of our  disputes,  that  hedid  not  want a secretary,  but  a  lawyer’s  clerk.  He  followed  this  ad-vice,  and  actually  engaged,  as  my  successor,  a  real  attorney,  who,  inless  than  a  year,  robbed  him  of twenty  or  thirty  thousand  lures.  Hedismissed  him,  and  had  him  imprisoned;  discharged  his  gentlemenin  a.  manner  that  caused  great  scandal;  quarrelled  with  everyone;put  up  with  affronts  that  a  lackey  would  not  have  endured;  and  atlast,  by his  repeated  acts  of  folly,  succceded  in  getting  himself  re-called  and  sent  into  retirement  in  the  country.  Amongst  the  repri-mands  which  he received  from  the  Court,  his affair  with  me  was  ap-parently  not  forgotten.  At  any  rate,  shortly  after  his  return,  he  senthis  maitre  d’hétel  to  me  to  settle  my  account  and  give  me  somemoney,  which I sorely  needed  at  the  time,  for  my  debts  at  Venice—debts  of honour,  if there  ever  were  such—weighed  heavily  upon  mymind.  I seized  the opportunity  which  was  afforded  me  of discharg-ing them,  together  with  Zanetto  Nani’s  bill.  I took  what  was  offeredto  me,  paid  all  my  debts,  and,  although  this  left  me  as  penniless  asbefore,  I was  relieved  from  a burden  which  had  become-unendurableto  me.  Since  then,  I never  heard  a  word  about  M.  de Montaigu  untilhis death,  which  I learned  through  the  newspapers.  Heaven  rest  thepoor  man!  He  was  as  fit  for  the  trade  of  an  ambassador  as,  in  myyouth,  I had  been  for that of an  attorney.  However,  it had only restedTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU336with  him  to  have  maintained  himself  honourably  with  my  assist-ance,  and  to  have  ensured  my  speedy  promotion  in  the  position  forwhich  the  Comte  de  Gouvon  had  designed  me  in  my  youth,  andwhich,  by my  own  exertions  at  a  more  advanced  age,  I had  qualifiedmyself  to  fulfil.The  justice  and  uselessness  of my  complaints  left  in my  mind  theseeds  of  indignation  against  our  foolish  civil  institutions,  wherebythe real  welfare  of the  public  and  true  justice  are  always  sacrificed  toan  apparent  order,  which  is in reality  subversive  of all  order,  and  ofwhich  the  only  effect  is, to  bestow  the  sanction  of  public  authorityupon  the oppression  of the  weak  and  the injustice  of the strong.  Twocauses  prevented  these  seeds  from  developing  at  that  time,  as theydid  afterwards.  In the first  place,  it was  a  matter  that  concerned  my-self:  and  private  interest,  which  has  never  produced  anything  greator  noble,  cannot  draw  from  my  heart  the  divine  flights  which  onlythe  purest  love  of the  just and  the  beautiful  can  produce;  in the  sec-ond  place,  the  charm  of friendship  moderated  and  calmed  my  angerby the ascendency  of a  gentler  feeling.  At Venice  I had  made  the  ac-quaintance  of a  Biscayan,  a  friend  of my  friend  Carrio,  and  a  personwho  deserved  the  friendship  of every  honourable  man.  This  amiableyoung  man,  endowed  with  every  accomplishment  and  virtue,  hadjust travelled  through  Italy  in  order  to  cultivate  a  taste  for  the  finearts,  and,  thinking  that  he had  nothing  further  to  learn,  intended  toreturn  direct  to  his own  country.  I told  him  that the arts  were  merelythe  recreation  of a  genius  like  his, which  was  made  to  cultivate  thesciences;  and  J advised  him,  in order  to  acquire  a  taste  for  these,  totake  a  journey  to  Paris  and  stay  there  for  six  months.  He  believedwhat  I said,  and,  on  my  arrival  at  Paris,  I found  him  waiting  forme.  His  apartments  were  too  large  for him;  he offered'to  share  themwith  me,  and  I accepted.  I found  him  full  of  enthusiasm  for  thehigher  branches  of knowledge.  Nothing  was  beyond  his  powers  ofcomprehension;  he  devoured  and  digested  everything  with  marvel-lous  rapidity.  How  he  thanked  me  for  having  provided  him  withthis  nourishment  for his mind,  which  was  tormented  by a thirst  afterknowledge,  without  his being aware  of it himself!  What  treasures  ofknowledge  and  virtue  did I find  in this  vigorous  soul!  I felt that  thiswas  the  friend  I needed;  we  became  intimate.  Our  tastes  were  noteIGNACIO  EMMANUEL  DE  ALTUNA337the  same;  we  were  always  disputing.  Both  obstinate,  we  could  neveragree  on  a  single  subject.  Notwithstanding,  we  were  unable  to  sepa-rate;  and,  although  we  perpetually  contradicted  each  other,  neitherof us  would  have  wished  the  other  to  be different.Ignacio  Emmanuel  de  Altuna  was  one  of those  rare  individuals,whom  Spain  alone  produces,  too  seldom  for  her  own  glory.  He  wasnot  a  man  of the  violent  national  passions  common  to  his  country-men;  the  idea  of revenge  was  as  far  from  his  mind  as  the  desire  ofit from  his heart.  He  was  too  proud  to be vindictive,  and  I have  oftenheard  him  say,  with  great  sang-froid,  that  no  living  man  could  of-fend  him.  He  was  gallant  without  being  tender;  he  played  withwomen  as  if they had  been  pretty  children;  he amused  himself  withhis friends’  mistresses,  but  I never  knew  him  to  have  one  himself  oreven  to  desire  it. The flames  of the  virtue  which  consumed  his heartnever  suffered  the  passions  of  desire  to  become  excited.After  his  travels,  he married,  died  young,  and  left  children;  and  Iam  as  convinced  as  I am  of my  own  conscience,  that  his wife  was  thefirst  and  only  woman  with  whom  he  enjoyed  the  pleasures  of love.Outwardly,  he  was  devout,  like  a  Spaniard;  in his  heart  he  had  thepiety  of an  angel.  With  the  exception  of myself,  he is the  only  toler-ant  person  I have  ever  seen  in my  life.  He  never  asked  anyone  whathis religious  views  were.  It made  little  difference  to  him  whether  hisfriend  was  a  Jew, Protestant,  Turk,  bigot,  or  atheist,  provided  he wasan  honest  man.  Obstinate  and  headstrong  in  matters  of  little  im-portance,  the  moment  religion,  or  even  morality,  became  the  subjectof discussion,  he drew  back,  held  his  tongue,  or  simply  said,  “I haveonly myself  to  answer  for.”  It is incredible  that  so  elevated  a  mindcould  be associated  with  an  attention  to  detail  carried  to  minuteness.He  divided  and  settled  in  advance  the  occupations  of  his  day,  byhours,  quarters,  and  minutes,  and  he adhered  so  scrupulously  to  thisarrangement,  that,  if the  hour  struck  while  he  was  in  the  middle  ofa  sentence,  he  would  have  shut  the  book  without  finishing  it.  Eachof these  portions  of time,  thus  broken  up,  was  set  apart  for a  differentoccupation;  reflection,  conversation,  divine  service,  Locke,  telling  hisbeads,  visiting,  music,  painting;  no  pleasure,  temptation,  or  desireto  oblige,  was  permitted  to  interrupt  this  arrangement;  only  a  dutyto  be  fulfilled  could  have  done  so.  When  he  gave  me  the  list  of his338THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUdistribution  of  time,  in  order  that  I might  follow  it,  I began  bylaughing,  and  ended  with  tears  of  admiration.  He  never  boredothers,  or  suffered  them  to  bore  him;  he was  somewhat  abrupt  withthose  who,  out  of  politeness,  attempted  to  do  so.  He  was  hot-tem-pered,  but  not  sulky.  I have  often  seen  him  in a passion,  but  neverangry.  Nothing  could  be  more  cheerful  than  his  disposition.  Heknew  how  to  make  and  take  a  joke;  he  was  even  brilliant  in  thisrespect,  and  had a talent  for epigram.  When  anyone  roused  him,  hewas  loud  and  noisy,  and  his  voice  could  be  heard  at  a  distance;  but,whilst  he  exclaimed  loudly,  one  could  see  him  smile,  and,  in  themidst  of  his  excitement,  he  would  utter  some  pleasantry,  whichmade  everyone  burst  out  laughing.  He  had  neither  the  phlegmaticdisposition  nor  the  complexion  of  a  Spaniard.  His  skin  was  white,his  cheeks  ruddy,  his  hair  light  brown,  almost  fair.  He  was  tall  andwell-built;  his  body  was  a  worthy  habitation  for  his  soul.This  man,  wise  in  heart  as  in  understanding,  was  a  man  of  theworld,  and  was  my  friend.  This  is my  only  answer  to  those  who  arenot.  We  became  so  intimate,  that  we  formed  the  intention  of spend-ing our  lives  together.  It was  agreed  that,  in a  few  years,  I should  goand  live  with  him  on  his  estate  at  Ascoytia.  All  the  details  of  thisplan were  arranged  between  us  the  day before  he left.  Nothing  waswanting,  except  that  which  does  not  depend  upon  men  in the  best-concerted  plans.  Later  events,  my  misfortunes,  his  marriage,  and,lastly,  his  death,  separated  us  for  ever.  One  would  feel inclined  tosay,  that  only  the  dark  schemes  of the  wicked  succeed;  that  the  in-nocent  projects  of  the  good  are  hardly  ever  fulfilled.Having  felt  the  inconvenience  of  dependence,  I firmly  resolvednever  to  expose  myself  to  it again.  Having  seen  the  ambitious  proj-ects,  which  circumstances  had  caused  me  to  form,  overthrownalmost  at  their  birth,  discouraged  from  again  entering  the  career,which  I had  begun  so  successfully,  and  from  which,  notwithstand-ing, I had  just been  driven,  I resolved  never  to  attach  myself  to  any-one  again,  but  to  remain  independent,  by making  the best  use  of mytalents,  the extent  of which  I was  at  last beginning  to  appreciate,  andof  which  I had  hitherto  entertained  too  modest  an  opinion.  I re-sumed  work  at  my  opera,  which  had been  discontinued  owing to  myjourney  to  Venice,  and  in order  to  devote  myself  to  it with  less  inter-<THEBESE  LE  VASSEUR339ruption,  after  Altuna’s  departure,  I returned  to  my  old  lodgings  atthe  Hotel  St.  Quentin,  which  was  situated  in  an  unfrequentedquarter  of the  city,  close  to  the  Luxembourg,  and  was  better  suited:for  quiet  work  than  the  noisy  Rue  St.  Honoré.  There,  the  only realconsolation,  which  Heaven  has  afforded  me  in  my  misery,  andwhich  alone  renders  it endurable,  awaited  me.  As  this  is no  passingacquaintance,  I must  enter  in some  detail  upon  the manner  in whichit was  formed.We  had  a  new  landlady,  who  came  from  Orleans.  To  help  herwith  the  linen,  she  had  a  young  girl  from  her  native  place,  abouttwenty-two  or  twenty-three  years  of age,  who, like  the landlady,  tookher  meals  with  us.  This  girl,  whose  name  was  Thérése  le Vasseur,was  of respectable  family,  her  father  being  an  official  at  the  Orleansmint,  and  her  mother  engaged  in  business.  The  family  was  a largeone,  and,  as  the  mint  stopped  working,  the  father  found  himselfwithout  resources,  while  the  mother,  who  had  become  bankrupt,managed  her  affairs  badly,  gave  up  business,  and  came  to  Paris  withher  husband  and  daughter,  who,  by her  own  exertions,  supportedall  three.The  first  time  I saw  this  girl appear  at  table,  I was  struck  by hermodest  behaviour,  and,  still  more,  by her  lively  and  gentle  looks,which,  in  my  eyes,  at  that  time  appeared  incomparable.  The  com-pany  at  table,  besides  M.  de  Bonnefond,  consisted  of  several  Irishpriests,  Gascons,  and  others  of  the  same  description.  Our  hostessherself  had  led an  irregular  life.  I was  the only person  who  spoke andbehaved  decently.  They  teased  the  girl,  I took  her  part,  and  im-mediately  their  railleries  were  turned  against  me:  Even  if I had  notfelt naturally  inclined  towards  this poor  girl, a  feeling  of compassion,even  of opposition,  would  have  aroused  my  sympathy.  I have  alwaysadmired  decency  in words  and  manners,  especially  in  the  oppositesex.  I openly  avowed’  myself  her  champion.  I  saw  that  she  wastouched  by  my  sympathy,  and  her  looks,  enlivened  by  gratitudewhich  she  dared  not  express,  were  thereby  rendered  more  eloquent.She  was  very  bashful,  and  so  was  I.  The  intimacy,  which  thissimilarity  of disposition  seemed  to  keep  at  a  distance,  was,  however,very  speedily  formed.  The  landlady,  who  perceived  it, became  furi-ous,  and  her  brutal  behaviour  gained  me  greater  favour  with  theTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU340little  one,  who, having  no  one  in the house  except  myself  to  help her,was  grieved  to  see  me  go  out,  and  sighed  for  her  protector’s  return.The  relation  of  our  hearts,  and  the  similarity  of  our  disposition,soon  exercised  their  usual  effect.  She  thought  that  she  saw  in me  anhonourable  man,  and  she  was  not  mistaken.  I thought  that  I saw  inher  a feeling,  simple  girl,  free  from  coquetry,  and  I was  not  de-ceived  either.  I declared  to  her  beforehand  that  I would  never  for-sake  her, but that  I would  never  marry  her.  Love,  esteem,  and  simplesincerity  secured  my  triumph,  and  it  was  because  her  heart  wastender  and  virtuous,  that  I was  happy  without  being  too  audacious.Her  fear  that  it would  annoy  me  not  to  find  in  her  that  whichshe  believed  I expected,  delayed  my  happiness  more  than  anythingelse.  I saw  that  she  was  disturbed  and  confused  before  she  gaveherself  up  to  me,  anxious  to  make  herself  understood,  and  yet  afraidto  explain  herself.  Far  from  suspecting  the  real  cause  of  her  em-barrassment,  I quite  wrongly  attributed  it  to  another,  the  idea  ofwhich  was  highly  insulting  to  her  character.  Believing  that  she  in-tended  me  to  understand  that  my  health  might be endangered,  I wasgreatly  perplexed,  and,  although  this  did  not  restrain  my  feelings,for  several  days  it poisoned  my  happiness.  As  neither  of  us  under-stood  the  other,  our  conversations  on  the  subject  were  so  manyriddles  and  ridiculous  misunderstandings.  She  was  inclined  to  be-lieve  that  I was  utterly  mad,  and  I hardly  knew  what  to  think  ofher.  At  last  we  came  to  an  explanation.  She  confessed  to  me  withtears  that  she had  once  misconducted  herself  in the early years of herwomanhood,  when  a  cunning  seducer  had  taken  advantage  of  herignorance.  As  soon  as  I understood  her,  I uttered  a  cry  of joy. “Vir-ginity!”  I cried;  “Paris  is the  right  place,  twenty  is the  right  age  tolook  for  it!  Ah,  my  Thérése!  I am  only  too  happy  to  possess  you,modest  and  healthy,  and  not  to  find  what  I never  looked  for.”At  first  I had  only  sought  amusement;  I now  saw  that  I hadfound  more  and  gained  a  companion.  A little  intimacy  with  thisexcellent  girl,  a  little  reflection  upon  my  situation,  made  me  feelthat,  while  thinking  only of my  pleasures,  I had  done  much  to  pro-mote  my  happiness.  To  supply  the  place  of my  extinguished  ambi-tion,  I needed a lively  sentiment  which  should  take  complete  pos-session  of my  heart.  In a  word,  I needed  a  successor  to  mamma.  AsCHARACTER  OF  THERESE341I should  never  live  with  her  again,  I wanted  someone  to  live  withher pupil,  in whom  I might  find  the  simplicity  and  docility  of heartwhich  she  had  found  in  me.  I felt  it necessary  that  the  géntle  tran-  <quillity  of private  and  domestic  life  should  make  up  to  me  for  theloss  of  the  brilliant  career  which  I was  renouncing.  When  I wasquite  alone,  I felt  a  void  in  my  heart,  which  it only  needed  anotherheart  to  fill.  Destiny  had  deprived  me  of, or,  at  least  in part,  alienatedme  from,  that  heart  for  which  Nature  had  formed  me.  From  thatmoment  J was  alone;  for  with  me  it has  always  been  everything  ornothing.  I found  in Thérése  the  substitute  that  I needed.  Thanks  toher,  I lived  happily,  as  far  as  the  course  of events  permitted.  At  firstI tried  to  improve  her  mind,  but  my  efforts  were  useless.  Her  mindis what  Nature  has  made  it; culture  and  teaching  are  without  influ-ence  upon  it.  I am  not  ashamed  to  confess  that  she  has  never  learnthow  to  read  properly,  although  she  can  write  fairly  well.  When  Iwent  to  live  in the  Rue  Neuve-des-Petits‘Champs,  opposite  my  win-dows,  at  the  Hôtel  de  Pontchartrain  there  was  a  clock.  For  morethan  a  month  I did  my  utmost  to  teach  her  how  to  tell  the  time  byit, but,  even  now,  she  can  hardly  do  so.  She  has  never  been  able  togive the names  of the twelve  months  of the year  in correct  order,  anddoes  not  know a single  figure,  in  spite  of  all  the  trouble  I havetaken  to  teach  her.  She can  neither  count  money  nor  reckon  the priceof  anything.  The  words  which  she  uses  in  speaking  are  often  thevery  opposite  of those  which  she  means.  I once  made a dictionary  ofthe  phrases  she  used,  to  amuse  Madame  de  Luxembourg,  and  herabsurd  mistakes  have  become  famous  in the  society  in  which I lived.But  this  person,  so  limited  in  understanding—so  stupid,  if you  will—is  a  most  excellent  adviser  in  cases  of  difficulty.  Frequently,  in‘Switzerland,  in  England,  and  in  France,  at  the  time  of the  misfor-tunes  which  befell  me,  she  saw  what  I did  not  see  myself,  gave  methe best  advice  to  follow,  rescued  me  from  dangers  into  which  I wasrushing  blindly,  and,  in  the  presence  of  ladies  of  the  highest  rank,of princes  and  the  great  ones  of the  world,  her  opinions,  her  goodsense,  her answers,  and  her behaviour  have  gained  for her the esteemof all, and  for me,  compliments  upon  her  good qualities  which I felt‘convinced  were  sincere.When  we  are  with  those  we  love,  sentiment  nourishes  the  mind+342THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUas  well  as  the  heart,  and  we  have  little  need  to  search  for  ideas  else-where.  I lived  with  my  Thérèse  as  pleasantly  as  with  the  most  bril-liant  genius  in the world.  Her  mother,  who  prided  herself  on  havingbeen  formerly  brought  up with  the Marquise  de Monpipeau,  tried  toplay  the  wit,  and  wanted  to  undertake  the  mental  guidance  of herdaughter,  and,  by her  craftiness,  spoiled  the  simplicity  of our  inter-course.  The  annoyance  which  her  importunity  caused  me  made  me,in  some  degree,  get  over  the  foolish  shame,  which  prevented  mefrom  venturing  to  show  myself  with  Thérése  in public,  and  we  tooklittle  walks  together  in  the  country,  where  we  had  little  collationswhich  were  delightful  to  me.  I saw  that  she  loved  me  sincerely,  andthis increased  my  affection  for her.  This  sweet  intimacy  made  up foreverything.  I no  longer  felt  any  concern  about  the future,  or,  at  least,I only  thought  of it as  a  prolongation  of the  present.  I only  desiredto  make  sure  that  it would  last.This  attachment  rendered  all other  recreation  superfluous  and  in-sipid.  I never  went  out  except  to  visit  Thérèse;  her  place  of  abodebecame  almost  my  own.  This  retired  life proved  so  favourable  to  mywork  that,  in  less  than  three  months,  my  opera,  words  and  music,was  finished,  and  nothing  remained  to  be  added,  except  some  ac-companiments  and a few  tenor  notes.”  This  drudgery  wearied  meexceedingly.  I proposed  to  Philidor  to  undertake  it in  return  for  ashare  of the  profits.  He  came  twice  and  put  in a  few  notes  in the  actof “Ovid”;  but  he was  unable  to  tie himself  to  a  task  which  requiredsuch  unremitting  application,  on  the  chance  of  remote  and  evendoubtful  profit.  He  did  not  come  again,  and  I finished  my  task  my-self.;My opera  being  ready,  the  next  thing  was  to  make  some  moneyby it, which  was  a  far  more  difficult  task.  It is impossible  for  a manwho  lives a solitary  life  to  succeed  in Paris.  I thought  of making  myway  with  the  aid  of M.  de la Popliniére,  to  whom I had  been  intro-duced  by Gauffecourt  on  my  return  from  Geneva.  M.  de  la Popli-nière  was  the  Maecenas  of Rameau;  Madame  de  la Popliniére  washis  most  humble  pupil;  Rameau  was  completely  master  in  thathouse.  Supposing  that  he  would  be  glad  to  give  his  support  to  thework  of one  of  his  disciples,  I wanted  to  show  him  mine.  He  re-2  Remplissages:  the  parts  between  bass  and  treble.343PERFORMANCE  OF  HIS  OPERAfused  to  look  at  it, saying  that  he could  not  read  scores;  it was  toafatiguing.  La  Popliniére  suggested  that  it might  be  possible  to  gethim to listen  to it, and offered  to get an  orchestra  together  to performselections.  I desired  nothing  better.  Rameau  grumblingly  consented,repeating  incessantly  that  the  composition  of a  man,  who  had  notbeen  brought  up  to the profession,  and  who had  learnt  music  entirelyby himself,  must  be something  fine.  I hastened  to  copy  out  in partsfive  or  six  of  the  best  passages.  I had  about  ten  instrumentalists,Albert,  Bérard,  and  Mademoiselle  Bourdonnais  being  the  vocalists.As  soon  as  the  overture  commenced,  Rameau,  by his  extravagantpraises,  intended  to  make  it  understood  that  the  work  could  notbe  my  own  composition.  He  exhibited  signs  of impatience  at  everypassage;  but, after  a  counter-tenor  song,  the  execution  of which  wasrobust  and  powerful,  and  the  accompaniment  brilliant,  he could  nolonger contain  himself;  he addressed  me  with  a brutality  which  gaveuniversal  offence,  and  declared  that  part  of what  he had  just heardwas  the  work  of a  consummate  master  of the  art,  while  the  rest  wasby an  ignorant  fellow,  who  did  not  even  understand  music.  It is truethat  my  work,  uneven  and  irregular,  was  sometimes  sublime  andsometimes  insipid,  as  must  be  the  work  of everyone  who  only  ele-vates  himself  by flashes  of genius,  without  the  support  of  scientifictraining.  Rameau  declared  that  he  saw  in  me  only  a  contemptibleplagiarist,  without  talent  or  taste.  The company  present,  and  particu-larly  the  master  of the  house,  thought  differently.  M.  de  Richelieu,who  at  that  time,  as  is well  known,  was  a  frequent  visitor,  heard  ofmy  work  and  wished  to  hear  the  whole  of it played,  intending,  if itpleased  him,  to  have  it performed  at  Court.  It was  performed  withfull  chorus  and  orchestra,  at  the  King’s  expense,  at  the  house  of M.Bonneval,  manager  of the  Court  amusements.””  Francceur  directedthe performance,  and  the effect  was  surprising.  The  Duke  was  nevertired  of loudly  expressing  his  approval;  and,  at  the  end  of a  chorusin  the  act  of  “Tasso,”  he  got  up  from  his  seat,  came  over  to  me,shook  me  cordially  by the  hand,  and  said,  “M.  Rousseau,  that  is adelightful  harmony!  I have  never  heard  anything  finer;  I will  haveit performed  at  Versailles.”  Madame  de la Popliniére,  who  was  preseX  Intendant  des  menus  (plaisirs):  lit.  Manager  of  the  expenses  connected  withCourt  ceremonies,  festivals,  and  theatrical  and  other  performances.344THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUent,  did  not  say  a  word.  Rameau,  although  invited,  had  refused  tocome.  The  next  day Madame  de la Popliniére  received  me  very  un-graciously  at  her toilette,  pretended  to  depreciate  my  work,  and  toldme  that,  although a little  false  glitter  had  dazzled  M.  de Richelieu  atfirst, he  had  recovered  himself,  and  she  advised  me  not  to  build  anyhopes  upon  my  opera.  The  Duke  arrived  shortly  afterwards,  andspoke  to  me  in  quite  a  different  tone,  flattered  me  upon  my  talents,and  seemed  still  disposed  to  get  my  work  performed  before  theKing.  “Only  the  act  of  “Tasso’  would  not  be  permitted  at  Court,”said  he;  “you  must  write  another  instead  of it.”  These  words  alonewere  enough  to  make  me  go  and  shut  myself  up  in  my  room;  andin  three  weeks  I had  composed  another  act  in  place  of “Tasso,”  thetheme  of  which  was  “Hesiod  inspired  by  one  of  the  Muses.”  Ifound  means  to  introduce  into  the  act  part  of the  history  of  thedevelopments  of my  talents  and  of the  jealousy  with  which  Rameauhad  been  pleased  to  honour  them.  In  the  new  act,  the  flight  was  lessgigantic  and  better  sustained  than  in  “Tasso.”  The  music  wasequally  grand  and  the  composition  far  superior,  and,  if  the  othertwo  acts  had been  equal to  this, the whole  piece might  have  been  rep-resented  with  success;  but,  while  I  was  putting  the  last  touchesupon  it, another  undertaking  interrupted  its  execution.[1745-1747.]—During  the  winter  after  the  battle  of  Fontenoy,several  fêtes  took  place  at  Versailles,  and  several  operas  were  per-formed  at  the  Théatre  des  Petites-Ecuries.  Amongst  these  was  Vol-taire’s  drama,  La  Princesse  de  Navarre,  set  to  music  by  Rameau,which  had  just  been  revised  and  the  title  changed  to  Les  Fétes  deRamire.  This  change  of  subject  rendered  several  alterations  neces-sary  in  the  divertissements,  both  in  the  words  and  music.  Thequestion  was,  to  find  someone  capable  of  performing  this  two-foldtask.  Voltaire  and  Rameau  being in Lorraine,  where  they were  bothengaged  on  the  opera  of Le  Temple  de  la  Gloire,  and  consequentlyunable  to  give  their  attention  to  it, M.  de  Richelieu  thought  of  me,and  proposed  to  me  that  I should  undertake  the  task;  and,  in  orderthat  I should  be  better  able  to  judge  what  there  was  to  be  done,sent  me  the poem  and  the  music  separately.  Before  all, I was  unwill-ing to  touch  the  words  without  the  author’s  consent,  and  I wrote  toThe  incidental  songs  and  dances.LETTER  FROM  VOLTAIRE345him  on  the  subject  a  very  polite  and  even  respectful  letter,  as  wasonly  proper,  and  received  the  following  answer,  the  original  ofwhich  is to  be found  in the  packet  of papers,  docketed  A, No.  1:fi“December  15th,  1745.TESir,—Two  accomplishments,  which  have  hitherto  always  beenseparate,  are  united  in  you.  These  are  two  good  reasons  why  Ishould  esteem  and  endeavour  to  love  you.  I am  sorry,  for  your  ownsake,  that  you  should  employ  these  accomplishments  upon  a  workwhich  is none  too  worthy  of you.  Some  months  ago,  M.  de Richelieugave  me  strict  orders  to  compose,  at  a  moment’s  notice,  a  triflingand  poor  sketch  of some  insipid  and  unfinished  scenes,  which  wereto  be  adapted  to  divertissements  utterly  unsuited  to  them.  I obeyedmost  scrupulously.  I worked  very  rapidly  and  very  badly.  I sent  themiserable  skit  to  M.  de  Richelieu,  feeling  sure  that  he  would  notmake  use  of it, or  that  I should  have  to  correct  it.  Happily  it is inyour  hands;  you  may  do  exactly  what  you  please  with  it;  I haveentirely  put  it out  of  my  sight.  I have  no  doubt  that  you  have  cor-rected  all  the  errors  which  must  have  occurred  in the  hasty  compo-sition  of a  simple  sketch,  and  that  you  have  filled  in  all  that  waswanting.“I  remember  that,  amongst  other  stupid  blunders,  I have  forgot-ten  to  explain,  in the  scenes  which  connect  the  divertissements,  howthe  Princess  Grenadine  is  suddenly  transported  from  a  prison  intoa garden  or  palace.  As  it is not  a  magician,  but  a  Spanish  nobleman,who  gives  the  festival  in  her  honour,  it seems  to  me  that  nothingought  to  take  place  by enchantment.  I beg you,  Sir,  to  look at  thispassage  again,  of which  I have  only a confused  idea.  See  if it is  neces-sary  that  the prison  should  open,  and  our  princess  be conducted  fromit to  a  beautiful  gilded  and  varnished  palace,  already  prepared  forher.  I know  that  all this  is very  wretched  stuff,  and  that  it is beneaththe  dignity  of  a  thinking  being  to  make a serious  business  of  suchtrifles;  but,  since  it is our  duty  to  displease  as  little  as  possible,  wemust  employ  as  much  reason  as  we  are  able,  even  upon  a  miserableopera  divertissement.“T  entirely  depend  upon  you  and  M.  Ballod,  and I trust  soon  tohave  the  honour  of  thanking  you,  and  of  assuring  you,  Sir,  how  Ihave  the honour  to  be,”  &c.  &c.There  is  nothing  to  cause  surprise  in  the  excessive  politeness  ofthis letter,  compared  with  the almost  rude  tone  of those  which  I have346THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsince  then  received  from  him.  He  thought  that  I was  high in favourwith  M. de Richelieu,  and his well-known  courtly  suppleness  obligedhim  to  show  great  politeness  towards  a  newcomer,  until  he  had  be-come  better  acquainted  with  the  measure  of his  importance.“Authorised  by  M.  de  Voltaire,  and  relieved  from  consideringRameau  at  all  in the  matter,  since  his  only  object  was  to  injure  me,I set  to  work,  and  in two  months  my  task  was  executed.  The  poetrywas  a  mere  trifle;  my  only  endeavour  was  to  prevent  the  differenceof  style  being  noticed,  and  I was  presumptuous  enough  to  believethat  I was  successful.  The  music  cost  me  more  time  and  labour;  be-sides  being  obliged  to  compose  several  introductory  pieces,  amongstothers  the  overture,  the  whole  of  the  recitative,  which  devolvedupon  me,  presented  very  great  difficulties,  since  I was  obliged  to  con-nect,  often  in  a  few  lines,  and  by means  of very  rapid  modulations,symphonies  and  choruses  in  very  different  keys;  for,  in  order  thatRameau  might  not  be  able  to  accuse  me  of having  spoilt  his  airs,  Iwas  determined  not  to  alter  or  transpose  a  single  one.  The  recitativewas  a  success.  It was  well  accented,  full  of vigour,  and  above  all, ad-mirably  modulated.  The  idea  of  the  two  great  men,  with  whom  Ihad  the  honour  to  be  thus  associated,  had  elevated  my  genius,  andI can  say  that,  in  this  thankless  and  inglorious  task,  of  which  thepublic could  not  even  be informed,  I nearly  always  kept myself  up  tothe level  of my  models.The  piece,  as  revised  by me,  was  rehearsed  at  the  grand  theatreof the  Opera.  Of the  three  authors  I alone  was  present.  Voltaire  wasaway  from  Paris,  and  Rameau  either  did  not  come,  or  kept  himselfhidden.The  words  of the  first  monologue  were  very  melancholy.  It beganas  follows:“O  mort!  viens  terminer  les  malheurs  de  ma  vie.”I had  been  obliged  to  set  it to  appropriate  music;  and  yet it was  justthis upon  which  Madame  de la Popliniére  founded  her criticism,  andaccused  me,  with  considerable  bitterness,  of  having  composed  afuneral  anthem.  M. de Richelieu  judiciously  began by inquiring  whohad  written  the  words  of the  monologue.  I showed  him  the  manu-rcript  which  he  had  sent  me,  which  proved  that  it  was  Voltaire.JEALOUSY  OF  RAMEAU347“In  that  case,”  said  he,  “Voltaire  alone  is  to  blame.”  During  therehearsal,  all  my  work  was  disapproved  of by Madame  de  la  Pop-liniére,  and  defended  by M.  de Richelieu.  But  in the  end  I found  theopposition  too  strong,  and  it was  notified  to  me,  that  I should  haveto  make  several  alterations  in my  work,  in regard  to  which  it wouldbe necessary  to  consult  M.  Rameau.  Deeply  grieved  at  such  a  result,instead  of the praise  which  I had  expected  and  certainly  deserved,  Ireturned  home  heart-broken.  Worn  out  with  fatigue,  and  consumedby grief,  I fell  ill, and  for  six  weeks  I was  unable  to  leave  my  room.Rameau,  who  was  commissioned  to  make  the  alterations  indi-cated  by Madame  de  la Popliniére,  sent  to  ask  me  for  the  overtureof my  great  opera,  in order  to  substitute  it for  that  which  I had  justcomposed.  Luckily,  I perceived  the  trick  and  refused.  As  there  wereonly  four  or  five  days  before  the  representation,  he  had  no  time  tocompose  a  fresh  overture,  and  was  obliged  to  leave  mine  as  it was.It  was  in  the  Italian  style,  at  that  time  quite  unknown  in  France.Nevertheless,  it gave  satisfaction  and  I heard,  through  M.  de  Val-malette,  the  King’s  maitre  d'hôtel,  the  son-in-law  of M.  Mussard,  arelative  and  friend  of mine,  that  musical  enthusiasts  had  expressedthemselves  well  satisfied  with  my  work,  and  that  the  general  publichad  not  been  able  to  distinguish  it from  Rameau’s.  But  the  latter,  inconcert  with  Madame  de  la  Popliniére,  took  measures  to  preventanyone  from  knowing  that  I had  anything  at all to  do with  it. On  thebooks  of the  words,  which  were  distributed  amongst  the  spectators,and  in  which  the  authors’  names  are  always  given,  Voltaire  alonewas  mentioned.  Rameau  preferred  the  suppression  of his own  nameto  seeing  mine  associated  with  it.As  soon  as  I was  able  to  go  out,  I resolved  to  call  upon  M.  deRichelieu.  It was  too  late;  he had  just set  out  for  Dunkirk,  where  hewas  to  direct  the  embarkation  of the  troops  for  Scotland.  When  hereturned,  in order  to  justify  my  idleness,  I said  to  myself  that  it wastoo  late.  As  I never  saw  him  again,  I lost  the  honour  which  my  workdeserved,  and  the  fee  which  it ought  to  have  brought  me;  while  Inever  received  the  least  return,  or  rather  compensation  for  my  time,my  trouble,  my  vexation,  my  illness,  and  the  expense  which  it en-tailed.  Nevertheless,  I have  always  thought  that  M.  de  Richelieuwas  himself  well-disposed  towards  me,  and  entertained  a  favourable348THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUopinion  of my abilities;  but my  iH-luck  and  Madame  de la Popliniérecombined  prevented  him  from  giving  effect  to  his  goodwill.I was  quite  unable  to  understand  the  dislike  with  which  I wasregarded  by this woman,  whom I had  done  my  utmost  to  please,  andto  whom I paid  court  regularly.  Gauffecourt  explained  the  reasonsfor  it.  “In  the  first  place,”  said  he,  “her  friendship  for  Rameau,whose  avowed  patroness  she is, and  who  will  brook  no  rival;  and, inthe  second  place,  an  original  sin,  which  condemns  you  in  her  eyes,and  which  she will  never  forgive—the  fact  that  you  are  a  Genevese.”In  regard  to  this,  he  told  me  that  the  Abbé  Hubert,  who  also  camefrom  Geneva,  and  was  the  sincere  friend  of  M.  de  la  Popliniére,had  done  his  utmost  to  prevent  him  from  marrying  this  woman,whose  character  he knew  well,  and  that,  after  the  marriage,  she  hadsworn  implacable  hatred  against  him  and  all  the  Genevese  as  well.“Although  M.  de  la  Popliniére  is  well-disposed  towards  you,”  headded—“this  I know  to  be  a  fact—do  not  reckon  upon  his  support.He  is very  fond  of his  wife;  she  hates  you;  she  is mischievous  andcunning.  You  will  never  do any  good in that  house.”  I took  the hint.The  same  Gauffecourt  also  rendered  me  a very  essential  serviceabout  this  time.  I had  just lost  my  worthy  father;  he was  about  sixtyyears  of age.  I did not  feel  this  loss as  keenly  as  I should  have  done  atanother  time,  when.  the  difficulties  of my  situation  occupied  my  at-tention  less.  During  his lifetime,  I had  never  attempted  to  claim  theremainder  of my  mother’s  property,  and  had  allowed  him  to  drawthe  trifling  interest  it produced.  After  his  death,  I no  longer  felt  anyscruples  about  the matter,  but the want  of legal proof of my brother’sdeath  caused  a  difficulty  which  Gauffecourt  undertook  to  remove,and  did  so,  with  the  aid  of the  good  offices  of De  Lolme,  the  advo-cate.  As  I had  pressing  need  of this  small  addition  to  my  finances,and  the  result  was  so  uncertain,  I waited  for  definite  informationwith  the  liveliest  impatience.One  evening,  on  entering  my  lodgings,  I found  the  letter  whichwas  bound  to  contain  it; I took  it up,  in  order  to  open  it, with  animpatient  trembling,  of  which  I inwardly  felt  ashamed.  “What!”said  I contemptuously  to  myself,  “shall  Jean  Jacques  suffer  himselfto  be  overcome  by self-interest  and  curiosity?”  I immediately  putback  the  letter  on  the  mantelpiece,  undressed,  went  quietly  to  bed,CONDUCT  ©F  THERESE’S  FAMILY349slept better  than  usual,  and  got  up  rather  late  the  next  day, withoutthinking  any  more  about  my  letter.  While  dressing,  I caught  sightof it, opened  it leisurely,  and  found  a  bill  of exchange  inside.  Manypleasant  feelings  entered  my mind  at once;  but the liveliest  of all wasthe consciousness  of my  victory  over  myself.  I could  mention  a  num-ber of similar  instances  in the course  of my  life, but I am  too  pressedfor  time  to  relate  everything.  I sent  a little  of  the  money  to  poormamma,  regretting  with  tears  the  happy  time  when  I should  havelaid  the  whole  at  her  feet.  All  her  letters  showed  signs  of  her  dis-tress.  She  sent  me  heaps  of  recipes  and  secret  remedies,  which  shedeclared  would  make  my  fortune  and  her own.  Already  the thoughtof her  wretchedness  contracted  her  heart  and  narrowed  her  mind.The  small  sum  which  I was  able  to send  her fell into  the hands  of therascals  by whom  she  was  surrounded.  She  derived  no  benefit  fromanything.  I was  disgusted  at  the idea  of sharing  what  I myself  sorelyneeded  with  these  wretches,  especially  after  the  fruitless  attemptswhich  I made  to  get  her  out  of  their  hands,  as  will  be  afterwardsrelated.Time  slipped  away,  and  the  money  with  it.  We  were  two,  evenfour  in  number,  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  seven  or  eight;  for,although  Thérèse  was  disinterested  to  a  degree  almost  unexampled,her mother  was  by no  means  the  same.  As  soon  as  she  found  herselfsomewhat  improved  in circumstances—thanks  to  my  attention—shesent  for her whole  family  to  share  the fruits  of it. Sisters,  sons,  daugh-ters,  grand-daughters—all  came,  with  the  exception  of  her  eldestdaughter,  who  was  married  to  the manager  of the carriage  service  atAngers.  All  that  I did  for  Thérése  was  turned  by her  mother  to  thebenefit  of these  starvelings.  As  I had  not  to  do  with  a  covetous  per-son,  and  was  not  under  the  influence  of  a  foolish  passion,  I com-mitted  no  follies.  Content  to  keep  Thérése  decently,  but  withoutluxury,  protected  against  pressing  needs,  I consented  to  her  handingover  to  her mother  all that  she was  able  to earn  by her  own  exertions,nor  did  I limit  myself  to  that;  but,  by a  fatality  which  always  pur-sued  me,  while  mamma  was  plundered  by  the  rascals  who  sur-rounded  her,  Thérése  was  preyed  upon  by her  family,  and  I couldrender  no  assistance  in  either  case  which  benefited  her  for  whom  itwas  intended.  It  was  curious  that  Madame  le  Vasseur’s  youngest350THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUchild—the  only  one  who  had  not  received  a  marriage  portion—wasthe  only  one  who  supported  her  father  and  mother,  and  that,  afterhaving  long endured  the  blows  of her  brothers  and  sisters,  and  evenof  her  nieces,  this  poor  girl  was  now  plundered  by them,  withoutbeing  able  to  offer  a  better  resistance  to  their  thefts  than  formerlyto  their  blows.  Only  one  of her  nieces,  named  Goton  Leduc,  was  of atolerably  amiable  and  gentle  disposition,  although  she  was  spoiledby the  example  and  lessons  of the  others.  As  I frequently  saw  themtogether  I gave  them  the  names  which  they  gave  to  each  other.  Icalled  the niece  my  niece,  and  the  aunt  my  aunt,  and  both  called  meuncle.  Hence  the  name  of “aunt”  by which  I continued  to  call  Thé-rése,  and  which  my  friends  sometimes  repeated  by way  of a  joke.It will  easily  be  understood  that,  in  such  a  situation,  I had  not  amoment  to  lose  before  attempting  to  extricate  myself  from  it.  Sup-posing  that  M.  de  Richelieu  had  forgotten  me,  and  no  longer  ex-pecting  anything  from  the  Court,  I made  some  attempts  to  get  myopera  accepted  in  Paris;  but  I encountered  difficulties  which  it re-quired  considerable  time  to  overcome,  and  I became  more  hardpressed  every  day. I resolved  to  offer  my  little  comedy  of Narcisse  tothe  Italian  theatre.  It  was  accepted,  and  I was  given  a  free  pass  tothe  theatre,  which  pleased  me  greatly,  but  this  was  all.  I could  neverget  my  piece  performed,  and  at  length,  tired  of  paying  court  tocomedians,  I turned  my  back  upon  them.  At length  I had recourse  tothe  last  expedient  which  remained,  and  the  only  one  which  I oughtto  have  adopted.  While  visiting  at  M.  de la Popliniére’s  house,  I hadkept away  from  M.  Dupin’s.  The  two  ladies,  although  related,  werenot  on  good  terms,  and  never  visited.  There  was  no  intercourse  be-tween  the two  houses—Thieriot  alone  was  at  home  in both.  He  wascommissioned  to  endeavour  to  bring  me  back  to  M.  Dupin.  M.  deFrancueil  at  that  time  was  studying  natural  history  and  chemistry.and  was  making a collection.  I believe  that  his  ambition  was  to  beelected  a member  of the  Academy  of  Sciences.  With  this  object  hewanted  to  write  a  book,  and  he  thought  that  I might  be  useful  tchim  in this  undertaking.  Madame  Dupin,  who  also  contemplated  <book,  had  almost  similar  views  in  regard  to  me.  They  would  haveliked  to  engage  me  as  a  kind  of  secretary,  to  be  shared  betweerthem;  and  this  was  the  object  of Thieriot’s  exhortations.  I requiredFAILURE  OF“LES  MUSES  GALANTES”’E  ae:351bas  a  preliminary,  that  M.  de Francueil  should  employ  his  own  andJelyote’s  influence  to  get  my  piece  rehearsed  at  the  opera.  He  con-sented.  The  Muses  galantes  was  at  first  rehearsed  several  times  at  theMagasin,”  and  afterwards  at  the  Grand  Theatre.  There  was  a  largeaudience  at  the general  rehearsal,  and  several  pieces  were  warmly  ap-plauded.  Nevertheless,  during  the  performance—very  badly  con-ducted  by Rebel  felt  myself  that  the piece  would  not  be accepted,and, indeed,  that it could  not  be presented  to  the public  without  greatalterations.  Accordingly  I withdrew  it without  saying  a  word,  andwithout  exposing  myself  to  the  risk  of  rejection;  but  I clearly  saw,from  several  indications,  that,  even  if  the  work  had  been  perfect,it would  not  have  passed.  M.  de  Francueil  had  certainly  promisedto  get it rehearsed,  not  to  secure  its acceptance.  He  scrupulously  kepthis  word.  I have  always  fancied,  on  this  and  several  other  occasions,that  neither  he nor  Madame  Dupin  were  particularly  anxious  that  Ishould  acquire  a  certain  reputation  in  the  world,  perhaps  for  fearthat, when  their  own  works  appeared,  it might be supposed  that  theyhad  grafted  their  talents  upon  mine.  However,  as  Madame  Dupinhad  always  entertained  a  very  moderate  idea  of  my  abilities,  andnever  employed  me  except  to  write  at  her  dictation,  or  to  undertakepurely  learned  researches,  this  reproach,  especially  as  far  as  she  wasconcerned,  might  have  been  unjust.[1747-1749.|—This  last  failure  completely  di dale  me.  Iabandoned  every  prospect  of  fame  and  promotion;  and,  withoutthinking  further  of my  real  or  fancied  talents,  which  were  of suchlittle  service  to  me,  I devoted  my  time  and  trouble  to  providing  forthe  support  of  myself  and  my  dear  Thérése,  in  a  manner  whichmight  be  agreeable  to  those  who  undertook  to  assist  me  in  doingso.  I accordingly  attached  myself  entirely  to  Madame  Dupin  andM. de Francueil.  This  did not  place me  in a very  affluent  position,  forthe  800  or  goo  francs  which  I received  for  the  first  two  years  washardly  sufficient  for my  most  pressing  needs,  as  I was  obliged  to  renta  furnished  room  in their  neighbourhood,  in a  somewhat  expensivequarter,  and  to  pay  for  another  lodging  quite  at  the  other  end  ofParis,  at  the top of the  Rue  Saint-Jacques,  where  I went  nearly  every2  The  place  where  the  theatrical  decorations,  costumes,  and  accessories  werekept.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU352evening  to  supper,  whatever  the  state  of  the  weather  might  be.  Isoon  got  into  the  way  of  my  new  occupation,  and  even  began  tolike  it.  I became  interested  in  chemistry,  and  went  through  severalcourses  at  M.  Rouelle’s,  together  with  M.  de Francueil,  and  we  pro-ceeded,  to the best of our  ability,  to fill quires  of paper  with  our  scrib-blings  upon  this  science,  of  which  we  scarcely  knew  the  elements.In  1747  we  went  to  spend  the  autumn  in  Touraine,  at  the  Chateauof Chenonceaux,  a  Royal  mansion  upon  the  Cher,  built  by Henri  II.for  Diana  of Poitiers,  whose  monogram  may  still  be  seen  there,  and‘which  is now  in  the  possession  of  M.  Dupin,  a  farmer-general.  Weenjoyed  ourselves  greatly  in this  beautiful  place;  we  lived  well, and  Ibecame  as  fat  as  a monk.  We  had  a  good  deal  of music.  I composedseveral  trios,  full  of vigour  and  harmony,  of  which  I shall  perhapsspeak  in  my  supplement,  if I ever  write  one.  We  played  comedies.I wrote  one,  in  three  acts,  entitled  Engagement  téméraire,  whichwill  be found  amongst  my  papers,  and  has  no  other  merit  than  thatof great  liveliness.  I also  composed  some  other  trifles,  amongst  thema  piece  in verse,  called.’  Allée  de  Sylvie,  from  a  walk  in the  park,  onthe  banks  of the  Cher.  This  did  not,  however,  interrupt  my  chemi-cal  studies,  or  the  work  which  I was  doing  for  Madame  Dupin.While  I was  growing  fat  at  Chenonceaux,  my  poor  Thérése  wasincreasing  in  size  at  Paris  for  another  reason;  and,  on  my  return,  Ifound  the  work  which  I had  commenced  in  a  more  forward  condi-tion  than  I had  expected.  Considering  my  position,  this  would  havethrown  me  into  the  greatest  embarrassment,  had  not  some  table  com-panions  furnished  me  with  the  only means  of getting  out  of the  dif-culty. This  is one  of those  essential  pieces of information  which  I can-not  give  with  too  much  simplicity,  because,  if I were  to  offer  anyexplanation,  I should  be obliged  either  to  excuse  or  to  inculpate  my-self,  and  in  this  place  I ought  not  to  do  either  the  one  or  the  other.During  Altuna’s  stay  at  Paris,  instead  of going  to  an  eating-house,we  usually  took  our  meals  in  our  neighbourhood,  nearly  oppositethe  cul-de-sac  of the  Opera,  at  the  house  of one  Madame  la Selle,  atailor’s  wife,  whose  dinners  were  indifferent,  but  her  table  wasalways  in request,  on  account  of the  good  and  respectable  companywhich  resorted  there;  no  one  was  admitted  unless  he  was  known,and  it was  necessary  to  be  introduced  by one  of the  regular  guests.`THE  HOUSE  OF  MADAME  LA  SELLE353Commandeur  de  Graville,  an  old  rake,  full  of  wit  and  politeness,but  filthy  in  his  language,  lodged  there,  and  attracted  a  jovial  andbrilliant  company  of  young  officers  in  the  guards  and  musketeers;Commandeur  de Nonant,  protector  of all  the  girls  employed  at  theOpera,  daily  brought  all  the  news  from  that  haunt  of vice;  M.  Du-plessis,  a  retired  lieutenant-colonel,  a  good  and  respectable  old  man;and  Ancelet,°°  an  officer  in  the  musketeers,  maintained  a  certainamount  of order  amongst  these  young  people.  The  house  was  alsofrequented  by merchants,  financiers,  and  purveyors,  but  polite  andhonourable  men,  distinguished  in  their  profession,  M.  de  Besse,  M.de Forcade,  and  others  whose  names  I have  forgotten.  In short,  goodcompany  of  all  classes  was  to  be  met  there,  with  the  exception  ofabbés  and  lawyers,  whom I never  saw  there,  and  it was  agreed  thatmembers  of  those  professions  were  never  to  be  introduced.  Thecompany,  fairly  numerous,  was  very  gay  without  being  noisy,  andmany  broad  stories  were  told,  which,  however,  were  free  from  vul-garity.  Old  de  Graville,  with  all  his  risky  stories,  never  lost  his  old-fashioned  courtly  politeness,  and  no  indecency  ever  escaped  his  lipswhich  was  not  so  witty  that  any  woman  would  have  pardoned  it.He  gave  the  tone  to  the  whole  table;  all  these  young  people  relatedtheir  adventures  of  gallantry  with  equal  freedom  and  grace;  andthere  was  no  lack  of  stories  of  girls,  as  there  was  a  stock  of  themclose  at  hand,  since  the  passage  leading  to  Madame  la  Selle’s  housealso  led  to  the shop of Madame  Duchapt,  a  famous  dressmaker,  whoat  the time  employed  some  very  pretty  girls,  with  whom  our  gentle-men  used  to  go  and  chat  before  or  after  dinner.  I  should  haveamused  myself  like  the  rest,  if  I had  been  bolder.  I only  needed  to3  Tt was  to  this  Ancelet  that  I gave  a  little  comedy  of mine,  entitled  Les  Prison-niers  de  Guerre,  which  I had  written  after  the  disasters  of  the  French  in  Bavariaand  Bohemia,  but  which  I never  ventured  to  show  or  acknowledge,  for  the  singu-lar  reason  that  the  King,  France,  and  the  French  people  have  perhaps  never  beenmore  highly  or  sincerely  praised  than  in  this  piece;  and,  avowed  Republican  andcensurer  of the  Government  as  I was,  I did  not  dare  to  confess  myself  the  panegy-rist  of a  nation,  whose  principles  were  all  exactly  the  opposite  of my  own.  Moregrieved  at  the  misfortunes  of  France  than  even  the  French  themselves,  I  wasafraid  of  being  taxed  with  flattery  and  cowardice,  on  account  of  the  expressionsof sincere  attachment,  the  date  and  origin  of which  I have  mentioned  in the  firstpart  of this  work,  and  which  I was  ashamed  to  make  public.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU354go  in  as  they  did,  but  I never  ventured.  As  for  Madame  de la Selle,I often  went  to  dine  at  her  house  after  Altuna  had  left.  I there  hearda  number  of amusing  anecdotes,  and  also  gradually  adopted,  thankHeaven!  not  the morals,  but the principles  which  I found  established.Honourable  people.  injured,  husbands  deceived,  women  seduced,secret  accouchements,  these  were  the  most  ordinary  topics;  and  hewho  contributed  most  to  the  population  of the  Foundling  Hospitalwas  always  most  applauded.  I caught  the  infection;  I formed  mymanner  of thinking  upon  that  which  I saw  prevalent  amongst  veryamiable  and,  in  the  main,  very  honourable  people.  I said  to  myself,“Since  it is the custom  of the country,  one  who  lives  here  may  followt.”  Here  was  the  expedient  for  which  I was  looking.  I cheerfullyresolved  to  adopt  it, without  the  least  scruples  on  my  own  part;  Ionly had  to  overcome  those  of Thérèse,  with  whom I had  the  great-est  trouble  in  the  world  to  persuade  her  to  adopt  the  only  meansof saving  her  honour.  Her  mother,  who,  in  addition,  was  afraid  ofthis  new  embarrassment  in  the  shape  of  a  number  of  brats,  sup-ported  me,  and  Thérèse  at  last  yielded.  We chose  a  discreet  and  safemidwife,  one  Mademoiselle  Gouin,  who  lived  at  the  Pointe  Saint-Eustache,  to  take  care  of  this  precious  charge;  and  when  the  timecame,  Thérése  was  taken  to  her  house  by her  mother  for  her  ac-couchement.  I went  to  see  her  several  times,  and  tock  her  a mono-gram,  which  I had  written  on  two  cards,  one  of  which  was  placed‘in  the  child’s  swaddling  clothes,  after  which  it  was  deposited  bythe  midwife  in  the  office  of  the  hospital  in  the  usual  manner.  Thefollowing  year  the  same  inconvenience  was  remedied  by the  sameexpedient,  with  the  exception  of the  monogram,  which  was  forgot-ten.  On  my  side  there  was  no  more  reflection,  no  greater  approvalon  the  mother’s;  she  obeyed  with  a  sigh.  Later,  all  the  vicissitudeswhich  this  fatal  conduct  produced  in my  manner  of thinking,  as  wellas  in my  destiny,  will  become  apparent;  for  the  present,  let  us  keepto  this  first  period.  Its  consequences,  as  cruel  as  they  were  unfore-seen,  will  force  me  to  return  to  it only  too  frequently.Here  I will  mention  my  first  acquaintance  with  Madame  d’Epi-nay,  whose  name  will  frequently  recur  in  these  Memoirs.  Hermaiden  name  was  Mademoiselle  d’Esclavelles,  and  she had gust mar-ried  M. d’Epinay,  son  of M. de Lalive  de Bellegarde,  farmer-general.MADAME  D  EPINAY9,355Her  husband,  like  M.  de  Francueil,  was  musical.  She  also  was  mu-sical,  and  devotion  to  the  art  led  to  a  great  intimacy  between  thethree.  M.  de  Francueil  introduced  me  to  Madame  d’Epinay,  who  <sometimes  invited  me  to  supper.  She  was  amiable,  witty,  and  tal-ented,  and  certainly  a  very  desirable  acquaintance.  But  she  had  afriend,  Mademoiselle  d’Ette,  who  was  supposed  to  be  very  spite-ful,  and  lived  with  the  Chevalier  de  Valory,  who  did  not  enjoy  agood  reputation  either.  I believe  that  the  society  of these  two  peopledid  harm  to  Madame  d’Epinay,  who,  although  of  a  very  exactingdisposition,  was  endowed  by  Nature  with  qualities  admirablyadapted  to  regulate  or  counterbalance  its extravagances.  M.  de Fran-cueil  partly  inspired  her  with  the  friendship  he  himself  entertainedfor  me,  and  confessed  his  relations  with  her,  which,  for  this  reason,I would  not  speak  of  here,  had  they  not  become  public  property,and  even  reached  the  ears  of M.  d’Epinay  himself.  M.  de Francueilmade  singular  revelations  to  me  concerning  this  lady,  which  shenever  mentioned  to me  herself,  and  of which  she never  thought  I hadbeen  informed.  I never  opened,  and  never  will  open,  my  lips on  thesubject,  to  her  or  anyone  else.  All  these  confidential  communicationsfrom  one  quarter  and  another  rendered  my  situation  very  embar-rassing,  especially  with  Madame  de  Francueil,  who  knew  me  sufficiently  well  not  to  distrust  me,  although  I was  intimate  with  herrival.  As well  as  I was  able, I consoled  this  poor  lady, whose  husbandcertainly  did  not  return  the  love  which  she  felt  for  him.  I listenedto  these  three  persons  separately,  and  kept their  secrets  so  faithfully,that  not  one  of the  three  ever  extracted  from  me  any  of  the  secretsof the other  two,  while  at the same  time  I did  not  conceal  from  eitherof  the  women  my  attachment  to  her  rival.  Madame  de  Francueil,who  wanted  to  make  use  of me  in several  ways,  had  to  put up  with  aformal  refusal,  and  Madame  d’Epinay,  who  on  one  occasion  wantedto  intrust  me  with a letter  for  Francueil,  not  only met  with  a  similardenial,  but  I plainly  declared  that,  if she  wanted  to  drive  me  fromher  house  for  ever,  she  had  only  to  propose  the  same  thing  to  meagain.  I must,  however,  do  justice  to  Madame  d’Epinay.  Far  fromshowing  herself  displeased  with  my  conduct,  she spoke in the highestterms  of it to  Francueil,  and  made  me  as  welcome  as  ever.  In  thismanner,  amidst  the  stormy  relations  between  these  three  persons,_THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU356whom  I had  to  manage  most  carefully,  upon  whom  I in  a  mannerdepended,  and  to  whom  I was  sincerely  attached,  I retained  to  theend  their  friendship,  their  esteem,  and  their  confidence,  while  Ibehaved  with  gentleness  and  complaisance,  but  always  with  up-rightness  and  firmness.  In  spite  of my  awkwardness  and  stupidity,Madame  d’Epinay  would  take  me  with  her  to  the  gaieties  at  LaChevrette,  a château  near  Saint-Denis  belonging  to  M. de Bellegarde.There  was  a  stage  there,  on  which  performances  were  frequentlygiven.  A part  was  given  to  me,  which  I studied  for  six  months  with-out  intermission,  but  when  the  piece  was  performed,  I had  to  beprompted  in  it  from  beginning  to  end.  After  this  trial,  no  moreparts  were  offered  to  me.The  acquaintance  of Madame  d’Epinay  also  procured  me  that  ofher  step-sister,  Mademoiselle  de  Bellegarde,  who  soon  afterwardsbecame  Comtesse  de  Houdetot.  When  I first  saw  her,  it  was  justbefore  her marriage,  and  she conversed  with  me  for  a  long time  withthat  charming  familiarity  which  is natural  to  her.  I found  her  veryamiable;  but I was  far from  foreseeing  that  this  young  person  wouldone  day  decide  the  destiny  of  my  life,  and  was  fated  to  drag  medown,  although  innocently,  into  the  abyss  in  which  I find  myselfto-day.Although,  since  my  return  from  Venice,  I have  not  spoken  ofDiderot,  or  my  friend  Roguin,  I had  not  neglected  either,  and  withthe  former  especially  I had  daily  grown  more  and  more  intimate.He had  a Nanette,  just as  I had a Thérèse:  this was  a  further  point ofagreement  between  us.  But  the difference  was,  that my Thérése,  whowas  at  least  as  good-looking  as  his  Nanette,  was  of a  gentle  disposi-tion  and  an  amiable  character,  calculated  to  gain  the  attachment  ofan  honourable  man,  while  his Nanette,  who  was  a regular  shrew  anda  fish-fag,  exhibited  no  redeeming  qualities  which  could  compen-sate,  in  the  eyes  of others,  for  her  defective  education.  However,  hemarried  her, which  was  very  praiseworthy,  if he had  promised  to  doso.  As  for  myself,  having  made  no  promise  of the  kind,  I was  in  nohurry  to  imitate  him.I had  also  become  connected  with  the  Abbé  de  Condillac,  who,like  myself,  was  unknown  in  the  literary  world,  but  was  destinedto become  what  he is at the present  day. I was,  perhaps,  the first  whoTHE  “DICTIONNAIRE  ENCYCLOPÉDIQUE”357discovered  his  abilities,  and  estimated  him  at  his  proper  value.  He  -also  seemed  to  have  taken  fancy  to  me;  and  while,  shut  up  in  myroom  in the  Rue  Jean-Saint-Denis,  near  the  Opera,  I was  composingmy  act  of Hestode,  he  sometimes  dined  with  me  #éte-d-téte,  and  weshared  the  expenses.  He  was  at  that  time  engaged  upon  his  “Essaisur  l’Origine  des  Connaissances  humaines,”  his  first  work.  Whenit was  finished,  the  difficulty  was  to  find  a  bookseller  to  take  it. Thebooksellers  of  Paris  are  always  arrogant  and  hard  towards  a  newauthor,  and  metaphysics,  which  was  not  much  in  fashion  at  thetime,  did  not  offer  a  very  attractive  subject.  I spoke  of  Condillacand  his  work  to  Diderot,  and  introduced  them  to  each  other.  Theywere  made  to  suit  each  other,  and  did  so.  Diderot  induced  Durantthe  bookseller  to  accept  the  Abbé’s  manuscript,  and  this  great  meta-physician  received  for  his  first  book—and  that  almost  as  a  favour—one  hundred  crowns,  and  even  that  he  would  perhaps  not  have  re-ceived  but  for  me.  As  we  lived  at  a  great  distance  from  one  another,we  all three  met  once  a  week  at  the  Palais-Royal,  and  dined  togetherat  the  Hôtel  du  Panier  Fleuri.  These  little  weekly  dinners  musthave  been  exceedingly  agreeable  to  Diderot,  for  he,  who  nearlyalways  failed  to  keep  his  other  appointments,  never  missed  one  ofthem.  On  these  occasions  I drew  up  the  plan  of  a  periodical,  to  becalled  Le Persifleur,  to  be written  by Diderot  and  myself  alternately.I sketched  the  outlines  of the  first  number,  and  in  this  manner  be-came  acquainted  with  D’Alembert,  to  whom  Diderot  had  spoken  ofit. However,  unforeseen  events  stopped  the  way,  and  the  project  fellinto  abeyance.These  two  authors  had  just  undertaken  the  “Dictionnaire  Ency-clopédique,”  which  at  first  was  only  intended  to  be  a  kind  of trans-lation  of  Chambers’s,  almost  like  that  of  James’s  “Dictionary  ofMedicine,”  which  Diderot  had  just  finished.  The  latter  wanted  tosecure  my  assistance  in  this  second  enterprise,  and  proposed  that  Jshould  undertake  the  musical  part  of it.  I consented,  and  completedit  very  hastily  and  indifferently,  in  the  three  months  which  wereallowed  to  myself,  and  all  the  other  collaborators  in  the  work.  ButI was  the  only  one  who  was  ready  at  the  time  appointed.  I handedhim  my  manuscript,  which  I had  had  copied  by one  of M.  de  Francueil’s  lackeys,  named  Dupont,  who  wrote  a very  good hand,  paying358THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUhim  ten  crowns  out  of my  own  pocket,  for  which  I have  never  beenreimbursed.  Diderot,  on  the  part  of  the  booksellers,  promised  mesome  remuneration,  which  neither  of us  ever  mentioned  again  to  theother.The  undertaking  was  interrupted  by  his  imprisonment.  His“Pensées  philosophiques”  had  brought  upon  him a certain  amountof annoyance,  which  led  to  no  further  consequences.  It was differentwith  his  “Lettre  sur  les  Aveugles,”  which  contained  nothing  thatdeserved  censure  except  a  few  personal  allusions,  at  which  MadameDupré  de  Saint-Maur  and  M.  de  Réaumur  took  offence,  and  forwhich  he  was  confined  in  the  donjon  of Vincennes.  It is impossibleto  describe  the  anguish  which  my  friend’s  misfortune  caused  me.My melancholy  imagination,  which  always  exaggerates  misfortune,became  alarmed.  I thought  that  he  would  be  imprisoned  for  therest  of his  life;  I nearly  went  mad  at  the  idea.  I wrote  to  Madamede  Pompadour,  entreating  her  to  procure  his  release,  or  to  get  meimprisoned  with  him.  I received  no  answer  to  my  letter;  it was  toounreasonable  to  produce  any  effect,  and  I cannot  flatter  myself  thatit contributed  to  the  subsequent  alleviation  of the  hardships  of poorDiderot’s  confinement.  Had  its  severity  continued  without  relaxa-tion,  I believe  that  I should  have  died  of despair  at  the  foot  of  thisaccursed  donjon.  Besides,  even  if my  letter  produced  but  little  effect,neither  did  I myself  claim  much  merit  for  it, for  I only  mentionedit to  one  or  two  people,  and  never  to  Diderot  himself.ad~e neeBOOK  VIII[1749]I Have  been  obliged  to  pause  at  the  end  of the preceding  book.  Withthe present  book  commences,  in its first  origin,  the long chain  of mymisfortunes.Having  lived  in  two  of  the  most  brilliant  houses  in  Paris,  I hadmade  some  acquaintances,  in  spite  of  my  want  of  tact;  amongstothers,  at  Madame  Dupin’s,  the  young  hereditary  prince  of  Saxe-Gotha  and  Baron  de Thun,  his tutor;  at  M.  de la Popliniére’s,  M.  Se-guy,  a  friend  of  Baron  de  Thun,  who  was  known  in  the  literaryworld  by his  beautiful  edition  of Rousseau.!  The  Baron  invited  M,Seguy  and  myself  to  spend  a  day  or  two  at  Fontenay-sous-Bois,where  the  Prince  had  a  country  house.  We  accepted  the  invitation.While  passing  Vincennes,  I  felt  so  distressed  at  the  sight  of  thedonjon,  that  the  Baron  perceived  the  effects  of my  emotion  on  mycountenance.  At  supper  the  Prince  spoke  of Diderot’s  confinement.The  Baron,  in  order  to  make  me  speak,  accused  the  prisoner  of im-pudence,  which  I myself  displayed  by the  impetuosity  with  whichI defended  him.  This  excess  of zeal  was  excused  in  a man  who  wasinspired  by attachment  to  an  unfortunate  friend,  and  the  conversa-tion  took  another  turn.  Two  Germans,  belonging  to  the  Prince’ssuite,  were  present:  M.  Kliipfel,  a  man  of great  ability,  his chaplain,who  afterwards  supplanted  the  Baron,  and  became  his  tutor;  and  ayoung  man  named  Grimm,  who  held  the  post  of  reader  until  hecould  find  some  other  place,  and  whose  modest  equipment  showedhow  urgent  was  his  need  for  finding  something  of the  kind.  Fromthat  same  evening,  Klüpfel  and  myself  formed  an  acquaintancewhich  soon  ripened  into  friendship.  My  acquaintance  with  M.Grimm  did  not  advance  so  rapidly;  he  kept  himself  in  the  back-1  Jean  Baptiste  Rousseau,  the  poet.359360THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUground,  and  gave  no  signs  of the  boastfulness  which  he  afterwardsdisplayed  when  he  became  prosperous.  At  dinner  the  next  day  theconversation  turned  upon  music;  he  spoke  well  upon  the  subject.I was  delighted  when  I heard  that  he  was  able  to  accompany  on  thepiano.  After  dinner,  some  music  was  sent  for,  and  we  amused  our-selves  for  the  rest  of the  day on  the  Prince’s  piano.  In  this  mannerbegan  that  friendship,  at  first  so  pleasant  to  me,  and  in  the  end  sofatal,  of which,  from  this  time  forth,  I shall  have  so  much  to  say.On  my  return  to  Paris,  I received  the  agreeable  news  that  Diderothad  been  released  from  the  donjon,  and  confined  to  the  chateau  andpark  of  Vincennes  on  parole,  with  permission  to  see  his  friends.How  painful  it was  to  me  not  to  be  able  to  run  to  him  on  the  spot!But  I was  detained  for  two  or  three  days  at  Madame  Dupin’s  byduties  which  I could  not  neglect,  and,  after  what  seemed  three  orfour  centuries  of  impatience,  I few  into  my  friend’s  arms.  O inde-scribable  moment!  He  was  not  alone;  D’Alembert  and  the  treasurerof the  Sainte-Chapelle  were  with  him.  When I entered,  I saw  no  oneexcept  him.  I made a single  bound,  I uttered  a  single  cry;  I pressedmy  face  to  his;  I embraced  him  closely  without  an  utterance,  ex-cept  that  of my  tears  and  sighs;  I was  choked  with  tenderness  andjoy.  The  first  thing  he  did,  after  leaving  my  arms,  was  to  turntowards  the  ecclesiastic  and  say  to  him:  “You  see,  sir,  how  myfriends  love  me!”  Completely  overcome  by my  emotion,  I did  not  atthat  time  think  of  this  manner  of  turning  it  to  advantage;  but,when  occasionally  reflecting  upon  it  afterwards,  I  have  alwaysthought  that  this  would  not  have  been  the  first  idea  that  would  haveoccurred  to  me  had  I been  in Diderot’s  place.I found  him  greatly  affected  by his  imprisonment.  The  donjonhad  made a terrible  impression  upon  him,  and,  although  he  wascomfortable  at  the  castle  and  allowed  to  walk  where  he’ pleased  in apark that  was  not  even  surrounded  by walls,  he needed  the society  ofhis  friends,  to  avoid  giving  way  to melancholy.  As  I was  certainly‘the  one  who  had  most  sympathy  with  his sufferings,  I believed  that  I‘should  also  be  the  one  whose  presence  would  be  most  consoling  tohim, and, in spite of very  pressing  engagements,  I went  at least  everyother  day, alone  or  with  his  wife,  to  spend  the  afternoon  with  him.The  summer  of  1749  was  excessively  hot.  Vincennes  is reckonedBEGINS  HIS  ESSAY361to  be  two  leagues  distant  from  Paris.  Being  unable  to  afford  a  con-veyance,  I set  out  at  two  o'clock  in the afternoon  on  foot,  when  I wasalone,  and  walked  fast,  in  order  to  get  there  sooner.  The  trees  onthe  road—always  lopped  after  the  fashion  of  the  country—hardlyafforded  any  shade,  and  often,  exhausted  by  heat  and  fatigue,  Ithrew  myself  on  the  ground,  being  unable  to  walk  any  further.  Inorder  to  moderate  my  pace,  I bethought  myself  of  taking  a  bookwith  me.  One  day I took  the Mercure  de France,  and,  while  readingas  I walked,  I came  upon  the  subject  proposed  by the  Academy  ofDijon  as  a  prize  essay  for  the  following  year:  “Has  the  progress  ofthe  arts  and  sciences  contributed  more  to  the  corruption  or  purifi-cation  of morals?”From  the  moment  I read  these  words,  I beheld  another  world  andbecame  another  man.  Although  I have a lively  recollection  of  theimpression  which  they  produced  upon  me,  the  details  have  escapedme  since  I committed  them  to  paper  in one  of my  four  letters  to  M.de Malesherbes.  This  is one  of the peculiarities  of my  memory  whichdeserves  to  be  mentioned.  It only  serves  me  so  long  as  I am  depen-dent  upon  it. As soon  as  I commit  its contents  to  paper  it forsakes  me,and  when  I have  once  written  a  thing  down,  I completely  forget  it.This  peculiarity  follows  me  even  into  music.  Before  I learned  it, Iknew  a number  of songs  by heart.  As  soon  as  I was  able  to  sing fromnotes,  I could  not  retain  a  single  one  in  my  memory,  and  I doubtwhether  I should  now  be  able  to  repeat,  from  beginning  to  end,  asingle  one  of those  which  were  my  greatest  favourites.What  I distinctly  remember  on  this  occasion  is, that  on  my  ar-rival  at  Vincennes  I was  in a state  of agitation  bordering  upon  mad-ness.  Diderot  perceived  it. I told  him  the  reason,  and  read  to  him  theProsopopoea  of Fabricius,”  written  in pencil,  under  an  oak-tree.  Heencouraged  me  to  allow  my  ideas  to  have  full  play,  and  to  competefor  the  prize.  I did  so,  and  from  that  moment  I was  lost.  The  mis-fortunes  of  the  remainder  of my  life  were  the  inevitable  result  ofthis  moment  of madness.With  inconceivable  rapidity,  my  feelings  became  elevated  to  thetone  of my  ideas.  All  my  petty  passions  were  stifled  by the  enthusi-2 Prosopopée  de  Fabricius:  a  soliloquy.  of  the  famous  Roman  general,  intro-duced  by Rousseau  in his  essay.362'  THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUasm  of truth,  liberty  and  virtue;  and  the  most  astonishing  thing  is,that  this  fervour  continued  in  my  heart  for  more  than  four  or  fiveyears,  in a  higher  degree,  perhaps,  than  has  ever  been  the  case  withthe  heart  of any  other  man.I worked  at  this  Essay  in  a  very  curious  manner,  which  I haveadopted  in almost  all my  other  works.  I devoted  to  it the hours  of thenight  when  I was  unable  to  sleep.  I meditated  in  bed  with  my  eyesshut,  and  turned  and  re-turned  my  periods  in  my  head  with  in-credible  labour.  Then,  when  I was  finally  satisfied  with  them,  Istored  them  up  in  my  memory  until  I was  able  to  commit  them  topaper;  but  the  time  spent  in  getting  up  and  dressing  myself  mademe  forget  everything,  and  when  I sat  down  in  front  of my  paper  Icould  recall  scarcely  anytHing  of what  I had  composed.  I conceivedthe  idea  of  making  Madame  le Vasseur  my  secretary.  I had  takenlodgings  for  her, her  husband  and  her  daughter,  nearer  to  my  own;and  she,  in  order  to  save  me  the  expense  of  a  servant,  came  everymorning  to  light  my  fire  and  attend  to  my  little  wants.  When  shecame,  I dictated  to  her  from  my  bed  the  result  of my  labours  of thepreceding  night;  and  this  plan,  to  which  I have  long  adhered,  hassaved  me  from  forgetting  much.When  the  Essay  was  finished  I showed  it  to  Diderot,  who  waspleased  with  it, and  suggested  a  few  corrections.  This  production,however,  although  full  of warmth  and  vigour,  is altogether  destituteof logic and  arrangement.  Of all the works  that  have  proceeded  frommy  pen,  it is the  weakest  in  argument  and  the  poorest  in  harmonyand  proportion;  but,  however  great  a  man’s  natural  talents  may  be,the  art  of writing  cannot  be learnt  all at  once.I sent  off  the  work  without  mentioning  it  to  anyone,  with  theexception,  I fancy,  of  Grimm,  with  whom I began  to  be  on  mostintimate  terms  after  he  went  to  live  with  the  Comte  de  Friése.  Hehad  a  piano, which formed  our  meeting- -place, and  at  which  I spentin his  company  all  my  spare  moments,  singing  Italian  airs  and  bar-rarolles,  without  break  or  intermission  from  morning  till  evening,or,  rather,  from  evening  till morning;  and  whenever  I was  not  to  befound  at  Madame  Dupin’s  I was  sure  to  be  found  at  Grimm’s,  or,at  least,  in his  company,  either  on  the  promenade  or  at  the  theatre.I gave  up  going  to  the  Comédie  Italienne,  where  I had  a  free  pass,+GOES  T@  LIVE  WITH  THERESE362but  which  he  did  not  care  for, and  paid to  go  to  the  Comédie  Fran-çaise,  of which  he was  passionately  fond.  At length  I became  so  pow:erfully  attracted  to  this  young  man,  and  so  inseparable  from  him,  -that  even  poor  “aunt”  was  neglected—that  is  to  say,  I saw  less  ofher,  for  my  attachment  to  her  has  never  once  wavered  during  thewhole  course  of my  life.This  impossibility  of  dividing  the  little  spare  time  I had  in  ac-cordance  with  my  inclinations,  renewed  more  strongly  than  everthe  desire,  which  I had  long  since  entertained,  of  having  only  oneestablishment  for  Thérése  and  myself;  but  the  obstacle  presented  byher  numerous  family  and,  above  all,  want  of  money  to  buy  furni-ture,  had  hitherto  prevented  me.  The  opportunity  of  making  an`  effort  to provide  a  home  presented  itself,  and  I seized  it. M.  de Fran-cueil  and  Madame  Dupin,  feeling  that  800  or  goo  francs  a year  couldnot  be  sufficient  for  me,  of  their  own  accord  raised  my  salary  tofifty Jouis;  and,  in  addition,  Madame  Dupin,  when  she  heard  that  Iwanted  to  furnish  my  own  rooms,  gave  me  some  assistance.  Withthe  furniture  which  Thérése  already  had,  we  put  all  together,  and,having  rented  some  small  rooms  in the  Hôtel  de Languedoc,  in  theRue  de  Grenelle-Saint-Honoré,  kept  by very  respectable  people,  wesettled  there  as  comfortably  as  we  could,  and  we  lived  there  quietlyand  agreeably  for  seven  years,  until  I removed  to  the  Hermitage.Thérése’s  father  was  a  good  old  man,  of a  very  peaceful  disposi-tion  and  terribly  afraid  of  his  wife,  upon  whom  he  had  bestowedthe  name  of  “Criminal  Lieutenant,’ ? which  Grimm  afterwardsjestingly  transferred  to  the  daughter.  Madame  le  Vasseur  was  notlacking  in  intelligence,  that  is  to  say,  in  address;  she  ever  pridedherself  on  her  politeness  and  distinguished  manners;  but  she  had  aconfidential  wheedling  tone,  which  was  unendurable  to  me.  Shegave  her  daughter  bad  advice,  tried  to  make  her  dissemble  with  me,and  cajoled  my  friends,  separately,  at  the  expense  of  one  another,and  at  my  own;  in  other  respects,  she  was  a  fairly  good  mother,  be-cause  she  found  it  worth  her  while  to  be,  and  she  concealed  herdaughter’s  faults,  because  she profited  by them.  This  woman,  whom.I loaded  with  care,  attention,  and  little  presents,  and  whose  affec-3  Lieutenant  Criminel:  a  former  magistrate  of the  Châtel  (the  name  of iwo  oldcourts,  civil  and  criminal)  of Paris.364THE  CONFESSIONS.  OF  ROUSSEAUtion  I was  exceedingly  anxious  to  gain,  by reason  of  my  utter  in-ability  to  succeed,  was  the  only cause  of trouble  in my  little  establish-ment;  for  the  rest,  I.can  say  that,  during  these  six  or  seven  years,  Ienjoyed  the  most  perfect  domestic  happiness  that  human  weaknesscan  permit.  My  Thérése’s  heart  was  that  of  an  angel;  intimacy  in-creased  our  attachment,  and  we  daily  felt  more  and  more  how  per-fectly  we  were  made  for  each  other.  If  our  pleasures  could  bedescribed,  their  simplicity  would  appear  ridiculous;  our  walks,  téte-a-téte,  outside  the  city,  where  I spent  my  eight  or  ten  sous  magnifi-cently  in  some  beer-house;  our  little  suppers  at  the  open  window,at  which  we  sat  opposite  each  other  on  two  low  chairs  placed  upona  trunk  which  filled  up  the  breadth  of  the  window-niche.  In  thisposition,  the  window  served  us  as a table,  we  breathed  the  fresh  air,we  could  see  the  surrounding  country  and  the  passers-by,  and,although  we  were  on  the  fourth  storey,  we  could  look  down  uponthe  street  while  we  ate.  Who  could  describe,  who  could  feel  thecharm  of these  meals,  at  which  the  dishes  consisted  of nothing  morethan  a  quartern  loaf  of  coarse  bread,  a  few  cherries,  a  morsel  ofcheese,  and  half  a  pint  of  wine,  which  we  shared  between  us?Friendship,  confidence,  intimacy,  tranquillity  of  mind,  how  deli-cious  are  your  seasonings!  Sometimes  we  rernained  there  till  mid-night,  without  thinking  of  it  or  suspecting  how  late  it  was,  untilthe  old  lady informed  us.  But  let us  leave  these  details,  which  mustappear  insipid  or  ridiculous.  I have  always  felt  and  declared,  that  itis impossible  to  describe  true  enjoyment.At the same  time  I indulged  in a  somewhat  coarser  enjoyment,  thelast  of the  kind  with  which  I have  to  reproach  myself.  I have  men-tioned  that  Klüpfel,  the  minister,  was  of  an  amiable  disposition;my  relations  with  him  were  nearly  as  intimate  as  with  Grimm,  andbecame  equally  confidential.  They sometimes  shared  my table.  Thesemeals,  somewhat  more  than  simple,  were  enlivened  by the  witty  andbroad  jokes  of Klipfel  and  the  humorous  Germanisms  of  Grimm,who  had  not  yet  become a purist.Sensuality  did  not  preside  at our  little  orgies;  its place was  suppliedby gaiety,  and  we  were  so  well  satisfied  with  each  other  that  wewere  unable  to  separate.  Kliipfel  had  furnished  a  room  for a littlegirl,  who,  notwithstanding,  was  at  everybody’s  disposal,  since  he7AFFAIR  IN  THE  RUE  DES  MOINEAUXPo365Awas  unable  to  keep  her  by himself.  One  evening,  as  we  were  enter-ing the  café,  we  met  him  coming  out  to  go  and  sup  with  her.  Werallied  him;  he revenged  himself  gallantly  by taking  us  to  share  thesupper,  and  then  rallied  us  in  turn.  The  poor  creature  appeared  to  |me  to  be of a  fairly  good  disposition,  very  gentle,  and  little  adaptedfor  her  profession,  for  which  an  old  hag,  whom  she  had  with  her,dressed  her  as  well  as  she  was  able.  The  conversation  and  the  wineenlivened  us  to  such  a  degree  that  we  forgot  ourselves.  The  worthyKliipfel  did  not  desire  to  do  the  honours  of his  table  by halves,  andall  three  of us,  in  turn,  went  into  the  adjoining  room  with  the  littleone,  who  did  not  know  whether  she  ought  to  laugh  or  cry.  Grimmhas always  declared  that  he never  touched  her, and  that  he temainedso  long  with  her  simply  in  order  to  amuse  himself  at  our  impa-tience.  If  he  really  did  not  touch  her,  it  is  not  likely  that  he  wasprevented  by  any  scruples,  since,  before  going  to  live  with  theComte  de  Friése,  he  lived  with  some  girl  in  the  same  quarter  ofSaint-Roch.I left  the  Rue  des  Moineaux,  where  this  girl  lived,  feeling  asashamed  as  Saint-Preux,  when  he left  the  house  where  he  had  beenmade  drunk,  and  I had  a  vivid  remembrance  of my  own  story  whenwriting  his.  Thérése  perceived,  from  certain  indications,  and,  aboveall, from  my  confused  air,  that  I had  something  to  reproach  myselfwith;  I relieved  my  conscience  of the  burden  by making  a  promptand  frank  confession.  In  this  I did  well;  for,  the  next  morning,Grimm  came  in triumph  to  her, to  give her  an  exaggerated  accountof my  offence,  and  since  that  time  he  has  never  failed  spitefully  toremind  her  of it. This  was  the  more  inexcusable  in him,  since  I hadfreely  and  voluntarily  taken  him  into  my  confidence  and  had  theright  to  expect  from  him  that  he would  not  give me  cause  to  repentit.  I never  felt  so  much  as  on  this  occasion  the  goodness  of my  Thé-rése’s  heart,  for  she  was  more  indignant  at  Grimm’s  conduct  thanoffended  at  my  unfaithfulness,  and  I only  had  to  submit  to  tenderand  touching  reproaches  on  her  part,  in  which  I did  not  detect  theslightest  trace  of anger.This  excellent  girl’s  good-heartedness  was  equalled  by her  sim-plicity  of mind.  Nothing  more  need  be said;  however,  I may  be per-mitted  to  mention  an  example of it, which I recollect.  I had  told  her.366THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU_that Kliipfel  was  preacher  and  chaplain  to  the  Prince  of Saxe-Gotha.In  her  estimation  a  preacher  was  so  extraordinary  a  person  that,oddly  confounding  two  most  dissimilar  ideas,  she  got it into  herhead  to  take  Kliipfel  for the  Pope.  I thought  she  was  mad  when  shetold  me,  for  the  first  time,  on  my  return  home,  that  the  Pope  hadcalled  to  see  me.  I made  her  explain  herself,  and  made  all  haste  togo  and  tell  the  story  to  Grimm  and  Kliipfel,  whom  we  ever  after-wards  called  Pope,  and  gave  the  name  of  Pope  Joan  to  the  girl  inthe  Rue  des  Moineaux.  Our  laughter  was  inextinguishable,  andalmost  choked  us.  Those  who  have  made  me  say,  in  a  letter  whichthey have  been  pleased  to  attribute  to  me,  that  I have  only  laughedtwice  in my life, were  not  acquainted  with  me  at  that  time  or  in myyouthful  days;  otherwise,  this  idea  would  certainly  never  have  oc-curred  to  them.[1750-1752.|—In  the  following  year  (1750)  I  heard  that  myEssay, of which  I had  not  thought  any  more,  had  gained  the  prize atDijon.  This  news  awoke  again  all  the  ideas  which  had  suggested  itto  me,  animated  them  with  fresh  vigour,  and  stirred  up  in my  heartthe  first  leavening  of  virtue  and  heroism,  which  my  father,  mycountry,  and  Plutarch  had  deposited  there  in  my  infancy.  I consid-ered  that nothing  could  be grander  or  finer  than  to be free  and  virtu-ous,  above  considerations  of  fortune  and  the  opinion  of  mankind,and  completely  independent.  Although  false  shame  and  fear  of pub-lic disapproval  at  first  prevented  me  from  living  in accordance  withmy  principles,  and  from  openly  insulting  the  maxims  of  my  age,from  that  moment  my  mind  was  made  up,  and I delayed  carryingout  my  intention  no  longer  than  was  necessary  for  contradiction  toirritate  it and  render  it victorious.While  philosophising  upon  the  duties  of  man,  an  event  occurredwhich  made  me  reflect  more  seriously  upon  my  own.  Thérèse  be-came  pregnant  for  the  third  time.  Too  honest  towards  myself,  tooproud  in my  heart  to  desire  to  belie  my  principles  by my  actions,  Ibegan  to consider  the  destination  of my  children  and  my  connectionwith  their  mother,  in the light of the laws  of nature,  justice,  and  rea-son,  and  of  that  religion—pure,  holy  and  eternal,  like  its  author—which  men  have  polluted,  while  pretending  to  be  anxious  to  purifyit, and  which  they  have  converted,  by their  formulas,  into  a  mere)DISPOSES,  OF  HIS  CHILDREN367religion  of  words,  seeing  that  it costs  men  little  to  prescribe  whatis impossible,  when  they  dispense  with  carrying  it out  in  practice.If  I was  wrong  in  my  conclusions,  nothing  can  be  more  remark-able  than  the  calmness  with  which  I abandoned  myself  to  them.  IfI had  been  one  of those  low-born  men,  who  are  deaf  to  the  gentlevoice  of  Nature,  in  whose  heart  no  real  sentiment  of  justice  orhumanity  ever  springs  up,  this  hardening  of my  heart  would  havebeen  quite  easy  to  understand.  But  is  it  possible  that  my  warm-heartedness,  lively  sensibility,  readiness  to  form  attachments,  thepowerful  hold  which  they exercise  over  me,  the cruel  heartbreakingsI experience  when  forced  to  break  them  off,  my  natural  goodwilltowards  all  my  fellow-creatures,  my  ardent  love  of  the  great,  thetrue,  the  beautiful,  and  the  just;  my  horror  of  evil  of  every  kind,my  utter  inability  to  hate  or  injure,  or  even  to  think  of it; the  sweetand  lively  emotion  which I feel  at  the  sight  of all  that  is virtuous,generous,  and  amiable;  is  it possible,  I ask,  that  all  these  can  everagree  in the  same  heart  with  the  depravity  which,  without  the  leastscruple,  tramples  underfoot  the  sweetest  of  obligations?  No!  I feeland  loudly  assert—it  is impossible.  Never,  for  a  single  moment  inhis life, could  Jean Jacques  have  been  a man  without  feeling,  withoutcompassion,  or  an  unnatural  father.  I may  have  been  mistaken,never  hardened.  If I were  to  state  my  reasons,  I should  say too  much.Since  they  were  strong  enough  to  mislead  me,  they  might  misleadmany  others,  and  I do not  desire  to  expose  young  people,  who  mayread  my  works,  to  the danger  of allowing  themselves  to be misled  bythe  same  error.  I will  content  myself  with  observing,  that  my  errorwas  such  that,  in handing  over  my  children  to  the  State  to  educate,for  want  of means  to  bring  them  up  myself,  in  deciding  to  fit themfor  becoming  workmen  and  peasants  rather  than  adventurers  andfortune-hunters,  I thought  that  I was  behaving  like  a  citizen  and  afather,  and  considered  myself  a  member  of  Plato’s  Republic.  Morethan  once  since  then,  the regrets  of my  heart  have  told  me  that  I waswrong;  but, far from  my  reason  having  given  me  the  same  informa-tion,  I have  often  blessed  Heaven  for  having  preserved  them  fromtheir  father’s  lot, and  from  the  lot which  threatened  them  as  soon  asI should  have  been  obliged  to  abandon  them.  If  I had  left  themwith  Madame  d’Epinay  or  Madame  de Luxembourg,  who,  fromTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU368friendship,  generosity,  or  some  other  motive,  expressed  themselveswilling  to  take  charge  of  them,  would  they  have  been  happier,would  they  have  been  brought  up  at  least  as  honest  men?  I do  notknow;  but I do know  that  they would  have  been  brought  up to  hate,perhaps  to  betray,  their  parents;  it is  a hundred  times  better  that  theyhave  never  known  them.My third  child  was  accordingly  taken  to  the  Foundling  Hospital,like  the  other  two.  The  two  next  were  disposed  of in the  same  man-ner,  for  I had  five  altogether.  This  arrangement  appeared  to  me  soadmirable,  so  rational,  and  so  legitimate,  that,  if  I did  not  openlyboast  of it, this  was  solely  out  of regard  for the  mother;  but  I told  allwho  were  acquainted  with  our  relations.  I told  Grimm  and  Diderot.I afterwards  informed  Madame  d’Epinay,  and,  later,  Madame  deLuxembourg,  freely  and  voluntarily,  without  being  in  any  wayobliged  to  do  so,  and  when  I might easily  have  kept it a  secret  fromeverybody;  for  Gouin  was  an  honourable  woman,  very  discreet,  anda  person  upon  whom  I could  implicitly  rely.  The  only  one  of  myfriends  to  whom I had  any  interest  in  unbosoming  myself  was  M.Thierry,  the  physician  who  attended  my  poor  “aunt”  in a  dangerousconfinement.  In  a  word,  I made  no  mystery  of what I did,  not  onlybecause  I have  never  known  how  to  keep  a  secret  from  my  friends,but  because  I really  saw  no  harm  in it. All  things  considered,  I chosefor my  children  what  was  best, or,  at  least,  what  I believed  to  be bestfor them.  I could  have  wished,  and  still  wish,  that  I had  been  rearedand  brought  up  as  they have  been.While  I was  thus  making  my  confessions,  Madame  le Vasseur  onher part  did  the  same,  but  with  less  disinterested  views.  I had  intro-duced  her  and  her  daughter  to  Madame  Dupin,  who,  out  of friend-ship  for  me,  did  them  a  thousand  kindnesses.  The  mother  confidedher  daughter’s  secret  to  her.  Madame  Dupin,  who  is good-heartedand  generous,  whom  she  never  told  how  attentive  I was  to  providefor  everything,  in  spite  of  my  moderate  means,  herself  made  pro-vision  for her  with  a  generosity  which,  by her  mother’s  instructions,the  daughter  always  kept a  secret  from  me  during  my  stay  in Paris,and  only  confessed  to  me  at  the  Hermitage,  after  several  other  con-fidences.  I did  not  know  that  Madame  Dupin,  who  never  gave  methe  least  hint  of  it, was  so  well  informed.  Whether  Madame  deMADAME  DE  CHENONCEAUX36%Chenonceaux,  her  daughter-in-law,  was  equally  well  informed,  Ido  not  know;  but  Madame  de  Francueil,  her  step-daughter,  was,and  was  unable  to  hold  her  tongue.  She  spoke  to  me  about  it thefollowing  year,  after  I had  left  their  house.  This  induced  me  to  ad-dress  a  letter  to  her  on  this  subject,  which  will  be  found  in  my  col-lections,  in  which  I have  set  forth  those  reasons  for  my  conduct,which  I was  able  to  give without  compromising  Madame  le Vasseurand  her  family,  for  the  most  decisive  of them  came  from  that  quar-ter,  and  upon  them  I kept silence.I can  rely upon  the  discretion  of Madame  Dupin  and  the  fiend:ship  of  Madame  de  Chenonceaux;  I felt  equally  sure  in  regard  toMadame  de Francueil,  who,  besides,  died  long before  my  secret  wasnoised  abroad.  It  could  only  have  been  disclosed  by  those  verypeople  to  whom I had  confided  it, and, in fact, it was  not  until  afterI had  broken  with  them,  that  it was  so  disclosed.  By this  single  factthey  are  judged.  Without  desiring  to  acquit  myself  of  the  blamewhich I deserve,  I would  rather  have  it upon  my  shoulders  than  thatwhich  their  malice  deserves.  My  fault  is  great,  but  it  was  due  toerror;  I have  neglected  my  duties,  but  the  desire  of doing  an  injurynever  entered  my  heart,  and  the  feelings  of a  father  cannot  speakvery  eloquently  on  behalf  of children  whom  he has  never  seen;  but,to  betray  the  confidence  of  friendship,  to  violate  the  most  sacredof  all  agreements,  to  disclose  secrets  poured  into  our  bosoms,  de-liberately  to  dishonour  the  friend  whom  one  has  deceived,  and  whastill  respects  us  while  leaving  us—these  are  not  faults;  they  are  actsof meanness  and  infamy.I have  promised  my  confession,  not  my  justification;  therefore  Isay  no  more  on  this  point.  It is my  duty to  be true;  the reader’s  to  bejust. I shall  never  ask  more  from  him  than  that.The  marriage  of M. de Chenonceaux  made  his mother’s  house  stillmore  pleasant  to  me,  owing  to  the  accomplishments  of  his  youngwife—a  very  amiable  person,  who  appeared  to  take  especial  noticeof me  amongst  M. Dupin’s  secretaries.  She  was  the only daughter  ofMadame  la Vicomtesse  de Rochechouart,  a great  friend  of the Comtede Friése,  and,  consequently,  of Grimm,  who  was  attached  to  him.It was  I, however,  who  introduced  him  to  his  daughter;  but, as  theirdispositions  did  not  agree,  the  acquaintance  did  not  last  long,  and370THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUGrimm,  who  from  that  time  only had  eyes  for that  which  was  solid,preferred  the mother,  who  belonged  to the great world,  to  the daugh-ter,  who  desired  friends  on  whom  she  could  rely  and  who  wereagreeable  to  her,  who  were  neither  mixed  up  in  any  intrigues  norsought to  gain credit  amongst  the great.  Madame  Dupin, not  findingin  Madame  de  Chenonceaux  all  the  docility  which  she  expectedfrom  her,  made  her  house  very  dull  for  her,  and  Madame  de  Che-nonceaux,  proud  of her  own  merits,  and  perhaps  also  of her  birth,preferred  to  renounce  the  pleasures  of society,  and  to  remain  almostalone  in her room,  than  to  bear  a  yoke for  which  she felt  she was  notadapted.  This  species  of exile  increased  my  attachment  for her, fromthe  natural  inclination  which  attracts  me  towards  the  unfortunate.I found  in  her  a  metaphysical  and  thoughtful  mind,  although  attimes  somewhat  sophistical.  Her  conversation,  which  was  by  nomeans  that  of  a young  woman  just leaving  the  convent,  was  very  at-tractive  to  me;  and  yet  she  was  not  twenty  years  of age.  Her  com-plexion  was  dazzlingly  fair.  Her  figure  would  have  been  dignifiedand  beautiful,  if she  had  carried  herself  better.  Her  hair,  which  wasashen-grey  and  of  rare  beauty,  reminded  me  of  my  dear  mamma’sin her  youth,  and  caused a lively emotion  in my  heart.  But  the  strictprinciples  which  I had  just laid  down  for  myself,  and  which  I wasresolved  to  act  up  to  at  all  cost,  protected  me  against  her  and  hercharm.  During  the  whole  summer  I spent  three  or  four  hours  everyday alone  with  her,  solemnly  teaching  her  arithmetic,  and  wearyingher  with  my  everlasting  figures,  without  ever  uttering  a  single  wordof gallantry  or  casting  a  glance  of admiration  upon  her.  Five  or  sixyears  later,  J should  have  been  neither  so  wise  nor  so  foolish;  butit was  destined  that  I should  only  love  truly  once  in  my  life,  andthat  the  first  and  last  sighs  of my  heart  should  be  given  to  anotherthan  her.Since  I had  lived  at  Madame  Dupin’s,  I had  always  been  satisfiedwith  my  lot, without  showing  any  desire  to  see  it improved.  The  in-crease  in  my  salary,  due  to  her  and  M.  de  Franceuil  together,  wasquite  voluntary  on  their  part.  This  year,  M.  de  Francueil,  whosefriendship  for  me  increased  daily,  wanted  to  make  my  positionsomewhat  more  comfortable  and  less  precarious.  He  was  Receiver-General  of  Finance.  M.  Dudoyer,  his  cashier,  was  old,  well  to  do,2SERIOUS  ILLNESS371and  anxious  to  retire.  M.  de Francueil  offered  me  his place;  and,  inorder  to  make  myself  fit  to take  it,  I went  for  a  few  weeks  to  M.Dudoyer’s  house,  to  receive  the necessary  instructions.  But,  whetherit was  that  I had  little  talent  for  this  occupation,  or  that  Dudoyer,who  seemed  to  me  to  have  someone  else  in  his  eye  as  his  successor,did  not  instruct  me  in good  faith,  my  acquisition  of the  knowledgerequired  was  slow  and  unsatisfactory,  and  I was  never  able  to  getinto  my  head  the  state  of  accounts,  which  perhaps  had  been  pur-posely muddled.  However,  without  having grasped  the intricacies  ofthe  business,  I soon  acquired  sufficient  knowledge  of  its  ordinaryroutine  to  undertake  the  general  management.  I even  commencedits duties.  I kept the ledgers  and  the cash; I paid and received  money,and  gave  receipts;  and  although I had  as  little  inclination  as  abilityfor such  employment,  advancing  years  made  me  more  sensible:  I de-termined  to  overcome  my  dislike,  and  to  devote  myself  entirely  tomy  duties.  Unfortunately,  just  as  I was  beginning  to  get  used  tothem,  M. de Francueil  went  away  on a short  journey,  during  whichI remained  in  charge  of his  cash,  which  at  that  time,  however,  didnot  amount  to  more  than  25,000  or  30,000  francs.  The  care  and  anx-iety which  this deposit caused  me  convinced  me  that  I was  not  madefor a  cashier,  and  I have  no  doubt  that  the  impatience  with  which  Iawaited  his  return  contributed  to  the  illness  which  subsequently  at-tacked  me.I have  already  mentioned,  in the first  part  of this  work,  that  I wasalmost  dead  when  I was  born. A defective  formation  of the  bladdercaused,  during  my  childhood,  an  almost  continual  retention  ofurine;  and  my  aunt  Suzon,  who  took  care  of  me,  had  the  greatestdifficulty  in  keeping  me  alive.  However,  she  at  length  succeeded:my  robust  constitution  at  length  gained  the  upper  hand,  and  myhealth  improved  so  much  during  my  youth  that,  with  the  exceptionof the  attack  of languor  which  I have  described,  and  the  frequentnecessity  of making  water,  which  the  least  heating  of the  blood  al-ways  rendered  a matter  of difficulty,  I reached  the  age  of thirty  with-out  feeling  my  early infirmity  at  all. The first  touch  of it which  I hadwas  on  my  arrival  at  Venice.  The  fatigue  of  the  journey,  and  thefearful  heat  which  I had  suffered,  brought  on  a  constant  desire  tomake  water  and  an  affection  of the kidneys,  which  lasted  till the be-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU372ginning  of the  winter.  After  my  visit  to  the  padoana,  I looked  uponmyself  as  a  dead  man,  and  yet  I never  suffered  the  slightest  incon-venience  from  it.  After  having  exHausted  myself  more  in  imagina-tion  than  in reality  for  my  Zulietta,  I was  in better  health  than  ever.It was  only after  Diderot’s  confinement  that  the  overheating,  causedby my  journeys  to  Vincennes  during  the  fearful  heat,  brought  on  aviolent  pain  in  the  kidneys,  and  since  that  time  I have  never  recov-ered  my  health  completely.At  the  time  of  which  I am  speaking,  having  perhaps  overtiredmyself  with  my  distasteful  work  at  the  confounded  office,  I becameworse  than  before,  and  was  confined  to  my  bed  for  five  or  six weeksin  the  most  melancholy  condition  that  can  be  imagined.  MadameDupin  sent  the  celebrated  Morand  to  see  me,  who,  in  spite  of  hiscleverness  and  delicacy  of touch, caused  me  incredible  suffering,  andcould  never  get  to  probe  me.  He  advised  me  to  consult  Daran,  whomanaged  to  introduce  his  bougies,  which  were  more  flexible,  andafforded  me  some  relief;  but,  when  giving  Madame  Dupin  an  ac-count  of my  condition,  he  declared  that  I had  less  than  six  monthsto  live.This  verdict,  which  I afterwards  heard,  caused  me  to  reflect  seri-ously  upon  my  condition,  and  upon  the  folly  of  sacrificing  the  re-pose  and  comfort  of my  few  remaining  days to  the  slavery  of an  em-ployment  for  which  I felt  nothing  but  aversion.  Besides,  how  couldI reconcile  the strict  principles  which  I had  just adopted  with  a  situa-tion  which  harmonised  so  ill  with  them?  Would  it not  have  beenvery  bad  taste  in  me,  cashier  of  a  Receiver-General  of  Finance,  topreach  disinterestedness  and  poverty?  These  ideas  fermented  sostrongly  in my  head  together  with  the  fever,  and  combined  so  pow-erfully,  that from  that  time  nothing  could  uproot  them,  and, duringthe  period  of  my  recovery,  I quietly  determined  to  carry  out  theresolutions  which  I had  made  during  my  delirium.  I renounced  forever  all plans of fortune  and  promotion.  Resolved  to pass  my  few re-maining  days  in  poverty  and  independence,  I  employed  all  mystrength  of  mind  in  breaking  away  from  the  bonds  of the  opinionof the  world,  and  in courageously  carrying  out  everything  which  ap-peared  to  me  to  be right,  without  troubling  myself  about  what  theBECOMES  A  COPYIST  OF  MUSIC373world  might  think  of it. The  obstacles  which  I had  to  overcome,  theefforts  which  I made  to  t#iumph  over  them,  are  incredible.  I suc-ceeded  as  much  as  was  possible,  and  more  than  I had  myself  hoped.If I had  been  as  successful  in  shaking  off  the  yoke  of friendship  asthat  of public  opinion,  I should  have  accomplished  my  purpose,  per-haps  the  greatest,  or,  at  any  rate,  the  most  conducive  to  virtue,  thata  mortal  has  ever  conceived;  but,  while  I trampled  underfoot  thesenseless  judgments  of the  common  herd  of the  so-called  great  andwise,  I suffered  myself  to  be  subjugated  and  led  like  a  child  by so-called  friends,  who,  jealous  of  seeing  me  strike  out  a  new  path  bymyself,  thought  of nothing  but  how  to  make  me  appear  ridiculous,and  began  by doing  their  utmost  to  degrade  me,  in order  to  raise  anoutcry  against  me.  It was  the  change  in  my  character,  dating  fromthis period,  rather  than  my  literary celebrity,  that  drew  their  jealousyupon  me;  they  would  perhaps  have  forgiven  me  for  distinguishingmyself in the art  of writing;  but they could  not  forgive  me  for settingan  example  in my  change  of life, which  seemed  likely  to  cause  theminconvenience.  I was  born  for  friendship;  my  easy  and  gentle  dis-position  found  no  difficulty  in  cherishing  it.  As  long  as  I was  un-known  to  the  world,  I was  loved  by all  who  knew  me,  and  had  nota  single  enemy;  but,  as  soon  as  I became  known,  I had  not a singlefriend.  This  was  a  great  misfortune;  it was  a still  greater  one  that  Iwas  surrounded  by people  who  called  themselves  my  friends,  andwho  only made  use  of the privileges  which  this  name  allowed  themto  drag me  to  my  ruin.  The  sequel  of these  memoirs  will  reveal  thisodious  intrigue;  at  present  I only  point  out  its  origin;  my  readerswill  soon  see  the  first  link  forged.In  the  state  of  independence  in  which  I intended  to  live,  it wasnecessary,  however,  to  find  means  of subsistence.  I bethought  myselfof a  very  simple  plan:  copying  music  at  so  much a page.  If a  moresolid  employment  would  have  fulfilled  the  same  end,  I should  haveadopted  it; but  as  I had  taste  and  ability  for  this,  and  as  it was  theonly  occupation  which  would  provide  my  daily  bread  without  per-sonal  dependence,  I was  satisfied  with  it. Believing  that  I no  longer_had  need  of foresight,  and  silencing  the voice  of vanity,  from  cashierto  a  financier  I became  a  copyist of music.  I thought  I had gained374THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUgreatly  by the  choice,  and  I have  so  little  regretted  it, that  I havenever  abandoned  this  employment  except  under  compulsion,  andthen  only  to  resume  it as  soon  as  I was  able.The  success  of my  first  Essay  made  it easier  for  me  to  carry  outthis  resolution.  After  it had  gained  the  prize,  Diderot  undertook  toget it printed.  While  I was  in bed  he wrote  me a note,  informing  meof  its  publication  and  the  effect  it had  produced.  “It  has  gone  uplike  a  rocket,”  he  told  me;  “such  a  success  has  never  been  seen  be-fore.”  This  voluntary  approval  of  the  public,  in  the  case  of an  un-known  author,  gave  me  the  first  real  assurance  of my  ability,  as  towhich,  in  spite  of  my  inner  feelings,  I had  until  then  always  beendoubtful.  I saw  the  great  advantage  I might  derive  from  it in  viewof  the  resolution  which  I was  on  the  point  of  carrying  out,  and  Ijudged  that a copyist  of some  literary  celebrity  would  not  be likely tosuffer  from  want  of work.As soon  as  my  resolution  was  taken  and confirmed,  I wrote  a  noteto  M.  de Francueil  to  inform  him  of it, thanking  him  and  MadameDupin  for all their  kindness,  and  asking  for their  custom.  Francueil,quite unable  to  understand  the note,  and  believing  that I was  still  de-lirious,  came  to  me  in  all  haste,  but  he  found  my  mind  so  firmlymade  up  that  he  was  unable  to  shake  my  resolution.  He  went  andtold  Madame  Dupin  and  everyone  else  that  I had  gone  mad. I lethim  do  so,  and  went  my  way.  I commenced  my  reformation  withmy  dress.  I gave  up  my  gold lace  and  white  stockings,  and  put  on  around  wig. I took  off my  sword  and  sold  my  watch,  saying  to  myselfwith  incredible  delight,  “Thank  Heaven,  I shall  not  want  to  knowthe  time  again!”  M.  de  Francueil  was  kind  enough  to  wait  sometime  before  he found  a  successor  to me.  At last, when  he saw  that  mymind  was  made  up,  he gave  my  post  to  M.  d’Alibard,  formerly  tutorto  the  young  Chenonceaux,  known  in  the  botanical  world  for  his“Flora  Parisiensis.”  4In spite of the  strictness  of my  sumptuary  reform,  I did not  at firstextend  it to  my  linen,  which  was  good,  and  of which  I had a large.I  have  no  doubt  that  Francueil  and  his  associates  now  give  a  totally  differentaccount  of  all  this,  but  I appeal  to  what  he  said  about  it at  the  time,  and  for  along  time.afterwards,  to  all  his  acquaintances,  until  the  conspiracy  was  formed.Men  of  good  sense  and  honour  cannot  have  forgotten  his  words.ROBBED  BY  THERESE’S  BROTHER395stock—the  remains  of my  Venetian  outfit—and  for  which  I had  aspecial  fondness.  I had  considered  it so  much  a  matter  of cleanlinessthat  I ended  by making  it a  matter  of luxury,  which  was  certainlyexpensive.  Someone  was  kind  enough  to  deliver  me  from  this  servi-tude.  On  Christmas  Eve,  while  the  women-folk  were  at  vespers,  andI was  at the “spiritual  concert,”the door  of a garret  in which  all ourlinen  was  hung up after  a  wash,  which  was  just finished,  was  brokenopen.  Everything  was  stolen,  amongst  other  things,  forty-two  finelinen  shirts  belonging  to  me—the  principal  part  of my  linen  ward-robe.  From  the  description  given  by the  neighbours  of  a  man  whohad  been  seen  to  leave  the hotel  carrying  some  bundles,  Thérése  andmyself  suspected  her  brother,  who  was  known  to  be a  worthless  fel-low.  The  mother  indignantly  repudiated  the  suspicion,  but  it wasconfirmed  by so  many  proofs  that  we  could  not  abandon  it, in  spiteof her indignation.  I did  not  venture  to  make  strict  inquiries  for  fearof  discovering  more  than  I might  have  liked.  The  brother  nevershowed  himself  again,  and  at  last  disappeared  altogether.  I deploredThérése’s  misfortune  and  my  own  in being connected  with  so  mixeda  family,  and  I urged  her  more  strongly  than  ever  to  shake  off a yokeso  dangerous.  This  adventure  cured  me  of my  passion  for fine  linen,and  from  that  time  I have  only  worn  shirts  of very  common  mate-rial,  more  in keeping  with  the  rest  of my  dress.Having  thus  completed  my  reforms,  my  only anxiety  was  to  makethem  solid  and  lasting,  by doing  my  utmost  to  root  out  of my  hearteverything  which  was  still  liable  to  be  affected  by public  opinion;everything  which,  from  fear  of censure,  might  turn  me  aside  fromthat  which  was  good  and  reasonable  in itself.  In  consequence  of thestir  which  my  Essay  created,  my  resolution  also  made  a  sensationand  brought  me  employment,  so  that  I commenced  my  new  profes-sion  with  tolerable  success.  Nevertheless,  several  causes  prevented  mefrom  succeeding  as  well  as  I might have  done  in other  circumstances.In  the  first  place,  my  bad  health.  My  recent  attack  left  after-effectswhich  prevented  me  from  ever  regaining  my  former  state  of health:and it is my  belief  that  the physicians,  to  whose  treatment  I intrusted  —myself,  did  me  as  much  harm  as  my  illness.  I consulted,  in  succes-5 At  which  only  religious  music  was  heard,  and  which,  on  certain  days,  was  asubstitute  for  secular  concerts.376THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsion,  Morand,  Daran,  Helvétius,  Malouin  and  Thierry,  all  verylearned  men,  and  my  personal  friends.  Each  treated  me  in  his  ownway,  afforded  me  no  relief,  and  considerably  weakened  me.  Themore  I  submitted  to  their  treatment,  the  yellower,  thinner,  andweaker  I became.  My  imagination,  which  they  terrified,  judged  ofmy  condition  by the  effects  of their  drugs,  and  only  set  before  myeyes  a  continuous  succession  of  sufferings  before  my  death—reten-tion  of urine,  gravel,  and  stone.  All  the  remedies  which  afford  reliefto  others—ptisans,  baths,  and  bleeding—only  aggravated  my  suffer-ings.  Finding  that  Daran’s  bougies,  the  only  ones  which  had  anyeffect,  and  without  which  I thought  I could  not  live,  only  affordedme  momentary  relief,  I proceeded,  at  great  expense,  to  lay  in  anenormous  stock  of them,  su  that,  in  case  of Daran’s  death,  I mightalways  have  some  for  use.  During  the  eight  or  ten  years  in which  Imade  such  constant  use  of them  I must  have  spent  at  least  fifty louts.It will  be  readily  imagined  that  a  treatment  so  expensive,  painful,and  troublesome  distracted  me  from  my  work,  and  that  a  dying  manis not  very  eager  about  earning  his  daily  bread.Literary  occupations  were  equally  prejudicial  to  my  daily  work.No  sooner  had  my  Essay  appeared,  than  the  defenders  of literaturefell  upon  me  as  if by common  consent.  Indignant  at  the  sight  of somany  Messieurs  Josse,  who  did  not  even  understand  the  question,attempting  to  decide  like  masters,  I took  up  my  pen  and  treatedsome  of them  in such  a  manner  that  they no  longer  had  the laugh ontheir  side.  One  M.  Gautier,  from  Nancy,  the  first  who  fell  under  mylash,  was  roughly  abused  in a letter  to  Grimm.  The  second  wasKing  Stanislaus  himself,  who  did  not  disdain  to  enter  the  lists  withme.  The  honour  which  he did  me  obliged  me  to  change  the  tone  ofmy  answer.  I adopted  one  that  was  more  serious,  but  equally  em-phatic,  and,  without  failing  in  respect  towards  the  author,  I com-pletely  refuted  his  work.  I knew  that  a  Jesuit,  Father  Menou,  hadhad  a  hand  in it. I trusted  to  my  judgment  to  distinguish  the  workof the  Prince  from  that  of the  monk;  and,  mercilessly  attacking  all‘M.  Josse  was  one  of  the  characters  in  Moliére’s  L’Amour  médecin.  The  say-ing,  “Vous  étes  orfévre,  Monsieur  Josse,”  is used  to  remind  a  man  that  he  is per-sonally  interested  in  the  success  of  anything  which  he  strongly  recommends  arsupports.6:.ENMITY  OF  M.  BORDES377the Jesuitical  phrases,  1 brought into  prominence,  as  I went  along, ananachronism  which I believed  could  only  have  proceeded  from  thepen  of his  reverence.  This  composition,  which,  for  some  reason  orother,  has  made  less  stir  than  my  other  writings,  is,  in  its  way,unique.  In it I seized  the  opportunity  of showing  the  public,  how  aprivate  individual  could  defend  the  cause  of  truth,  even  against  asovereign.  It would  be  difficult  to  adopt,  at  the  same  time,  a  moredignified  and  respectful  tone  than  that  which  I adopted  in  my  an-swer  to him.  I was  fortunate  enough  to  have  to  deal  with  an  adver-sary  for  whom I felt  sincere  esteem,  which  I could  exhibit  withoutservile  adulation;  this  I did  with  tolerable  success,  and  always  in adignified  manner.  My friends,  alarmed  on  my  behalf,  thought  theyalready  saw  me  in the  Bastille.  I never  once  had  any  such  fear,  andI was  right.  This  worthy  Prince,  after  he had  seen  my  reply,  said,  “Ihave  had  enough  of it; I will  have nothing  more  to  do with  it.”  Sincethen  I have  received  from  him  various  marks  of esteem  and  kind-ness,  some  of which  I shall  have  to  mention  presently;  and  my  com-position  quietly  circulated  throughout  France  and  Europe,  withoutanyone  finding  anything  in  it to  censure.Shertly  afterwards,  I had  another  opponent,  whom  I had  not  ex-pected,  the  same  M.  Bordes  of Lyons,  who,  ten  years  previously,  hadshown  me  much  friendship,  and  rendered  me  several  services.  I hadnot  forgotten  him,  but  had  neglected  him  from  simple  laziness;  andI had  not  sent  him  my  writings,  since  I had  had  no  convenient  op-portunity  of getting  them  delivered  to him.  I was  wrong;  he attackedme,  certainly  with  politeness,  and  I answered  in  the  same  tone.  Hemade  a  more  decided  rejoinder,  which  drew  from  me a final  answer,after  which  he  remained  silent.  But  he  became  my  most  violentenemy,  profited  by the  time  of my  misfortunes  to  write  a  most  fear-ful libel  against  me,  and  took  a journey  to  London  on  purpose  to  dome  harm  there.All  these  polemics  took  up  a  great  deal  of my  time,  which  waslost  to  my  copying,  without  any  advantage  to  the  cause  of truth,  orprofit  to  my  purse.  Pissot,  who  was  my  publisher  at  the  time,  gaveme  very  little  for  my  brochures,  and  often  nothing  at  all;  for  in-stance,  I never  received  a  sou  for  my  first  Essay;  Diderot  gave  it tohim  for  nothing.  I was  obliged  to  wait  a  long time,  and  extract  the378THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUlittle  remuneration  which  he gave  me,  sou  by sou.  In the meantime,my  copying  was a failure.  I carried  on  two  trades, which  was  the wayto fail in both.They  were  contradictory  in  another  way—the  different  mode  oflife  which  they forced  me  to  adopt.  The  success  of my  first  writingshad  made  me  the  fashion.  The  position  which  I  had  taken  uparoused  curiosity;  people  were  anxious  to  make  the  acquaintance  ofthe  singular  man,  who sought  no  one’s  society,  and  whose  only anx-iety was  to  live  free  and  happy  after  his  own  fashion;  this  was  suff-cient  to  make  this  an  impossibility  for him.  My room  was  never  freefrom  people  who,  under  different  pretexts,  came  to  rob  me  of  mytime.  Ladies  employed  a  thousand  artifices  to  get  me  to  dine  withthem.  The  more  I offended  people,  the  more  obstinate  they became.I could  not  refuse  everybody.  While  I made  a  thousand  enemies  bymy  refusals,  I was  incessantly  a  slave  to  my  desire  to  oblige;  and,however  I managed,  I never  had  an  hour  to  myself  during  the  day.I then  discovered  that  it is by no  means  so  easy  as  one  imagines  tobe poor  and  independent.  I wanted  to  live by my profession;  the pub-lic would  not  have  it. They invented  a  thousand  ways  of indemnify-ing me  for  the  time  which  they  made  me  lose.  Presents  of all  kindswere  always  being  sent  to  me.  Soon  I should  have  been  obliged  toshow  myself  like  Punch,  at  so  much  a  head.  I know  no  slavery  morecruel  and  degrading  than  that.  I saw  no  remedy  for  it, except  to  re-fuse  all presents,  great  and  small, and to make  no  exception  in favourof anyone.  The  only effect  of this  was  to  increase  the  number  of thedonors,  who  desired  to  have  the  honour  of  overcoming  my  resist-ance,  and  of compelling  me  to  be  under  an  obligation  to  them,  inspite  of myself.  Many,  who  would  not  have  given  me  a  crown  if Ihad  asked  for it, never  ceased  to  importune  me  with  their  offers,  andto  avenge  themselves  when  they  found  them  rejected,  charged  mewith  arrogance  and  ostentation,  in  consequence  of my  refusal.It will  easily  be understood  that  the  resolution  which  I had  taken,and  the  system  which I desired  to  follow,  were  not  at all to  the likingof Madame  le Vasseur.  All  the  daughter’s  disinterestedness  was  un-able  to  prevent  her  from  following  the  instructions  of  her  mother;and  the gouverneuses,  as  Grimm  used  to  call them,  were  not  alwaysas  firm  in  their  refusal  as  I was.  Although  many  things  were  con-PARIS  BECOMES  DISTASTEFUL379cealed  from  me,  I saw  enough  to convince  me  that  I did  not  seeeverything,  and  this  tormented  me,  not  so  much  on  account  of thecharge  of connivance,  which  I readily  foresaw  would  be made,  as  bythe cruel  thought that I could  never  be master  of my  own  household,or  even  of myself.  I begged,  entreated,  and  got  angry—all  in  vain.Mamma  gave  me  the  reputation  of an  eternal  grumbler  and  a  surlyboor.  Continual  whisperings  with  my  friends  went  on;  all was  mys-tery  and  secrecy  in my  household;  and,  to  avoid  exposing  myself  toperpetual  storms,  I no  longer  ventured  to  make  inquiries  about  whatwas  going  on.  To  deliver  myself  from  all  this  disturbance  wouldhave  needed  a  firmness  of  which  I was  incapable.  I knew  how  tomake  a  noise,  but  not  how  to  act.  They  allowed  me  to  speak  andwent  their  way.These  continual  upsets  and  the daily importunities  to  which  I wassubjected  at  length  made  my  apartments  and  my  stay  at  Paris  veryunpleasant.  When  my  ill-health  permitted  me  to  go  out,  and  I didnot  allow  myself  to  be  dragged  hither  and  thither  by my  acquaint-ances,  I used  to  go  for  a  solitary  walk,  during  which,  dreaming  ofmy grand  system,  I jotted  down  some  ideas  on  paper  with  the  aid  ofa  pocket-book  and  pencil,  which  I always  carried  about  with  me.  Inthis  manner  the  unforeseen  unpleasantnesses  of a  condition  which  Ihad  chosen  for  myself  threw  me  entirely  into  a  literary  career,  byway  of escaping  from  them;  and  this  is the  reason  why,  in  all  myearly works,  I introduced  the bitterness  and ill-humour  which  causedme  to  write  them.Another  circumstance  contributed  to  this.  Thrown,  in  spite  ofmyself,  into  the great  world,  without  possessing  its manners,  and  un-able  to  acquire  or  conform  to  them,  I took  it into  my  head  to  adoptmanners  of my  own,  which  might enable  me  to  dispense  with  them.Being  unable  to  overcome  my  foolish  and  disagreeable  shyness,which  proceeded  from  the  fear  of offending  against  the  rules  of po-lite  society,  I resolved,  in  order  to  give  myself  courage,  to  tramplethem  underfoot.  Shame  made  me  cynical  and  sarcastic.  I affected  todespise  the  politeness  which  I did  not  know  how  to  practise.  It  istrue  that  this  rudeness,  in harmony  with  my  new  principles,  becameennobled  in my  mind  and  assumed  the form  of dauntless  virtue;  andon  this  lofty  basis,  I venture  to  assert,  it supported  itself  longer  andTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU380more  successfully  than  would  naturally  have  been  expected  from  aneffort  so  contrary  to  my  disposition.  However,  in  spite  of the  repu-tation  for  misanthropy,  which  my  outward  appearance  and  somehappy  remarks  gained  for  me  in  the  world,  it is certain  that,  in pri-vate,  I always  sustained  my  part  badly.  My  friends  and  acquaint-ances  led  this  unsociable  bear  like  a  lamb,  and, limiting  my  sarcasmsto  unpalatable  but  general  truths,  I was  never  capable  of  saying  a~  single  discourteous  word  to  anyone  whatsoever.The  Devin  du  Village  made  me  quite  the  fashion,  and  soon  therewas  not  a  man  in Paris  more  sought  after  than  myself.  The  historyof this  piece,  which  was  an  epoch  in  my  life,  is mixed  up  with  thatof  the  connections  which  I had  formed  at  that  time.  In  order  thatthe  sequel  may  be  rightly  understood,  I must  enter  into  details.I had  a  tolerably  large  number  of  acquaintances,  but  only  twochosen  friends,  Diderot  and  Grimm.  Owing  to  the  desire  which  Ialways  feel,  to  bring  together  all  who  are  dear  to  me,  I was  so  de-voted a friend  of both,  that  it was  unavoidable  that  they should  soonbecome  equally  devoted  to  each  other.  I brought  them  together;  theysuited  each  other,  and  soon  became  more  intimate  with  each  otherthan  with  me.  Diderot  had  acquaintances  without  number;  butGrimm,  being  a  foreigner  and  a  newcomer,  had  his  to  make.  I de-sired  nothing  better  than  to  assist  him.  I had  introduced  him  toDiderot;  I introduced  him  to  Gauffecourt.  I took  him  to  Madame  deChenonceaux,  to  Madame  d’Epinay,  to  the  Baron  d’Holbach,  withwhom  I found  myself  connected,  almost  in  spite  of myself.  All  myfriends  became  his; that  was  simple  enough.  But  none  of his ever  be-came  mine;  this  was  not  so  intelligible.  While  he  Jived  with  theComte  de  Friése,  he  often  invited  us  to  dine  with  him,  but  I havenever  received  any  proof  of friendship  from  the  Comte  de Friése  orthe  Comte  de  Schomberg,  his  relative,  who  was  very  intimate  withGrimm,  or  from  any  other  person,  male  or  female,  with  whomGrimm  had  any  connection  through  their means.  The  only exceptionwas  the  Abbé  Raynal,  who,  although  his friend,  also  proved  himselfmine,  and,  when  IJ needed  it, placed  his  purse  at  my  disposal  witha  rare  generosity.  But  I had  known  the  Abbé  long  before  Grimmhimself,  and  I had  always  entertained  a  great  regard  for  him  sinceGRIMM’S  CURIOUS  ILLNESS381he had  behaved  to  me  in a  most  delicate  and  honourable  manner,  ina  matter  certainly  of little  ¢mportance,  but  which  I never  forgot.The  Abbé  Raynal  was  certainly  a  warm  friend.  He  gave  me  aproof of this about  this  time  in a  matter  that concerned  Grimm,  withwhom  he was  very  intimate.  Grimm,  after  having  long been  on  veryfriendly  terms  with  Mademoiselle  Fel, suddenly  took  it into  his headto  conceive  a  violent  passion  for  her,  and  wanted  to  supplant  Cahu-sac.  The  young  lady,  priding  herself  upon  her  constancy,  showedher  new  admirer  the  door.  The  latter  took  the  matter  in  a  tragiclight,  and  had  a  fancy  that  it would  be his death.  He  suddenly  beganto  suffer  from  the  strangest  illness  that  has  perhaps  ever  been  heardof.  He  passed  days  and  nights  in a state  of  continued  lethargy,  hiseyes  wide  open,  his  pulse  regular,  but  without  speaking,  eating,  orstirring,  sometimes  seeming  to  hear,  but  never  answering,  even  bysigns;  in  other  respects,  he  was  free  from  agitation,  pain  or  fever,and  lay as  if he had  been  dead.  The  Abbé  Raynal  and  myself  took  itin turns  to  watch  him,  the Abbé,  being stronger  and  in better  health,by night,  and  myself  by day;  he was  never  left  alone,  and  neither  ofus  ever  quitted  him  before  the  other  had  come  to  take  his place.  TheComte  de  Friése,  being  alarmed  about  him,  brought  Senac  to  seehim,  who,  after  a  careful  examination,  declared  that  there  was  noth-ing the  matter  with  the  patient,  and  did  not  even  prescribe  for  him.My  anxiety  about  my  friend  made  me  carefully  observe  the  physi-cian’s  countenance,  and  I saw  him  smile  as  he left  the  room.  Never-theless,  Grimm  remained  for  several  days  without  moving,  withouttaking  broth  or  anything  else, except  some  preserved  cherries  whichI laid  upon  his tongue  from  time  to  time,  and  which  he eagerly  swal-lowed.  One  fine  morning,  he  got  up,  dressed  himself,  and  resumedhis ordinary  occupations,  without  ever  saying  anything  either  to  me,or,  as  far  as  I know,  to  the  Abbé,  or  anyone  else,  about  this  singularlethargy,  or  of the  attention  and  care  which  we  had  bestowed  uponhim  as  long as  it lasted.This  adventure,  nevertheless,  made  a  considerable  stir;  and  itwould  really  have  been  a  wonderful  story,  if the  cruelty  of an  opera-girl had  caused  a  man  to  die  of despair.  This  violent  passion  madeGrimm  the  rage;  he  was  soon  looked  upon  as  a  prodigy  of  love,382THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUfriendship,  and  devotion  in  every  respect.  This  reputation  causedhim  to  be  run  after  and  féted  in  the  great  world,  which  separatedhim  from  me,  who  had  never  been  anything  to  him  but  a  makeshift.I saw  that  he was  on  the  point  of being  entirely  estranged  from  me.This  was  very  distressing  to  me,  for  all  the  lively  feelings,  of whichhe made  such  a  show,  were  just  those  which  I entertained  for  him,although  I did  not  make  such  a  noise  about  it.  I was  glad  that  heshould  succeed  in the  world,  but  I should  have  wished  him  to  do  sowithout,  at  the  same  time,  forgetting  his  friend.  I said  to  him  oneday, “Grimm,  you  are  neglecting  me;  I forgive  you.  When  the  firstintoxication  of noisy  success  has  produced  its  effect,  and  you  beginto  perceive  its emptiness,  I hope that  you  will  come  back  to  me:  youwill  always  find  me  the  same.  For  the  present,  do  not  put  yourselfout;  I leave  you  to  do as  you please,  and  will  wait  for  you.”  He  toldme  that  I was  right,  made  his  arrangements  accordingly,  and  wenthis  own  way  so  completely,  that  I only  saw  him  in  the  company  ofour  mutual  frieuds.Our  chief  meeting-place,  before  he  became  so  closely  connectedwith  Madame  d’Epinay,  was  the  Baron  d’Holbach’s  house.  ThisBaron  was  the  son  of a  self-made  man,  who  possessed  an  ample  for-tune,  which  he  used  nobly.  He  received  at  his  house  men  of lettersand  learning,  and,  by  his  own  knowledge  and  accomplishments,was  well  able  to  hold  his  own  amongst  them.  Having  been  long in-timate  with  Diderot,  he had  sought  my  acquaintance  through  him,even  before  my  name  became  known.  A  natural  repugnance  for  along  time  prevented  me  from  meeting  his  advances.  One  day  heasked  me  the  reason,  and I said  to  him,  “You  are  too  wealthy.”  Hepersisted,  and  finally  prevailed.  My  greatest  misfortune  has  everbeen  inability  to  resist  flattery,  and  I have  always  regretted  yieldingto  it.Another  acquaintance,  which  ripened  into  friendship  as  soon  as  Ihad a reason  to  claim  it, was  that  of  M.  Duclos.  Several  years  hadelapsed  since  I had  seen  him,  for  the  first  time,  at  La  Chevrette,  atthe  house  of  Madame  d’Epinay,  with  whom  he  was  on  intimateterms.  We  only  dined  together,  and  he  returned  the  same  day;  butwe  conversed  for  a  few  moments  after  dinner.  Madame  d’Epinayhad  spoken  to  him  of  me  and  my  opera  of  Les  Muses  Galantes.MADAME  DE  CREQUI384Duclos,  who  was  gifted  with  too  great  talent  himself  not  to  valuethose  who  possessed  it, became  prepossessed  in my  favour,  and  hadinvited  me  to go and  see  him.  In spite of my  early inclination,  whichwas  strengthened  by acquaintance,  my  timidity  and  want  of energykept  me  back  as  long  as  I had  no  other  passport  to  him  except  hiscourtesy;  but,  encouraged  by my  first  success  and  his  praises,  whichwere  repeated  to  me,  I went  to  call  upon  him,  and  he returned  mycall.  In  this  manner  commenced  the  connection  between  us,  whichwill  always  cause  me  to  regard  him  with  affection,  and  to  which,  aswell  as  the  testimony  of my  own  heart,  I owe  the  knowledge,  thatuprightness  and  honour  may  sometimes  be  combined  with  literaryculture.Many  other  connections  less  lasting,  which  I here  pass  over,  werethe  result  of  my  early  successes,  and  continued  until  curiosity  wassatished.  I was  a man  who  was  so  soon  understood,  that,  after  thefirst  day,  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  seen  in  me.  One  lady,  how-ever,  who  at  that  time  sought  my  acquaintance,  was  more  constantto  me  than  any  of  the  rest.  This  was  Madame  la Marquise  de  Cré-qui,  niece  of  the  Bailli  de  Fronlay,  the  Maltese  ambassador,  whose:brother  had  preceded  M. de Montaigu  in the embassy  at  Venice,  andwhom I had  gone  to  see  on  my  return  from  that  city.  Madame  deCréqui  wrote  to  me;  I called  upon  her,  and  she  conceived  a  friend-ship  for  me.  I sometimes  dined  at  her  house,  where  J met  severalmen  of letters;  amongst  others,  M.  Saurin,  the author  of “Spartacus,”“Barneveldt,”  and  other  works,  who  afterwards  became  my  bitter-est  enemy,  for  no  other  reason  that  I can  imagine,  except  that  I bearthe name  of  a man  whom  his  father  had  persecuted  disgracefully.It will  be  seen  that,  for  a  copyist  who  ought  to  be  occupied  withhis business  from  morning  till evening,  I had  numerous  distractions,which  prevented  my  daily  work  from  being  very  lucrative,  and  my-self  from  paying  sufficient  attention  to  what  I had  to  do, for  me  todo it well.  I thus  lost more  than  half  the time  I had  left in erasing  orscratching  out  mistakes,  or  beginning  my  work  again  on a freshsheet  of paper.  This  constant  interruption  made  Paris  daily more  in-tolerable  to  me,  and I eagerly  seized  every  opportunity  of going  intothe  country.  I went  several  times  to  spend  a  few  days at  Marcoussis,where  Madame  le Vasseur  knew  the vicar,  at  whose  house  we  so  ar-THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU384ranged  matters  that  he  found  himself  at  no  disadvantage.  OnceGrimm  went  with  us.’  The  vicar  had  a  good  voice  and  sang  well;and,  although  not  a  musician,  could  learn  his  part  with  ease  andaccuracy.  We  spent  the  time  in  singing  the  trios  which  I had  com-posed  at  Chenonceaux.  I also  wrote  two  or  three  new  ones,  to  thewords  which  Grimm  and  the  vicar  put  together  as  well  as  theycould.  I cannot  help  regretting  these  trios,  which  were  written  andsung  in  moments  of  pure  joy,  and  which  I have  left  at  Woottonwith  all  my  music.  Mademoiselle  Davenport  has,  perhaps,  alreadymade  curl-papers  of them;  but  they  were  worth  preserving,  and  aremostly  written  in a  very  good counterpoint.  It was  after  one  of theselittle  excursions,  when  I was  delighted  to  see  “aunt”  at  her  ease  andvery  cheerful,  and  had  also  enjoyed  myself  very  much,  that  I wroteto  the  vicar  a  letter  in verse,  hastily  dashed  off and  a  very  poor  com-position,  which  will  be  found  amongst  my  papers.Nearer  Paris,  I found  another  place  of  refuge,  very  much  to  mytaste,  with  M.  Mussard,  a  countryman,  relative,  and  friend,  who  hadmade  a  charming  retreat  for  himself  at  Passy,  where  I have  spentmany  peaceful  moments.  M.  Mussard  was a jeweller,  a man  of goodsense,  who,  after  having  made  a  comfortable  fortune  in his business,married  his  only  daughter  to  M.  de  Valmalette,  the  son  of  an  ex-change-broker,  and  maitre  d’hétel  to  the  King,  and  prudently  lefttrade  and  business  in his  old  age,  in order  to  enjoy  an  interval  of re-pose  and  enjoyment  between  the  worries  of life  and  his  death.  Theworthy  Mussard, a real  practical  philosopher,  lived,  free  from  cares,in a  very  nice  house,  which  he  had  built  for  himself,  standing  in  avery  pretty  garden  which  he had  planted  with  his own  hands.  Whiledigging  up  the terraces  of this  garden,  he found  fossil  shells  in suchquantities,  that  his  lively  imagination  saw  nothing  but  shells  in  thenatural  world,  and  he at  last  sincerely  believed  that  the  universe  con-sisted  of nothing  but  shells,  and  remains  of shells,  and  that  the wholeearth  was  nothing  but  so  much  shell  sand.  Thinking  of nothing  but"Since  I  have  here  omitted  to  mention  a trifling,  but  memorable  adventurewhich  I had  with  the  aforesaid  Grimm,  one  morning  when  we  were  to  dine  atthe  Fountain  of  Saint-Vandrille,  I will  not  return  to  it;  but,  on  subsequent  re-flection,  I concluded  that,  in  the  bottom  of  his  heart,  he  was  brooding  over  theconspiracy  which  he  afterwards  carrted  out  with  such  marvellous  success.M.  MUSSARD385this  fact  and  his  wonderful  discoveries,  he  became  so  excited  withthese  ideas,  that  they would  soon  have  turned  to  a system  in his head,that  is to  say,  to  madness,  had  not  death—fortunately  for  his  reason,but  unfortunately  for  his  friends,  who  were  much  attached  to  him,and  found  at  his house  a  most  agreeable  refuge—removed  him  fromthem  by a  most  strange  and  painful  disease.  This  was  a  constantlygrowing  tumour  in  the  stomach,  which  for  a  long  time  preventedhim  from  eating  before  the  reason  was  discovered,  and  which,  afterseveral  years  of suffering,  caused  his  death  from  sheer  starvation.  Ican  never  recall  without  the greatest  anguish  the last  days of this  un-fortunate  and  worthy  man,  who  still  heartily  welcomed  Lenieps  andmyself,  the  only  friends  whom  the  sight  of the  sufferings  which  heendured  did  not  drive  away  from  him  until  his last  hour,  who,  as  Isay,  was  reduced  to  devouring  with  his  eyes  the  repast  which  hecaused  to  be  set  before  us,  scarcely  able  to  swallow  a  few  drops  ofweak  tea,  which  he  was  obliged  to  bring  up  the  next  moment.  But,before  these  days of suffering,  how  many  agreeable  hours  did  I spendat  his house  with  the  select  circle  of his  friends!  At the head  of theseI place the Abbé  Prévost,  an  amiable  and  simple  person,  whose  heartinspired  his  writings,  which  deserved  to  be  immortalised,  and  who,neither  in  his  disposition  nor  in  society,  showed  any  traces  of  thesombre  colouring  which  characterised  his  works;  Procope  the  physi-cian,  a  little  Aesop,  who  was  a great  ladies’  man;  Boulanger,  thefamous  posthumous  author  of “Le  Despotisme  Oriental,”  and  who,I  believe,  extended  Mussard’s  theories  on  the  age  of  the  world.Amongst  his lady friends  were  Madame  Denis,  Voltaire’s  niece,  whoat  that  time  was  simple  and  unaffected,  and  made  no  pretence  to  bea  wit;  Madame  Vanloo,  who  was  certainly  no  beauty,  but  wascharming  and  sang  like  an  angel;  and  Madame  de  Valmalette  her-self,  who  also  sang,  and  who,  although  very  thin,  would  have  beenvery  amiable  if she  had  made  less  pretence  of being  so.  These  madeup  nearly  the  whole  of  M.  Mussard’s  friends;  their  society  wouldhave  been  very  agreeable  to  me,  had  not  his  conchylomania  beeneven  more  agreeable;  and  I can  say  that  for  six  months  or  more  Iworked  in his  study  with  as  much  pleasure  as  himself.He  had  for  a  long  time  insisted  that  the  waters  of Passy  would  bebeneficial  to  me,  and  strongly  advised  me  to  come  to  his  house  and386THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUdrink  them.  In  order  to  get  away  from  the  noisy  crowd  of the  cityror  a  little  while,  I at  last  gave  in,  and  spent  eight  or  ten  days  atPassy,  which  did  me  more  good  because  I was  in  the  country,  thanbecause  I took  the  waters.  Mussard  played  the  violoncello,  and  waspassionately  fond  of Italian  music.  One  evening  we  had a long con-versation  about  it before  going  to  bed,  especially  about  the  operabuffa,  which  we  had  both  seen  in Italy,  and  with  which  we  had  bothbeen  delighted.  During  the  night,  being  unable  to  sleep,  I began  toponder  how  it  would  be  possible  to  give  an  idea  of  this  kind  ofdrama  in France,  for  the  Amours  de  Ragonde  had  not  the  least  re-semblance  to  it.  In  the  morning,  while  walking  and  drinking  thewaters,  I hastily  made  up  a  few  specimens  of verse,  and  set  them  tothe  airs  which  came  into  my  head  as  I composed  them. I scribbleddown  the  whole  in  a  kind  of vaulted  salon  at  the  top  of the  garden,and,  at  tea,  I could  not  refrain  from  showing  these  airs  to  Mussardand  Mademoiselle  Duvernois,  his  housekeeper,  who  was  really  amost  excellent  and  amiable  young  woman.  The  three  pieces  which  Ihad  sketched  were  the  first  monologue,  J’ai perdu  mon  serviteur,  theair  of  the  Devin  du  village,  L'Amour  croit  s'il  s'inquiète,  and  thelast  duet,  A jamais,  Colin,  je t'engage,  &c.  I so  little  thought  that  itwas  worth  the  trouble  of going  on  with  it that,  had  it not  been  forthe  applause  and  encouragement  of both,  I should  have  thrown  myscraps  of paper  into  the  fire  and  thought  nothing  more  about  it, as  Ihad  often  done  with  other  pieces  which  were  at  least  as  good;  but  Ifelt  so  encouraged,  that  in six days my  drama  was  finished,  with  theexception  of  a  few  lines,  and  all  the  music  sketched  out,  so  that  Ihad  nothing  more  to  do in Paris  except  to  add a little  recitative  andfill  up  the  tenor  parts.  I finished  the  whole  so  quickly,  that  in threeweeks  my  scenes  were  copied  out  fairly  and  fit  for  representation.The  only  thing  remaining  was  the  divertissement,  which  was  notcomposed  until  a  long  time  afterwards.[1752.]—The  composition  of  this  work  had  so  excited  me  thatI had a great  desire  to  hear  it, and  I would  have  given  all I possessedto  have  seen  it performed,  as  I should  have  liked,  with  closed  doors,as  Lulli  is said  to  have  once  had  Armide  performed  before  himselfalone.  As  it was  not  possible  for  me  to  enjoy  this  pleasure  except  incompany  with  the  public,  I was  obliged  to  get my  piece  accepted  atHIS  “DEVIN  DU  VILLAGE”387the  Opera  in  order  to  hear  it.  Unfortunately,  it was  in  a  style  en-tirely new,  to  which  the  egrs  of the public  were  quite  unaccustomed;and,  besides,  the  failure  of the  Muses  galantes  made  me  expect  thelike  for  the Devin,  if I presented  it in my  own  name.  Duclos  helpedme  out  of the  difficulty,  and  undertook  to  get the piece  tried  withoutdisclosing  the  author.  To  avoid  betraying  myself,  I did  not  attendthe  rehearsal,  and  the  “little  violins”  8  themselves,  who  conducted,were  ignorant  of  the  composer’s  name,  until  the  general  approvalhad  attested  the  excellence  of  the  work.  All  who  heard  it were  sodelighted,  that,  the  next  day, nothing  else  was  talked  of in all circles,M.  de  Cury,  manager  of Court  entertainments,  who  had  been  pres-ent  at the rehearsal,  asked  for the piece, in order  that  it might  be per-formed  at  Court.  Duclos,  who  knew  my  intentions,  and  thoughtthat  I should  have  less  control  over  my  piece  at  the  Court  than  inParis,  refused  to  deliver  it. Cury  demanded  it by virtue  of his  office.Duclos  persisted  in  his  refusal,  and  the  dispute  between  them  be-came  so  lively  that, one  day, at  the Opera,  they would  have  gone  outtogether  to  fight a duel, unless  they had  been  separated.  Cury  wantedto  treat  with  me.  I left  the  decision  with  Duclos,  and  Cury  wasobliged  to  apply  again  to  him.  M.  le Duc  d’Aumont  interfered.  Atlength  Duclos  thought  it right  to  yield  to  authority,  and  the  piecewas  given  up  in order  to  be played  at  Fontainebleau.The  part  to  which  I had  devoted  most  attention,  and  in  which  Ihad  made  the greatest  departure  from  the  beaten  track,  was  the reci-tative.  Mine  was  accented  in an  entirely  new  manner  and  kept timewith  the  delivery®  of  the  words.  This  horrible  innovation  was  notallowed  to  stand,  for fear  of shocking  the  ears  of those  who  followedeach  other  like  a  flock  of sheep.  I consented  that  Francueil  and  Jel-yotte  should  compose  another  recitative,  but  I refused  to  have  any-thing  to  do  with  it myself.When  everything  was  ready  and  the  day  fixed  for  the  perform-ance,  it  was  proposed  to  me  that  I should  take  a  journey  to  Fon-tainebleau,  to  be present  at  the last  rehearsal,  at  any  rate.  I went  with8 These  were  the  names  given  to  Rebel  and  Franceevr,  who,  from  their  youth,had  been  in  the  habit  of going  from  house  to  house  to  play  the  violin.® Débit:  a  term  specially  applied  to  the  manner  in  which a recitative  is sung.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU388Mademoiselle  Fel,  Grimm,  and,  I think,  the Abbé  Raynal,  in one  ofthe  Royal  carriages.  The  rehearsal  was  tolerable;  I was  better  satis-fied  with it  than  I had  expected  to  be. The  orchestra  was  a  powerfulone,  consisting  of  those  of  the  Opera  and  the  Royal  band.  Jelyotteplayed  Colin;  Mademoiselle  Fel,  Colette;  Cuvitier,  the  Devin(soothsayer).  The  choruses  were  from  the  Opera.  I said  little.  Jel-yotte  had  arranged  everything,  and  I did  not  desire  to  have  any  con-trol  over  his  arrangements;  but,  in  spite  of my  Roman  air,  I was  asbashful  as  a  schoolboy  amongst  all  these  people.On  the  following  day,  when  the  rehearsal  was  to  take  place,  Iwent  to  breakfast  at  the  Café du  Grand  Commun,  which  was  full  ofpeople,  talking  about  the  rehearsal  of the  previous  evening,  and  thedifficulty  there  had  been  in  getting  in.  An  officer  who  was  presentsaid  that  he had  found  no  difficulty,  gave  a  long  account  of the  pro-ceedings,  described  the  author,  and  related  what  he  had  said  anddone;  but  what  astounded  me  most  in  his  long  description,  givenwith  equal confidence  and  simplicity,  was  that  there  was  not  a  wordof truth  in  it. It was  perfectly  clear  to  me,  that  the  man  who  spokeso  positively  about  this  rehearsal  had  never  been  present,  since  hehad  before  his eyes  the  author,  whom  he pretended  he had  observedso  closely,  and  did  not  recognise  him.  The  most  remarkable  thingabout  this  incident  was  the  effect  which  it produced  upon  me.  Thisman  was  somewhat  advanced  in years;  there  was  nothing  of the cox-comb  or  swaggerer  about  him,  either in  his  manner  or  tone;  hiscountenance  was  intelligent,  while  his  cross  of  Saint-Louis  showerthat  he  was  an  old  ane  In  spite  of  his  unblushing  effrontery,  inspite of myself,  he interested  me;  while  he retailed  his  lies  I blushed,cast  down  my  eyes,  and  was  on  thorns;  I sometimes  asked  myselfwhether  it might not  be possible  to  think  that  he was  mistaken,  andreally  believed  what  he  said.  At  last,  trembling  for  fear  that  some-one  might  recognise  me  and  put  him  to  shame,  I hurriedly  finishedmy  chocolate  without  saying  a  word,  and, holding  my  head  down  asI passed  him,  I left  the  café  as  soon  as  possible,  while  the  companywere  discussing  his  description  of  what  had  taken  place.  In  thestreet,  I found  that  I was  bathed  in  perspiration;  and  I am  certainthat,  if anyone  had  recognised  and  addressed  me  by name  before  Ileft,  I should  have  exhibited  all  the  shame  and  embarrassment  of aPERFORMANCE  BEFORE  THE  KING389guilty person,  simply from  the feeling  of humiliation  which  the poorfellow  would  have  experienced,  if his lies had  been  detected.I now  come  to  one  of the  critical  moments  of my  life, in which  itis difficult  to  confine  myself  to  simple  narrative,  because  it is almostimpossible  to  prevent  even  the  narrative  bearing  the  stamp  of cen-sure  or  apology.  However,  I will  attempt  to  relate  how,  and  fromwhat  motives  I acted,  without  adding  an  expression  of  praise  orblame.On  that  day I was  dressed  in my  usual  careless  style, with  a beardof  some  days’  growth  and a badly  combed  wig.  Considering  thiswant  of good manners  as  a proof of courage,  I entered  the hall  wherethe  King,  the  Queen,  the  Royal  Family,  and  the  whole  Court  werepresently  to  arrive.  I proceeded  to  take  my  seat  in the  box  to  whichM.  de  Cury  conducted  me;  it was  his  own—a  large  stage  box,  op-posite  a  smaller  and  higher  one,  where  the  King  sat  with  Madamede Pompadour.  Surrounded  by ladies,  and  the  only  man  in front  ofthe  box,  I had  no  doubt  that  I had  been  put  there  on  purpose  to  beseen.  When  the  theatre  was  lighted  up,  and  I found  myself,  dressedin  the  manner  I was,  in  the  midst  of  people  all  most  elegantly  at-tired,  I began  to  feel  ill at  ease.  I asked  myself  whether  I was  in myright  place,  and  whether  I was  suitably  dressed.  After  a  few  mo-ments  of uneasiness,  I answered  “Yes,”  with  a  boldness  which  per-haps was  due  rather  to  the  impossibility  of drawing  back  than  to  theforce  of my  arguments.  I said  to  myself:  I am  in  my  place,  since  Iam  going  to  see  my  own  piece  perfornied;  because  I have  been  in-vited;  because  I composed  it solely  for  that  purpose;  because,  afterall, no  one  has more  right than  myself to  enjoy the fruit  of my labourand  talents.  I am  dressed  as  usual,  neither  better  nor  worse.  If I againbegin  to  yield  to  public  opinion  in any  single  thing,  I shall  soon  be-come  its  slave  again  in  everything.  To  be  consistent,  I must  not  beashamed,  wherever  I may  be, to  be  dressed  in  accordance  with  thecondition  of life  which  I have  chosen  for  myself.  My  outward  ap-pearance  is simple  and  careless,  but  not  dirty or  slovenly.  A beard  initself is not  so,  since  it is bestowed  upon  us  by Nature,  and, accordingto  times  and  fashions,  is sometimes  even  an  ornament.  People  willconsider  me  ridiculous,  impertinent.  Well,  what  does  it  matter  tome?  I must  learn  how  to put up  with  ridicule  and  censure,  providedTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU390they are  not  deserved.  After  this  little  soliloquy,  I felt  so  encouragedthat  I should  have  behaved  with  intrepidity,  if it had  been  necessary.But,  whether  it was  the  effect  of  the  presence  of  the  ruler,  or  thenatural  disposition  of those  near  me,  I saw  nothing  in the curiosity,of which  I was  the  object,  except  civility  and  politeness.  This  so  af-fected  me,  that  I began  to  be uneasy  again  about  myself  and  the  fateof my  piece,  and  to  fear-that  I might  destroy  the  favourable  impres-sions  which  showed  only an  inclination  to  applaud  me.  I was  armedagainst  their  raillery;  but  their  kindly  attitude,  which  I had  not  ex-pected,  so  completely  overcame  me,  that  I trembled  like  a child  whenthe  performance  began.I soon  found  I had  no  reason  for  uneasiness.  The  piece  was  verybadly  acted,  but  the  singing  was  good,  and  the  music  well  executed.From  the  first  scene,  which  is  really  touching  in  its  simplicity,  Iheard  in  the  boxes  a murmur  of surprise  and  applause  hitherto  un-heard  of  at  similar  performances.  The  growing  excitement  soonreached  such  a  height,  that  it communicated  itself  to  the  whole  audi-ence,  and,  in  the  words  of  Montesquieu,  “the  very  effect  increasedthe  effect.”  In  the  scene  between  the  two  good  little  people,  this  ef-fect  reached  its  highest  point.  There  is never  any  clapping  when  theKing  is present:  this  allowed  everything  to  be  heard,  and  the  pieceand  the  author  were  thereby  benefited.  I heard  around  me  women,who  seemed  to  me  as  beautiful  as  angels,  whispering  and  saying  toeach  other  in a  low  tone,  “Charming!  delightful!  every  note  speaksto  the  heart!”  The  pleasure  of  affecting  so  many  amiable  personsmoved  me  to  tears,  which  I was  unable  to  restrain  during  the  firstduet,  when  I observed  that  I was  not  the  only one  who  wept.  For  amoment  I felt  anxious,  when I recalled  the  concert  at  M.  de  Trey-torens’s.  This  reminiscence  produced  upon  me  the  same  effect  as  theslave  who  held  the  crown  over  the  head  of a  Roman  general  in histriumphal  procession,  but  it did  not  last  long, and  I soon  abandonedmyself,  completely  and  without  reserve,  to  the  delight  of tasting  thesweets  of my  success.  And  yet  I am  sure  that  at  this  moment  I wasmuch  more  affected  by sensual  impulse  than  by the  vanity  I felt  as‘an  author.  If none  but  men  had  been  present,  I am  convinced  thatI should  not  have  been  consumed,  as  I was,  by the incessant  desire  ofcatching  with  my  lips the  delightful  tears  which  I caused  to  flow.  ISUMMONED  TO  THE  CHATEAU39)have  seen  pieces  excite  more  lively  transports  of  admiration,  butnever  so  complete,  so  «delightful,  and  so  moving  an  intoxication,which  completely  overcame  the  audience,  especially  at  a  first  per-formance  before  the  Court.  Those  who  saw  it on  this  occasion  cannever  have  forgotten  it, for  the  effect  was  unique.The  same  evening,  M.  le Duc  d’Aumont  sent  word  to  me  to  pre-sent  myself  at  the  chateau  on  the  following  day  at  eleven  o’clock,when  he would  present  me  to  the  King.  M.  de Cury,  who  broughtme  the  message,  added  that  he  believed  that  it was  a  question  of apension,  the  bestowal  of which  the  King  desired  to  announce  to  mein person.Will  it be believed,  that  the  night  which  succeeded  so  brilliant  aday was  for me  a night of anguish  and  perplexity?  My first  thought,after  that  of  this  presentation,  was  a  certain  necessity,  which  hadgreatly  troubled  me  on  the  evening  of the  performance,  and  had  fre-quently  obliged  me  to  retire,  and  might  trouble  me  again  on  thenext  day,  in  the  gallery  or  the  King’s  apartments,  amongst  all  thegreat  people,  while  waiting  for  His  Majesty  to  pass.  This  infirmitywas  the  chief  cause  which  prevented  me  from  going  into  society,  orfrom  staying  in a  room  with  ladies  when  the  doors  were  closed.  Themere  idea  of  the  situation  in  which  this  necessity  might  place  me,was  enough  to  affect  me  to  such  an  extent,  that  it  made  me  feelready to  faint, unless  I should  be willing  to  create.a  scandal,  to whichI should  have  preferred  death.  Only those  who  know  what  this  con-dition  is, can  imagine  the  horror  of running  the  risk  of it.I next  pictured  myself  in the King’s  presence  and  presented  to  HisMajesty,  who  condescended  to  stop  and  speak  to  me.  On  such  anoccasion,  tact  and  presence  of mind  were  indispensable  in  answer-ing.  Would  my  accursed  timidity,  which  embarrasses  me  in  thepresence  of the  most  ordinary  stranger,  abandon  me  when  I foundmyself  in the  presence  of the  King  of France?  would  it suffer  me  toselect,  on  the spur  of the moment,  the proper  answer?  It was  my  de-sire,  without  abandoning  the  austerity  of tone  and  manner  which  Ihad  assumed,  to  show  that  I was  sensible  of  the  honour  which  sogreat  a  monarch  bestowed  upon  me.  it was  necessary  that  I shouldconvey  some  great  and  useful  truth  in  words  of  well-selected  andwell-deserved  eulogy.  To be able  to  prepare  a  happy  answer  before-392THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUhand,  it would  have  been  necessary  to  know  exactly  what  he mightsay  to  me;  and,  even  had  this  been  possible,  I felt  perfectly  certainthat  I should  not  be able  to  recollect  in his  presence  a  single  word  ofall  that  I had  previously  thought  over.  What  would  become  of meat  this  moment,  before  the  eyes  of all the Court,  if, in my embarrass-ment,  some  of my  usual  silly utterances  were  to  escape  my  lips?  Thisdanger  alarmed,  frightened,  and  made  me  tremble  so  violently,  thatI resolved,  at  all hazards,  not  to  expose  myself  to  it.I lost,  it is true,  the  pension,  which  was  in  a  manner  offered  tome;  but,  at  the  same  time,  I escaped  the  yoke  which  it would  haveimposed  upon  me.  Adieu  truth,  liberty,  and  courage!  How  could  I,from  that  time  forth,  have  dared  to  speak  of independence  and  dis-interestedness?  I could  only  flatter  or  keep  my  mouth  closed  if  Iaccepted  this  pension;  and  besides,  who  would  guarantee  the  pay-ment  of it?  What  steps  should  I have  had  to  take,  how  many  peopleI should  have  been  obliged  to  solicit!  It would  have  cost  me  moretrouble  and  far  more  unpleasantness  to  keep  it, than  to  do  withoutit.  Consequently,  in  renouncing  all  thoughts  of it, I believed  that  Iwas  acting  in  a  manner  quite  consistent  with  my  principles,  andsacrificing  the  appearance  to  the  reality.  I communicated  my  resolu-tion  to  Grimm,  who  had  nothing  to  say  against  it.  To  others  I al-leged  my  ill-health  as  an  excuse,  and I left  the  same  morning.My  departure  caused  some  stir,  and  was  generally  censured.  Myreasons  could  not  be  appreciated  by everybody;  it was  much  easierto  accuse  me  of  a  foolish  pride,  and  this  more  readily  allayed  thejealousy  of all  who  felt  they  would  not  have  acted  like  myself.  Thefollowing  day,  Jelyotte  wrote  me  a  note,  in  which  he  gave  me  anaccount  of the  success  of my  piece  and  of the great  fancy  which  theKing  himself  had  conceived  for  it. “All  day long,”  he informed  me,“his  Majesty  is continually  singing,  with  the  most  execrable  voice  inhis  kingdom,  and  utterly  out  of tune,  J'ai perdu  mon  serviteur;  f'ai;  perdu  tout  mon  bonheur.”  He  added  that,  in  a  fortnight,  a  secondperformance  of  the  Devin  was  to  be  given,  which  would  establishin the eyes  of all the  public  the  complete  success  of the  first.Two  days later,.as  I was  going  to  supper-at  Madame  d’Epinay’s,about  nine  o’clock  in  the  evening,  a  coach  passed  me  at  the  door.Someone  inside  made  a  sign to me  to  get in. I did  so;  the  person  wasDIDEROT  AND  GRIMM  CONSPIRE393Diderot.  He  spoke  to  me  about  the  pension  more  warmly  than  Ishould  have  expected  agphilosopher  to  speak  on  such  a  subject.  Hedid  not  regard  my  unwillingness  to  be presented  to  the  King  as  anoffence;  but  he  considered  my  indifference  about  the  pension  as  aterrible  crime.  He  said  to  me  that, even  if I was  disinterested  on  myown  account,  I had  no  right to be so  in regard to  Madame  le Vasseurand  her  daughter;  that  I owed  it to  them  to  neglect  no  honourablemeans,  within  my  reach,  of providing  for their  support;  and  as,  afterall, it could  not  be  said  that  I had  refused  this  pension,  he  insistedthat,  since  there  appeared  a  disposition  to  bestow  it  upon  me,  Iought  to  ask  for it and  obtain  it, at  any  cost.  Although I felt touchedby his  zeal,  I was  unable  to  approve  of his  principles,  and  we  had  alively  discussion  on  the  subject,  the first  which  had  ever  occurred  be-tween  us.  All our  subsequent  disputes  were  of the  same  kind, he dic-tating  to  me  what  he maintained  I ought  to  do, while  I as  firmly  re-fused,  because  I did  not  believe  it was  my  duty.It was  late  when  we  separated.  I wanted  to  take  him  with  me  tosupper  at  Madame  d’Epinay’s,  but  he would  not  go;  and, in spite ofthe  efforts  which  the  desire  of  bringing  together  those  whom I re-gard  with  affection  caused  me  to  make  from  time  to  time,  to  inducehim  to  visit  her—I  even  went  so  far as  to  take  her  to  his  door,  whichhe  refused  to  open  to  us—he  always  declined  to  see  her,  and  neverspoke  of her  except  with  great  contempt.  It was  only  after  my  dis-agreement  with  both  that  they became  intimate,  and  that  he beganto  speak  of her  with  respect.From  that  time  Diderot  and  Grimm  seemed  to  make  it their  ob-ject to  set  the  gouverneuses®  against  me,  by giving  them  to  under-stand  that,  if they  were  not  better  off,  it was  entirely  my  fault,  andthat  they  would  never  do  any  good  with  me.  They  tried  to  inducethem  to  leave  me,  and  promised  them,  through  Madame  d’Epinay’sinterest,  a  license  to  sell  salt, or  a  tobacconist’s  shop,  and  I know  notwhat  besides.  They even  tried  to  drag Duclos  and  Holbach  into  theiralliance,  but  the  former  persistently  refused  to  join  them.  At  thetime  I had  some  notion  of their  intrigues,  but  I only  learned  themclearly  a  long  time  afterwards,  and  I often  had  reason  to  lament  theblind  and  indiscreet  zeal  of my  friends,  who,  in endeavouring  to  re-10  A half-contemptuous  term  for  the  “women-folk.”394THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUduce  me,  in  my  ill-health,  to  a  state  of  most  melancholy  isolation,imagined  that  they  were  doing  their  utmost  to  make  me  happy  bythe very  means  which,  beyond  all others,  were  most  adapted  to  makeme  utterly  miserable.[1753.]—In  the  following  carnival,  the  Devin  was  played  atParis,  and,  during  the  interval,  I had  time  to  compose  the  overtureand  divertissement.  The  latter,  as  it was  designed  and  engraved,  wasintended  to  keep  up  a  sustained  and  connected  action  from  one  endof the piece  to  the  other,  which,  in my  judgment,  gave  opportunitiesfor  very  agreeable  tableaux.  But,  when  I proposed  this  idea  at  theOpera,  I was  not  even  listened  to, and  I was  obliged  to  patch togethersongs  and  dances  in  the  ordinary  manner.  The  result  was  that  thedivertissement,  although  fuli  of charming  ideas,  which  certainly  didnot  damage  the  effect  of  the  scenes,  only  enjoyed  a  very  moderatesuccess.  I struck  out  Jelyotte’s  recitative  and  restored  my  own  in  itsoriginal  form  as  it  is  engraved;  and  this  recitative,  somewhatFrenchified,  I confess—that  is  to  say,  drawled  out  by the  actors—far  from  offending  anyone,  was  as  successful  as  the  music,  and  wasconsidered,  even  by the  people,  equally  well  composed.  I dedicatedmy  piece  to  M.  Duclos,  who  had  taken  it under  his  protection,  anddeclared  that  this  should  be  my  only  dedication.  However,  I wrotea  second  with  his  consent;  but  he  must  have  thought  himself  stillmore  honoured  by the  exception  than  if I had  written  none  at  all.I could  relate  a  number  of  anecdotes  about  this  piece,  but  moreimportant  matters  which  I must  mention  do  not  allow  me  time  todwell  upon  them  here;  I may,  perhaps,  on  a  future  occasion  returnto  them  in a  supplement.  One,  however,  I must  mention,  which  mayhave  reference  to  all  that  follows.  I was  one  day  looking  over  theBaron  d’Holbach’s  music  in his  study.  After  I had  looked  through  anumber  of  pieces  of  different  kinds,  he  showed  me a collection  ofpieces  for  the  piano,  and  said,  “These  were  written  especially  forme;  they  are  very  tasteful,  and  well-suited  for  singing.  No  one  is ac-quainted  with  them,  or  shall  ever  see  them,  except  myself.  Youought  to  select  one,  and  introduce  it into  your  divertissement.”  As  Ialready  had  in my  mind  far  more  subjects  for  airs  and  symphoniesthan  I could  ever  make  use  of, I cared  very  little  about  his.  How-ever,  he  pressed  me  so  earnestly  that,  to  oblige  him,  I selected  aTHE  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  STYLES395  |shepherd’s  song,  which  I abridged  and  altered  into  a trio,  for  theentry  of Colette’s  companions.  Some  months  afterwards,  while  theDevin  was  still  running,  on  going  into  Grimm’s  rooms,  I found  anumber  of people  round  his piano,  from  which  he hastily  got  up  onmy  arrival.  Looking  mechanically  at  his music-stand,  I saw  the iden-tical  collection  of Baron  d’Holbach,  open  exactly  at  the  piece  whichhe  had  pressed  me  to  take,  while  assuring  me  that  it should  neverleave  his  hands.  Some  time  afterwards,  I saw  the  same  collectionopen  on  M.  d’Epinay’s  piano,  one  day when  there  was  some  musicat his house.  Neither  Grimm  nor  anyone  else ever  spoke to  me  aboutthis  air, and  I should  have  said  nothing  about  it myself,  if it had  notbeen  rumoured,  some  time  afterwards,  that  I was  not  the  author  ofthe  Devin  du  Village.  As  I was  never  a  great  instrumentalist,  I amconvinced  that,  had  it  not  been  for  my  “Dictionary  of  Music,”  itwould  at last have  been  said  that  I knew  nothing  about  the  subject.4Some  time  before  the Devin  du  Village  was  performed,  some  Ital-ian  comedians  had  arrived  at  Paris,  and  were  ordered  to  play at  theOpera.  The  effect  which  they were  destined  to  produce  could  not  beforeseen.  Although  they  were  detestable,  and  the  orchestra,  at  thattime  very  ill-trained,  mutilated  to  its heart’s  content  the  pieces  whichthey performed,  they nevertheless  fatally  injured  the  French  Opera.The  comparison  of  the  two  kinds  of  music,  heard  the  same  day  atthe same  theatre,  opened  the French  ears;  none  of them  could  enduretheir  drawling  music  after  the  lively  and  pronounced  accentuationof the  Italian;  as  soon  as  the  comedians  had  finished,  everyone  leftthe  house.  It was  found  necessary  to  change  the  order  of representa-tion,  and  to  put  off  the  performance  of  the  comedians  to  the  last.Eglé,  Pygmalion,  and  Le  Sylphe  were  played;  nothing  held  itsground.  The  Devin  du  Village  alone  could  bear  comparison,  andwas  listened  to  with  pleasure,  even  after  the  Serva  padrona.  When  1composed  my  interlude,  I had  my  head  full  of these  pieces,  and  bor-cowed  my  ideas  from  them;  but  I was  far  from  suspecting  that  mypiece  would  be criticised  by the  side  of them.  If I had  been a plagia-rist,  how  many  thefts  would  then  have  been  detected,  and  howeagerly  would  they have  been  pointed  out!  But  nothing  of the  kinduI  could  not  foresee  that,  in  spite  of  the  “Dictionary,”  this  would  really  besaid  of me.396THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUwas  discovered;  all  attempts  to  find  in  my  music  the  slightest  rem-iniscence  of  any  other  were  in  vain;  and  all  my  songs,  when  com-pared  with  the  supposed  originals,  were  found  to  be  as  new  as  thecharacter  of  the  music  which  I  had  created.  If  Mondonville  orRameau  had  been  forced  to  submit  to  such a test,  they  would  nothave  escaped  without  being  torn  to  shreds.  The  comedians  gainedsome  very  ardent  support  for  Italian  music.  Paris  was  divided  intotwo  parties,  more  violently  opposed  than  if it had  been  a  matter  ofreligion  or  of an  affair  of State.  One, the more  numerous  and  influen-tial,  composed  of  the  great,  the  wealthy,  and  the  ladies,  supportedthe  French  music;  the  other,  more  lively,  more  proud,  and  more  en-thusiastic,  was  composed  of real  connoisseurs,  persons  of talent,  andmen  of genius.  This  little  group  assembled  at  the  Opera,  under  theQueen’s  box.  The  other  party  filled  the rest  of the  pit and  house;  butits chief  meeting-place  was  under  the King’s box.  This  was  the originof these  celebrated  party  names,  “King’s  corner”  and  “Queen’s  cor-ner.”  The  dispute,  as  it became  more  animated,  gave  rise  to  severalbrochures.  If the  “King’s  corner”  attempted  to  be witty,  it was  ridi-culed  by the  “Petit  Prophète”;  if it attempted  to  argue,  it was  crushedby the “Lettre  sur  la musique  Française.”  These  two  little  pamphlets,by Grimm  and  myself  respectively,  are  all  that  have  survived  thequarrel;  all the  rest  are  already  forgotten.But  the  “Petit  Prophète,”  which,  in  spite  of my  denial,  was  for  along  time  attributed  to  me,  was  taken  as  a  joke,  and  did  not  bringthe  least  annoyance  upon  its  author,  whereas  the  “Lettre  sur  la mu-sique”  was  taken  seriously  and  roused  against  me  the  whole  nation,which  considered  itself  insulted  in  its  music.  A  description  of theincredible  effect  of  this  brochure  would  be  worthy  of  the  pen  ofTacitus.  It was  the time  of the great  quarrel  between  Parliament  andclergy.  The  Parliament  had  just been  banished;  the  ferment  was  atits  height;  everything  pointed  to  an  approaching  outburst.  Fromthe  moment  the  brochure  appeared,  all  other  quarrels  were  at  onceforgotten;  nothing  was  thought  of, except  the  perilous  condition  ofFrench  music,  and  the only outburst  was  against  myself.  It was  suchthat  the nation  has never  quite recovered  from it.  At Court,  the onlydoubt  was  whether  the  Bastille  or  exile  should  be  the  punishment;and  the Royal  warrant  of arrest  would  have  been  drawn  up, had  not2DEPRIVED  OF  HIS  FREE  PASS397M.  de Voyer  shown  the  ridiculous  aspect  of the  affair.  Anyone  whosees  it stated  that  this  braehure  possibly  prevented  a revolution  in theState  will  believe  that  he is dreaming.  It is, however,  an  actual  truth,which  all Paris  can  still  attest,  since  it is at  the  present  day no  morethan  fifteen  years  since  this  singular  incident  took  place.Although  my  liberty  was  not  attacked,  I was  unsparingly  insulted,and  even  my  life  was  in  danger.  The  Opera  orchestra  entered  intoan  honourable  conspiracy  to  assassinate  me  when I left  the  theatre.Being  informed  of  this,  I only  attended  the  Opera  more  frequentlythan  before,  and  it  was  not  until  a  long  time  afterwards  that  Ilearned  that  M.  Ancelet,  an  officer  in  the  Musketeers,  who  waskindly  disposed  towards  me,  had  prevented  the  plot  from  beingcarried  out,  by causing  me  to  be protected,  unknown  to  myself,  whenI left  the  theatre.  The  city had  recently  taken  over  the  managementof the  Opera.  The  first  exploit  of the  Prévét  des  Marchands  was  todeprive  me  of my  free  pass,  in the  most  uncivil  manner  possible,  bypublicly  refusing  me  admission  when  I presented  myself,  so  that  Iwas  obliged  to  take  a  ticket  for  the  amphitheatre  to  avoid  the  morti-fication  of going back.  The  injustice  was  the more  outrageous,  as  theonly recompense  I had  stipulated  for,  when  I gave  up  my  rights  inthe  piece,  was  a  free  pass  for  life;  for,  although  this  was a privilegewhich  all  authors  enjoyed—and I had  thus  a  double  claim  to  itnevertheless  expressly  stipulated  for  it in  M.  Duclos’s  presence.  It istrue  that  fifty  Jouis  were  sent  to  me  through  the  treasurer  of  theOpera  by way  of honorarium,  which  I had  not  asked  for;  but,  besides  that  these  fifty  Jours  were  not  even  equal  to  the  amount  whichwas  due  to  me  according  to  the  regulations,  this  payment  had  noth-ing to  do with  the  right of admission,  which  had  been  formally  stip-ulated  for,  and  which  was  entirely  independent  of  it.  In  this  be-haviour  there  was  such  a  combination  of injustice  and  brutality,  thatthe  public,  although  at  the  height  of its  animosity  against  me,  wasnevertheless  unanimously  disgusted  at  it,  and  many,  who  had  in-sulted  me  on  the previous  evening,  cried  out  loudly  on  the followingday in  the  house,  that  it was  a  shame  to  deprive  an  author  in  thismanner  of his  right  of admission,  which  he  had  well  deserved  andwhich  he  was  even  entitled  to  claim  for  two  persons.  So  true  is theItalian  proverb,  Ognun’  ama  la giustizia  in  casa  d'altrui.398THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUUnder  these  circumstances,  I had  only  one  course  to  take—to  de-mand  the  return  of  my  work,  since  the  recompense  agreed  uponwas  withheld.  I wrote  to  that  effect  to  M.  d’Argenson,  who  had  con-crol  of the  Opera,  adding  to  my  letter  an  unanswerable  memoran-dum.  Letter  and  memorandum  both  remained  unanswered,  andproduced  no  effect.  This  unjust  man’s  silence  wounded  me  deeply,and  did  not  tend  to  increase  the  very  moderate  opinion  which  I hadalways  entertained  of his  character  and  ability.  Thus  the Opera  keptmy  piece  and  defrauded  me  of the  recompense  for  which  I had  sur-rendered  my  rights  in  it.  Between  the  weak  and  the  strong,  thiswould  be  called  robbery;  between  the  strong  and  the  weak,  it  issimply  called  the  appropriation  of what  belongs  to  one’s  neighbour.As for the pecuniary  profits  of this  work,  although  it did not  bringme  in a  quarter  of what  it would  have  brought  in in the hands  of an-other,  they  were,  nevertheless,  large  enough  to  enable  me  to  liveupon them  for  several  years,  and  to  make  up  for  the  continued  ill-success  of  my  copying.  I received  a  hundred  louis  from  the  King,fifty from  Madame  de Pompadour  for  the  performance  at  Bellevue,at  which  she  herself  took  the  part  of  Colin,  fifty  from  the  Opera,and  five  hundred  francs  from  Pissot  for  the  engraving,  so  that  thisinterlude,  which  cost  me  no  more  than  five  or  six  weeks’  work,  inspite  of my  ill-luck  and  stupidity  brought  me  in  almost  as  much  asmy  “Emile,”  on  which  I spent  twenty  years  of meditation  and  threeyears  of labour.  But  I paid  dearly  for  the  pecuniary  ease  which  thispiece  procured  me  by the  endless  annoyance  which  it brought uponme.  It  was  the  germ  of  the  secret  jealousies,  which  did  not  breakout  until  long afterwards.  From  the  time  of its  success,  I no  longerfound  in  Grimm,  Diderot,  or,  with  few  exceptions,  in  any  of  themen  of letters  with  whom  I was  acquainted,  the cordiality,  the frank-ness,  or  pleasure  in  my  society,  which  I believed  I  had  hithertofound  in  them.  As  soon  as  I appeared  at  the  Baron’s,  the  conversa-tion  ceased  to  be  general.  Those  present  collected  in  small  groupsand  whispered  together,  so  that  I was  left  alone,  without  knowingwhom  to  speak to.  For  a long time  I endured  this mortifying  neglect,and,  finding  that  Madame  d’Holbach,  who  was  gentle  and  amiable,always  received  me  kindly,  I put  up  with  her  husband’s  rudeness  aslong  as  it was  possible.  One  day, however,  he attacked  me  without““NARCISSE’’  PERFORMED399reason  or  excuse,  and  with  such  brutality—in  the  presence  of Dide-rot,  who  never  said  a  worand  of Margency,  who  has  often  told  mesince  then,  that  he  admired  the  gentleness  and  moderation  of  myanswers—that  at  last, driven  away  by this  unworthy  treatment,  I lefthis  house,  resolved  never  to  enter  it  again.  However,  this  did  notprevent  me  from  always  speaking  respectfully  of  himself  and  hishouse;  while  he  never  expressed  himself  in  regard  to  me  in  otherthan  most  insulting  and  contemptuous  terms.  He  never  spoke  of meexcept  as  the  little  cuistre,!?  without,  however,  being  able  to  pointto  a  single  wrong  of any  kind  which  I had  ever  done  to  him  or  any-one  in whom  he  took  an  interest.  This  was  the  manner  in which  hefulfilled  my  predictions  and  my  fears.  As  for  myself,  I believe  thatmy  friends  would  have  forgiven  me  for  writing  books—even  excel-lent  books—because  such  a  reputation  was  attainable  by  them-selves;  but  they  were  unable  to  forgive  me  for  having  composed  anopera,  or  for its brilliant  success,  because  not  one  of them  was  capableof following  the  same  career,  or  aspiring  to  the  same  honour.  Duclosalone,  superior  to  such  jealousy,  seemed  to  become  even  more  at-tached  to  me.  He  introduced  me  to  Mademoiselle  Quinault,  bywhom I was  treated  with  as  much  attention,  politeness,  and  friend-liness  as  I had  found  wanting  at  the  Baron’s  house.While  the  Devin  was  being  played  at  the  Opera,  its  author  wasalso  discussed  at  the  Comédie  Frangaise,  but  somewhat  less  favour-ably.  Having  vainly  attempted,  during  seven  or  eight  years,  to  getmy  Narcisse  performed  at  the Italian  Opera,  I became  disgusted  withthis  theatre,  since  the  actors  performed  so  badly  in  French  pieces,and  J should  have  been  glad to  get my  piece  accepted  at  the  ComédieFrangaise  rather  than  at  the  Italian  Opera.  I mentioned  my  wish  toLa  Noue,  the  comedian,  whose  acquaintance  I had  made,  and  who,as is well  known,  was  an  author  and  an  accomplished  man.  He  waspleased  with  Narcisse,  and  undertook  to  get  it  performed  anony-mously;  meanwhile,  he  procured  me  a  pass,  which  was  a  greatpleasure  to  me,  since  I have  always  preferred  the  Théâtre  Françaisto  the  other  two.  The  piece  was  received  with  applause,  and  per-formed  without  the  author’s  name  being  given;  but  I have  reasonto  believe  that  the  actors  and  many  others  were  not  ignorant  who  it®  Corresponding  somewhat  to  a  “college  servitor.”400THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUwas.  Mesdemoiselles  Gaussin  and  Grandval  played  the  love-parts;and  although  in  my  opinion  the  performance  showed a lack  of in-telligence  generally,  it could  not  be called  absolutely  bad.  However,I was  surprised  and  touched  by the  indulgence  of  the  public,  whohad  the  patience  to  listen  quietly  from  beginning  to  end,  and  evento  allow  it to  be  performed  a  second  time,  without  exhibiting  theleast  signs of impatience.  As for myself,  I was  so  bored  with  the first,that  I could  not  sit out  te  the  end.  I left the theatre  and  went  into  theCafé  de Procope,  where  I found  Boissy  and  others,  who  had probablybeen  as  much  bored  as  myself.  There  I cried  peccavi,  and,  humblyor  proudly,  confessed  myself  the  author  of the  piece,  and  spoke  of itas  everyone  thought  of it.  This  public  confession  of the  authorshipof a  piece  which  had  failed  was  much  admired,  and  caused  me  littlepain.  I even  found a certain  satisfaction  to  my  amour-propre  in  thecourage  with  which  I had  made  it; and I believe  that,  on  this  occa-sion,  there  was  more  pride  in speaking,  than  there  would  have  beenfalse  shame  in keeping  silence.  However,  as  there  was  no  doubt  thatthe  piece,  although  spoilt  at  the  performance,  would  bear  reading,I had  it printed,  and, in the preface,  which  is one  of my  best  produc-tions,  I began  to  express  my  principles  a  little  more  freely  than  I hadhitherto  done.I soon  had  an  opportunity  to  disclose  them  unreservedly  in a  workof greater  importance;  for  it was,  I think,  in  this  year  (1753)  thatthe  “Origin  of Inequality  amongst  Mankind”  appeared  as  the  sub-ject  proposed  for  discussion  by the  Academy  of  Dijon.  Struck  bythis  great  question,  I felt  surprised  that  this  Academy  had  venturedto  propose  it; but  since  it had  had  the  courage  to  do so,  I thought  Imight  have  the  courage  to  discuss  it, and  undertook  the  task.In order  to  consider  this  great  subject  at  my  ease,  I went  to  Saint-Germain,  on  a  seven  or  eight days’  journey,  with  Thérése,  our  host-ess,  who  was  a  good  sort  of woman,  and  one  of her  friends.  I countthis  trip  as  one  of  the  most  agreeable  in  my  life.  It  was  very  fineweather:  the  good  women  took  all  the  trouble  and  expense  uponthemselves,  Thérése  amused  herself  with  them,  while  I, relievedfrom  all  anxiety,  joined  them  at  meal-times,  and  diverted  myselfwithout  having  anything  to  trouble  me.  The  remainder  of the  day,I buried  myself  in the  forest,  where  I sought  and  found  the  picturea'  ESSAY  ON  INEQUALITY”401of those  primitive  times,  of which  I boldly  sketched  the history.  I de-molished  the  pitiful  lies  of mankind;  I dared  to  expose  their  naturein all  its nakedness,  to  follow  the  progress  of time  and  of the thingswhich  have  disfigured  this  nature;  and, comparing  the  man,  as  manhas  made  him,  with  the  natural  man,  I showed  him,  in  his  pre-tended  perfection,  the  true  source  of  his  misery.  My  soul,  upliftedby these  sublime  considerations,  ascended  to  the  Divinity;  and,  see-ing  my  fellow  creatures  following  blindly  the  path  of  their  preju-dices,  their  errors,  their  misfortunes,  and  their  crimes,  I cried  aloudto  them  with  a  feeble  voice  which  they could  not  hear,  “Fools,  whocontinually  complain  of  Nature,  learn  that  you  bring  all  your  mis-fortunes  upon  yourselves.”The  result  of these  meditations  was  the  “Essay  on  Inequality,”  awork  which  was  more  to  Diderot’s  taste  than  any  of my  other  writ-ings.  He  gave  most  useful  advice  concerning  it,!*  but  it only  foundfew readers  in Europe  who  understood  it, and  none  of the latter  everchose  to  speak  of it.  It was  written  as  a  prize  competition:  I sent  it,feeling  certain  beforehand  that  it would  be  unsuccessful,  as  I knewwell  that  the prizes  of Academies  were  not  intended  for works  of thekind.This  excursion  and  occupation  were  beneficial  to  my  health  andtemper.  Several  years  before,  tortured  by my  retention  of urine,  I hadput  myself  unreservedly  into  the  physicians’  hands,  and  they,  with-out  alleviating  my sufferings,  had  exhausted  my  strength  and  under-mined  my  constitution.  After  my  return  from  Saint-Germain,  Ifound  myself  stronger  and  better.  I took  the  hint, and  determined  torecover  or  die  without  the  assistance  of physicians  or  drugs.  I said13  At  the  time  when  I wrote  these  words,  I had  no  suspicion  of  Diderot’s  andGrimm’s  great  conspiracy;  otherwise  I should  easily  have  seen  how  the  formerabused  my  confidence,  in  order  to  give  my  writings  the  harsh  tone  and  air  ofgloominess  which  ceased  to  be  found  in  them  when  he  no  longer  guided  me,The  description  of  the  philosopher  who,  in  the  course  of  an  argument,  stops  uphis  ears,  in order  to  harden  himself  against  the  complaints  of  a  man  in  distress,  isin  his  style;  and  he  had  supplied  me  with  several  others,  even  still  stronger,which  I could  never  bring  myself  to  use.  But,  as  I attributed  to  his  confinementin the  donjon  of Vincennes  this  melancholy  tinge,  which  may  be  found  again,  inconsiderable  proportions  in his  “Clairval,”  it never  occurred  to  me  to  suspect  anyevil  intention.402THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUgood-bye  to  them  for ever,  and  began  to  live  without  any  fixed  rules,remaining  quiet  when  I could  not  walk,  and  walking  as  soon  as  Iwas  strong  enough  to  do  so.  Life  in Paris,  amongst  pretentious  peo-ple, was  little  to  my  taste;  the cabals  of men  of letters,  their  shamefulquarrels,  their  lack  of  candour  as  exhibited  in  their  books,  thehaughty  airs  they  gave  themselves  in  society,  were  all  so  hateful  toine  and  so  antipathetic,  I found  so  little  gentleness,  open-hearted-ness,  and  frankness,  even  in the  society  of my  friends,  that,  disgustedwith  this  tumultuous  life,  I became  to  long  earnestly  for  residencein the  country;  and,  as  I saw  no  prospect  of my  profession  allowingme  to  settle  there,  I hastened  to  spend  in  it at  least  the  few  hourswhich  I had  to  spare.  For  several  months,  at  first  after  dinner,  I usedto  go  for  a  walk  by myself  in  the  Bois  de  Boulogne,  to  think  oversubjects  for future  works,  and  did  not  return  till  nightfall.[1754-1756.|—-Gauffecourt,  with  whom  I was  at  that  time  ex-sremely  intimate,  found  himself  obliged  to  make  a  journey  toGeneva  on  business,  and  proposed  to  me  to  accompany  him;  I con-sented.  As I was  not  well  enough  to  be able  to  dispense  with  the careof the  gouverneuse,  it was  decided  that  she  should  go  with  us,  andthat  her  mother  should  look  after  the  house.  Having  made  all  ourarrangements,  we  alli  three  set  out  together  on  the  rst  of June,  1754.I must  mention  this  journey  as  the  period  of the  first  experiencewhich,  in the  course  of a  life  of forty-two  years,  gave  a  shock  to  theconfidence  of my  naturally  unsuspicious  disposition,  to  which  I hadalways  abandoned  myself  without  reserve  and  without  inconven-ience.  We  had a hired  carriage,  which  conveyed  us  by very  shortdaily  stages  without  changing  horses.  I often  got down  and  walked.We  had  scarcely  performed  half  the journey,  when  Thérése  showedthe  greatest  repugnance  to  remaining  alone  in  the  carriage  withGauffecourt,  and  when,  in  spite  of  her  entreaties,  I wanted  to  getdown,  she  did  the  same,  and  walked  with  me.  For  some  time  Iscolded  her  for  this  whim,  and  even  opposed  it so  strongly,  that  shefelt  obliged  to  declare  the  reason  for  her  conduct.  I thought  that  Iwas  dreaming,  I fell  from  the  clouds,  when  I heard  that  my  friendde  Gauffecourt,  more  than  sixty  years  old,  gouty,  impotent,  andworn  out  by a life  of pleasure  and  dissipation,  had  been  doing  hisutmost,  since  we  had  started,  to corrupt  a  person  who  was  no  longerTRAVELS  WITH  THERESE403young  or  beautiful,  and  who belonged  to  his friend,  and  that  by thelowest  and  most  disgraceful  means,  even  going  so  far  as  to  offer  hermoney,  and  attempting  to  excite  her  passions  by reading  a  disgust-ing book  to  her  and  showing  her  the  disgraceful  pictures  of  whichit was  full.  Thérèse,  in a  fit of indignation,  once  threw  his  villainousbook  out  of  the  carriage;  and  she  told  me  that,  the  very  first  day,when  I had  gone  to  bed  before  supper  with  a  very  violent  headache,he had  employed  all  the  time,  during  which  he was  alone  with  her,in attempts  and  actions  more  worthy  of a satyr  or  he-goat  than  of anhonourable  man,  to  whom I had  confided  myself  and  my  compan-ion.  What  a  surprise!  what  an  entirely  new  cause  of grief  for  me!  I,who  had  until  then  believed  that  friendship  was  inseparable  fromall  the  amiable  and  noble  sentiments  which  constitute  all  its charm,for the first  time  in my  life  found  myself compelled  to  couple it withcontempt,  and  to  withdraw  my  confidence  and  esteem  from  a  manwhom  I loved,  and  by whom I believed  myself  to  be  loved!  Thewretch  concealed  his  disgraceful  conduct  from  me;  and, to  avoid  ex-posing  Thérése,  I found  myself  compelled  to  conceal  my  contemptfrom  him,  and  to  keep  hidden,  in  the  bottom  of my  heart,  feelingswhich  he was  never  to  know.  Sweet  and  holy illusion  of friendship!Gauffecourt  was  the  first  to  lift  thy veil  before  my  eyes.  How  manycruel  hands  since  then  have  prevented  it  from  covering  thy  faceagain!At  Lyons I left  Gauffecourt,  to  take  the  road  through  Savoy,  as  Icould  not  bring  myself  to  be  so  near  mamma  again,  without  seeingher once  more.  I saw  her again—my  God!  in what  a  condition!  Howlow  had  she  fallen!  What  was  left  of her  former  virtue?  Could  it bethe  same  Madame  de  Warens,  once  so  brilliant,  to  whom  M.  Pont-verre,  the  curé,  had  sent  me?  How  my  heart  was  torn!  The  onlyresource  I could  see  for  her  was,  that  she  should  leave  the  country.I reiterated,  earnestly  but  in vain,  the  entreaties  which  I had  severaltimes  addressed  to  her  in  my  letters,  begging  her  to  come  and  livequietly  with  me,  and  let  me  devote  my  life  and  Thérése’s  to  makeher  own  happy.  Clinging  to  her  pension,  from  which,  although  itwas  regularly  paid,  she  had  for  a  long  time  drawn  nothing,  she  re-fused  to  listen  to  me.  I gave  her  a  small  portion  of my  money,  muchless  than  I ought to  have  given,  much  less  than  I should  have  given404THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUher,  if I had  not  felt  certain,  that  she  would  not  have  spent  a  souupon  herself.  During  my  stay  in  Geneva,  she  took  a  journey  toChablais,  and  came  to  see  me  at  Grange-Canal.  She  had  no  money  tocontinue  her  journey.  I had  not  as  much  with  me  as  she  wanted,  andsent  it to  her by Thérése  an  hour  later.  Poor  mamma!  Let  me  men-tion  one  more  proof  of her  goodness of heart.  Her  sole  remainingjewel was  a little  ring;  she  took  it from  her  finger  and  placed  it uponthat  of Thérése,  who  immediately  replaced  it, at  the  same  time  kiss-ing and  bathing  in  her  tears  that  noble  hand.  Ah!  then  would  havebeen  the  moment  to  pay  my  debt!  I ought  to  have  left  all  and  fol-lowed  her,  to  have  never  left  her  until  her  last  hour,  to  have  sharedher  lot, whatever  it might  have  been.  I did  nothing  of the  kind.  Oc-cupied  with  another  attachment,  I felt  the  tie  which  bound  us  loos-ened, for want  of any  hope of being able  to  make  it of any  use  to  her.I wept  over  her, but did  not  follow  her.  Of all the stings of consciencethat  I have  ever  felt, this  was  the  sharpest  and  most  lasting.  My con-duct  deserved  the  terrible  punishment  which  since  then  has  neverceased  to  overwhelm  me;  I hope  it may  have  atoned  for  my  ingrati-tude,  which,  indeed,  showed  itself  in  my  conduct,  but  has  woundedmy  heart  too  deeply  for  it ever  to  have  been  the  heart  of an  ungrate-ful  man.Before  I left  Paris,  I had  sketched  the  dedication  of  my  “Essayon  Inequality.”  I finished  it  at  Chambéri,  and  dated  it from  thatplace,  thinking  it  better,  in  order  to  avoid  all  unpleasantness,  notto  date  it either  from  France  or  Geneva.  On  my  arrival  in this  city, Igave  myself  up  to  the  republican  enthusiasm  which  had  led  methere.  This  enthusiasm  was  increased  by the  reception  I met  with.Féted  and  made  much  of by all classes,  I abandoned  myself  entirelyto  patriotic  zeal,  and,  ashamed  of being  excluded  from  my  rights  asa  citizen  by the  profession  of  a  religion  different  from  that  of  myfathers,  I resolved  publicly  to  return  to  the  latter.  As the  Gospel  wasthe  same  for every  Christian,  and  as  the essential  part  of the  doctrineonly  differed  in  the  attempts  of  different  people  to  explain  whatthey were  unable  to  understand,  I said  to  myself  that,  in each  coun-try,  it was  the  right  of the  Sovereign  alone  to  define  the  manner  ofworship  and  to  settle  this  unintelligible  dogma,  and  that  it was  con-sequently  the  duty of every  good citizen  to  accept  the  dogma  and  toABJURES  THE  CATHOLIC  FAITH405follow  the  manner  of worship  prescribed  by the  law.  Constant  asso-ciation  with  the  encyclopfedists,  far  from  shaking  my  faith,  hadstrengthened  it, in  consequence  of  my  natural  aversion  to  quarrelsand  schism.  The  study  of  man  and  the  universe  had  everywhereshown  me  the final  causes  and  the  intelligence  which  directed  them.The  reading  of the  Bible,  especially  the  Gospels,  to  which  I had  forseveral  years  devoted  myself,  had  taught  me  to  despise  the  low  andfoolish  interpretations  given  to  the  teaching  of Jesus  Christ  by per-sons  utterly  unworthy  of  understanding  it.  In  a  word,  philosophy,while  firmly  attaching  me  to  what  was  essential  in  religion,  had  re-leased  me  from  the petty  and  rubbishy  forms  with  which  it has beenobscured.  Believing  that,  for  an  intelligent  man,  there  could  not  betwo  ways  of being  a  Christian,  I also  believed  that  all religious  formand  discipline,  in  each  country,  came  under  the  jurisdiction  of  thelaw.  From  this  reasonable,  social,  and  pacific  principle,  which  hasbrought  upon  me  such  cruel  persecutions,  it followed  that,  if I de-sired  to  become a citizen,  I ought  to  be  a  Protestant,  and  to  returnto  the  religion  of my  country.  I accordingly  determined  to  do  so.  Ieven  submitted  to  the  instructions  of  the  pastor  of  the  parish,  inwhich  I was  staying,  which  was  outside  the  city.  I only  desired  notto  be obliged  to  appear  before  the consistory.  However,  the ecclesias-tical  law  was  definite  in regard  to  this;  but  they  were  kind  enoughto  make  an  exemption  in my  favour,  and  a  commission  of five  or  sixmembers  was  appointed  to  receive  my  profession  of faith  in private.Unfortunately,  Perdriau,  the  minister,  a  mild  and  amiable  man,with  whom  I was  on  friendly  terms,  took  it into  his  head  to  tell  methat they were  delighted  at  the idea  of hearing  me  speak in this  littleassembly.  The  expectation  of this  so  alarmed  me,  that,  after  havingstudied,  night  and  day,  for  three  weeks,  a  little  speech  which  I hadprepared,  I became  so  confused  at the moment  when  I had  to  deliverit, that  I was  unable  to  utter  a  single  word  of it, and, at  this  meeting,I behaved  like  the  most  stupid  schoolboy.  The  members  of the com-mission  spoke  for me;  I answered  “Yes”  and  “No”  like  a  fool;  afterwhich  I was  admitted  to  the  Communion,  and  reinstated  in  myrights  as  a  citizen.  I was  enrolled  as  such  in  the  list  of  the  civicguards,  who  are  paid  by the  citizens  and  full  burgesses  only,  and  Iattended  an  extraordinary  general  council,  to  receive  the  oath  fromTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU406the  syndic!#  Mussard.  I was  so  touched  by the  kindness  shown  tome  on  this  occasion  by the  Council  and  consistory,  and  by the  cour-teous  and  polite  behaviour  of  all  the  magistrates,  ministers,  andcitizens,  that,  persuaded  by the  persistent  entreaties  of the  excellentDeluc,  and  influenced  still  more  by my  own  inclinations,  I decidedonly  to  return  to  Paris  to  break  up  my  establishment,  arrange  mylittle  business  matters,  find  a  situation  for  Madame  le Vasseur  andher  husband  or  provide  for  their-wants,  and  then  to  return  withThérése  and  settle  at  Geneva  for  the  rest  of my  life.This  resolution  once  taken,  I suspended  all  serious  occupations,in order  to  enjoy  myself  with  my  friends,  until  it was  time  to  set  outfor  Paris.  Of  all  my  amusements,  that  which  pleased  me  most  wasrowing  round  the  lake  with  Deluc,  his  daughter-in-law,  his  twosons,  and  my  Thérése.  We  spent  seven  days in this  excursion,  in themost  beautiful  weather.  I preserved  the  liveliest  recollection  of thespots  which  had  delighted  me  at the other  end  of the lake, and  whichI described  some  years  later  in the  “Nouvelle  Héloïse.”The  principal  connections  which  I formed  at  Geneva,  besides  theDelucs  whom  I have  mentioned,  were:  the  young  minister  Vernes,whose  acquaintance  I had  already  made  in Paris,  and  of whom  I hada  better  opinion  than  he  afterwards  justified;  M.  Perdriau,  at  thattime  a  country  pastor,  now  professor  of belles-lettres,  whose  pleasantand  agreeable  society  I  shall  ever  regret,  although  he  has  sincethought  it the  proper  thing  to  break  off  the  acquaintance;  M.  Jala-bert,  professor  of physics,  since  then  counsellor  and  syndic,  to  whomI read  my  “Essay  on  Inequality”  (omitting  the  dedication),  withwhich  he appeared  delighted;  Professor  Lullin,  with  whom  I kept upa  correspondence  up  to  the  time  of  his  death,  and  who  even  com-missioned  me  to  purchase  some  books  for  the  library;  Professor  Ver-net,  who  turned  his  back  upon  me,  like  the  rest  of  the  world,  afterI had  shown  him  proofs  of attachment  and  friendship,  which  oughtto  have  touched  him,  if a  theologian  could  be touched  by anything;Chappuis,  clerk  and  successor  to  Gauffecourt,  whom  he  desired  tosupplant,  and  who  was  soon  afterwards  supplanted  himself;  Marcetde  Méziéres,  an  old  friend  of  my  father,  who  had  also  shown  him-self  mine,  but  who,  after  having  formerly  deserved  well  of his coun-™  Syndic:  the  head  of a  corporation.LEAVES  GENEVA  FOR  PARIS407try, became  a  dramatic  author and  candidate  for the Two  Hundred,changed  his  opinions,  and  made  himself  ridiculous  before  his  death.But  the  acquaintance  from  whom  I hoped  most  was  Moultou—ayoung  man  whose  talents  and  ardent  spirit  aroused  the  greatest  ex-pectations.  I have  always  felt  an  affection  for  him,  although  his con-duct  towards  myself  has  often  been  suspicious,  and  he is on  intimateterms  with  my  bitterest  enemies;  but, notwithstanding  all this, I can-not  prevent  myself  from  looking  upon  him  as  one  day  destined  tobecome  the  defender  of my  memory,  and  the  avenger  of his  friend.In  the  midst  of these  amusements,  I neither  lost  the  taste  for  mysolitary  walks,  nor  discontinued  them.  I  frequently  took  longrambles  on  the  shores  of  the  lake,  during  which  my  brain,  accus-tomed  to  work,  did  not  remain  idle.  I worked  up  the  outline  of my“Institutions  Politiques,”  of which  I shall  have  to  speak  presently,  Iprojected  a  “Histoire  du  Valais” —a tragedy  in prose,  the  subject  ofwhich  was  nothing  less than  Lucretia,  by which  I hoped  to  crush  thescoffers,  although  I ventured  to  introduce  this  unfortunate  womanon  the  stage  again  at  a  time  when  she  was  no  longer  possible  at  anyFrench  theatre.  I also  tried  my  hand  at  Tacitus,  and  made a transla-tion  of the  first  book  of the  Histories,  which  will  be found  amongstmy  papers.After  four  months’  stay  at  Geneva,  I returned  to  Paris  in October,avoiding  Lyons,  so  as  not  to  meet  Gauffecourt.  As  I did  not  intendto  return  to  Geneva  until  the  following  spring,  I resumed,  duringthe  winter,  my  usual  habits  and  occupations,  the  chief  of which  wasthe correction  of the  proofs  of my  “Discourse  on  Inequality,”  whichwas  being  published  in  Holland  by Rey,  whose  acquaintance  I hadrecently  made  at  Geneva.  As  this  work  was  dedicated  to  the  Repub-lic, and  this  dedication  might be displeasing  to  the  Council,  I waitedto  see  the  effect  it produced  at  Geneva  before  J returned  there.  Theresult  was  not  favourable  to  me;  and  this  dedication,  which  hadbeen  dictated  solely  by the  purest  patriotism,  made  enemies  for  mein  the  Council,  and  brought  upon  me  the  jealousy  of  some  of  thecitizens.  M.  Chouet,  at  that  time  chief  syndic,  wrote  me  a  polite,  butcold, letter,  which  will  be found  in my  collection  (Packet  A, No.  3).From  private  individuals,  amongst  others  Deluc  and  Jalabert,  I re-ceived  a  few  compliments,  and  that  was  all;  I did  not  find  that  a408THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsingle  Genevese  really  thanked  me  for  the  hearty  zeal  which  was  tobe  found  in  the  work.  This  indifference  shocked  all  those  who  ob-served  it.  I remember  that,  one  day,  at  Clichy,  when  I was  diningwith  Madame  Dupin  in company  with  Crommelin,  minister  of theRepublic,  and  M.  de  Mairan,  the  latter  openly  declared  that  theCouncil  owed  me  a  reward  and  public  honours  for  this  work,  andthat  it would  disgrace  itself  if it failed  to  do  its  duty.  Crommedlin,who  was  a  dark  and  vulgarly  spiteful  little  man,  did  not  venture  tomake  any  answer  in my  presence,  but  he made a frightful  grimace,which  caused  Madame  Dupin  to  smile.  The  only advantage,  besidesthe  satisfaction  it  afforded  my  heart,  which  I obtained  from  thiswork,  was  the  title  of  “citizen,”  which  was  bestowed  upon  me  bymy  friends  and  afterwards  by the  public,  which  I afterwards  lostfrom  having  deserved  it too  well.However,  this  ill-success  would  not  have  kept  me  from  carryingout  my  intention  of retiring  to  Geneva,  had  not  motives,  which  hadgreater  influence  over  my  heart,  contributed  to  this  result.  M.dEpinay,  being  desirous  of  adding  a  wing  which  was  wanting  tothe chateau  of La  Chevrette,  went  to  extraordinary  expense  to  finishit.  One  day,  having  gone,  in  company  with  Madame  d’Epinay,  tosee  the  works,  we  continued  our  walk  a  quarter  of a  league  further,as  far  as  the  reservoir  of the  waters  of the  park,  which  adjoined  theforest  of  Montmorency,  where  there  was  a  pretty  kitchen-garden,attached  to  which  was  a  small  and  very  dilapidated  cottage,  calledthe  Hermitage.  This  solitary  and  agreeable  spot  had  struck  my  at-tention  when  I saw  it for the first  time  before  my journey  to  Geneva.In my  transport,  I let fall  the  exclamation,  “Ah,  madam,  what  a  de-lightful  place  to  live  in!  Here  is  a  refuge  ready  made  for  me.”Madame  d’Epinay  did  not  take  much  notice  of  my  words  at  thetime;  but, on  this  second  visit,  I was  quite  surprised  to  find, in placeof the  old  ruins,  a  little  house  almost  entirely  new,  very  nicely  ar-ranged,  and  very  habitable  for a  small  establishment  of three  persons.Madame  d’Epinay  had  had the work  carried  out  quietly  and  at  verytrifling  expense,  by taking  some  materials  and  some  of the  workmenfrom  the  chateau.  When  she  saw  my  surprise,  she  said,  “There,  Mr.Bear,  there  is your  asylum;  you  chose  it; friendship  offers  it to  you.I hope  that  it will  put  an  end  to  your  cruel  idea  of separating  from|VOLTAIRE  SETTLES  AT  GENEVA409me.”  I do not  believe  that  I have  ever  felt  more  deeply  or  more  de-lightfully  touched;  I bathed with  my tears  the beneficent  hand  of myfriend;  and, if I was  not  vanquished  from  that moment,  I was  sorelyshaken  in my  resolution.  Madame  d’Epinay,  who  was  unwilling  tobe beaten,  became  so  pressing,  employed  so  many  different  means,and  so  many  persons,  in  order  to  get  over  me—even  enlistingMadame  le Vasseur  and  her daughter  in her service—that  she finallytriumphed  over  my  resolutions.  Abandoning  the  idea  of settling  inmy  native  country,  I decided,  and  promised,  to  live  in  the  Hermit-age;  and,  while  the  building  was  getting  dry,  she  undertook  to  seeafter  the furniture,  so  that all was  ready for occupation  the followingspring.One  thing  which  greatly  contributed  to  confirm  my  resolution,was  the  fact  that  Voltaire  had  settled  in  the  neighbourhood  ofGeneva.  I knew  that  this  man  would  cause  a  revolution  there;  thatI should  find  again  in  my  own  country  the  tone,  the  airs,  and  themanners  which  drove  me  from  Paris;  that  I should  have  to  maintaina  perpetual  struggle;  and  that  no  other  choice  would  be left  to  me,except  to  behave  either  as  an  insufferable  pedant,  or  as  a coward  anda  bad  citizen.  The  letter  which  Voltaire  wrote  to  me  about  my  lastwork  caused  me  to  hint  at  my  apprehensions  in my  reply;  the  effectwhich  it  produced  confirmed  them.  From  that  moment  I lookedupon  Geneva  as  lost,  and  I was  not  mistaken.  I ought  perhaps  tohave  defied  the  storm,  if I had  felt  that  I was  capable  of doing  so.But  what  could  I, timid,  and  a  poor  speaker,  have  done  unaidedagainst  one  who  was  arrogant,  wealthy,  supported  by the  credit  ofthe  great,  brilliantly  eloquent,  and  already  the  idol  of  the  womenand  young  men?  I was  afraid  of exposing  my  courage  uselessly  todanger;  I only  listened  to  the  voice  of my  naturally  peaceable  dis-position,  and  my  love  of tranquillity  which,  if it deceived  me  then,still  deceives  me  at  the  present  day in  this  particular.  By retiring  toGeneva,  I should  have  spared  myself  great  misfortunes;  but  I doubtwhether,  with  all  my  ardent  and  patriotic  zeal,  I should  have  doneanything  great  or  serviceable  to  my  country.Tronchin,  who,  nearly  about  the  same  time,  settled  at  Geneva,came  to  Paris  some  time  afterwards  to  play the  quack,  and  broughtaway  some  of its  treasures.  On  his  arrival,  he  came  to  see  me  with410THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthe  Chevalier  de  Jancourt.  Madame  d’Epinay  was  very  anxious  toconsult  him  privately,  but  it was  difficult  to  get  through  the  crowd.She  had  recourse  to  me,  and  I induced  him  to  go  and  see  her.  Thus,under  my  auspices,  they commenced  a  connection,  which,  later,  theystrengthened  at  my  expense.  Such  has  ever  been  my  lot;  no  soonerhave  I brought  together  separate  friends  of my  own,  than  they infal-libly  combined  against  me.  Although,  in  the  conspiracy,  which  theTronchins  from  that  time  entered  into,  to  reduce  their  country  to  astate  of  servitude,  they  must  all  have  felt  a  mortal  hatred  towardsme,  the  doctor  for  a  long  time  continued  to  show  me  proofs  of hisgoodwill.  He  even  wrote  to  me  after  his  return  to  Geneva,  offeringme  the  post  of honorary  librarian.  But  my  mind  was  made  up,  andthis  offer  did  not  shake  my  resolution.At  this  time  I returned  to  M.  d'Holbach.  The  reason  for  my  visitwas  the  death  of his  wife,  which  had  taken  place  during  my  stay  atGeneva.  Madame  Francueil  had  also  died  during  the  same  interval.Diderot,  when  informing  me  of  the  death  of  Madame  d’Holbach,spoke  of the  husband’s  deep  affliction.  His  grief  touched  my  heart,and  I myself  regretted  this  amiable  woman.  I wrote  to  M. d'Holbacha  letter  of condolence.  The  sad  event  made  me  forget  all  his  injus-tice;  and,  when  I returned  from  Geneva,  and  he himself  came  backfrom  a  tour  through  France,  which  he  had  made  in  company  withGrimm  and  some  other  friends  to  divert  his  thoughts  from  his  sor-row,  I went  to  visit  him,  and  continued  to  do  so  until  my  departurefor  the  Hermitage.  When  it  became  known  in  his  circle  thatMadame  d’Epinay,  with  whom  he  was  not  yet  acquainted,  was  pre-paring  a  dwelling-place  for  me,  sarcasms  fell  upon  me  thick  as  hail;it was  said  that,  unable  to  live  without  the  flattery  and  amusementsef the city, I could  not  endure  to  remain  even  a  fortnight  in solitude.Conscious  of my  real  feelings,  I let them  say  what  they pleased,  andwent  my  way.  Nevertheless,  M.  d’Holbach  helped  me  to  find  aplace  for  good  old  Le  Vasseur;?>  who  was  over  eighty  years  of age,Here  is  an  instance  of  the  tricks  which  my  memory  plays  me.  Long  afterwriting  this,  I have  just  learnt,  while  talking  with  my  wife  about  her  good  oldfather,  that  it was  not  M.  d’Holbach,  but  M.  de  Chenonceaux,  at  that  time  one  ofthe  Committee  of  the  Hôtel  Dieu,*  who  procured  him  the  place.  I had  so  com-VENTURE  DE  VILLENEUVE4IIand  whose  wife,  feeling  the burden  too  heavy  for  her,  continuallybegged  me  to  relieve  her  of it.  He  was  put  into  a  poorhouse,  wherehis  great  age,  and  his  grief  at  finding  himself  separated  from  hisfamily,  brought  him  to  the  grave  almost  as  soon  as  he was  admitted.His  wife  and  children  felt but little  regret  for him, but  Thérèse,  wholoved  him  fondly,  has  never  consoled  herself  for  his  loss,  and  hasnever  forgiven  herself  for  allowing  him,  when  so  near  his  end,  tofinish  his  days  at  a  distance  from  her.About  the  same  time,  I received  a  visit  which I little  expected,  al-though  from  an  old acquaintance.  I speak of my  friend  Venture  whosurprised  me  one  fine  morning,  when  he  was  the  last  person  I wasthinking  of.  He  had  a  companion  with  him.  How  changed  he  ap-peared  to  be!  Instead  of his  former  graceful  manners,  I only  foundin  him  a  general  air  of dissipation,  which  prevented  me  from  open-ing  my  heart  to  him.  Either  my  eyes  were  no  longer  the  same,  ordebauchery  had  stupefied  his  intellect,  or  else  all  his  early  brilliancyhad  depended  upon  the  brilliancy  of  youth,  which  he  no  longerpossessed.  I treated  him  almost  with  indifference,  and  we  partedrather  coolly.  But,  after  he had  left,  the  remembrance  of our  formerintimacy  so  vividly  recalled  the  recollections  of  my  own  youth,  sodelightfully  and  so  completely  devoted  to  the  angelic  woman  whowas  now  no  less  changed  than  himself,  the  little  incidents  of  thathappy  time,  the  romantic  day’s  journey  to  Toune,  spent  so  inno-cently  and  delightfully  in  the  company  of  the  two  charming  girlswhose  only favour  had  been  a  kiss  on  the  hand,  which,  nevertheless,had  left  behind  such  lively,  touching  and  lasting  regret;  all  the  de-lightful  transports  of a  young  heart,  which  I had  then  felt in all theirforce,  and  which  I thought  were  gone  for  ever;  all  these  tenderreminiscences  made  me  weep  for  my  past  youth  and  its  delights,henceforth  lost  for  me.  Ah!  how  I should  have  wept  over  their  tardyand  melancholy  return,  if I had  foreseen  the  sorrow  they  were  tocost  me!Before  I left  Paris,  during  the  winter  which  preceded  my  retire-pletely  forgotten  him,  and  had  so  lively  a  recollection  of  M.  d’Holbach,  that  Icould  have  sworn  that  it had  been  he.The  oldest  hospital  in  Paris—TR.  |412THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUment,  I enjoyed  a  pleasure  quite  after  my  own  heart,  which I tastedin all  its purity.  Palissot,  a member  of the  Academy  of Nancy,  whowas  known  for  some  plays  which  he had  written,  had  just had  oneperformed  at  Lunéville,  before  the  King  of  Poland.  He  evidentlyhoped  to  gain  favour  by introducing,  in  this  piece,  a man  who  hadventured  to  cross  pens  with  the King.  Stanislaus,  who was  a generousman  and  not  fond  of satire,  was  indignant  that  anyone  should  ven-ture  to  introduce  personalities  in  his  presence.  M.  le  Comte  deTressan  wrote,  by this  Prince’s  orders,  to  d Alembert  and  myself,  toinform  me  that  it was  His  Majesty’s  intention  to  procure  the  expul-sion  of Palissot  from  the  Academy.  In reply,  I earnestly  entreated  M.de Tressan  to  intercede  with  the  King  in  Palissot’s  favour.  He  waspardoned,  and  M. de Tressan,  when  informing  me  of it in the King’sname,  added  that  the  incident  would  be  inserted  in  the  records  ofthe  Academy.  I replied  that  this  would  rather  be  inflicting  a  per-petual  punishment  than  granting  a  pardon.  At  last,  by dint  of  en-treaties,  I succeeded  in  obtaining  a  promise,  that  the  whole  affairshould  be  kept out  of the  records,  and  that  no  trace  of it should  ap-pear  in  public.  The  promise  was  accompanied,  both  on  the  part  ofthe  King  and  of M.  de  Tressan,  by protestations  of esteem  and  re-gard,  which  flattered  me  exceedingly;  and  I felt  on  this  occasion,that  the esteem  of those,  who  are  so  worthy  of it themselves,  producein the  soul  a feeling  far sweeter  and  nobler  than  that  of vanity.  I haveinserted  in my  collection  the  letters  of M.  de  Tressan,  together  withmy  replies.  The  originals  will  be found  in Bundle  A, Nos.  9,  ro  andinI quite  feel  that,  if these  Memoirs  ever  see  the  light,  I am  hereperpetuating  the memory  of an  incident,  all traces  of which  I desiredto  efface;  but  I have  handed  down  many  other  incidents  to  posteritywith  equal  reluctance.  The  great  object  of my  undertaking,  whichis ever  before my  eyes,  the indispensable  duty of carrying  it out  in itsfullest  extent,  will  not  permit  me  to  be  turned  aside  from  my  pur-pose  by unimportant  considerations,  which  would  divert  me  frommy  object.  In  my  singular  and  unique  situation,  I owe  too  much  totruth  to  owe  anything  further  to  anyone  else.  In  order  to  know  mewell,  one  must  know  me  in all  my  aspects,  both  good  and  bad.  MyConfessions  are  necessarily  connected  with  those  of  many  others.HIS  SENSE  OF  PERSECUTION413I make  both  with  equal  frankness  in  all  that  relates  to  myself,  as  Ido not  think  that  I am  bowñd  to  treat  anyone  else  with  greater  con-sideration  than  myself,  although  I should  certainly  like  to  do  so.  Idesire  to  be always  just and  truthful,  to  say  as  much  good  of othersas  I can,  only  to  speak  evil  when  it concerns  myself,  and  when  I amcompelled  to  do so.  Who,  in the position  in which  I have  been  placedby the  world,  has  the  right  to  demand  more  from  me?  My  Confes-sions  are  not  written  to  appear  during  my  lifetime,  or  that  of  thepersons  concerned  in them.  If I were  the  master  of my  own  destinyand  of that  of this  work,  it should  not  see  the  light  until  long  aftermy  death  and  their  own.  But  the  efforts,  which  the  dread  of truthcauses  my  powerful  oppressors  to  make,  in order  to  efface all  tracesof  it, force  me  to  do  all  that  the  most  scrupulous  fairness  and  thestrictest  sense  of justice  allow  me,  in  order  to  preserve  these  traces.If the remembrance  of me  were  destined  to  die  with  me,  rather  thancompromise  anyone,  I would,  without  a  murmur,  endure  an  unjustand  momentary  ignominy;  but, since  my  name  is destined  to  live, itis incumbent  upon  me  to  endeavour  to  hand  down  with  it the  re-membrance  of the  unfortunate  man  who  bore  it—such  as  he  reallywas,  not  such  as  his  unjust  enemies  incessantly  endeavour  to  repre:sent  him.nentBOOK  Ix[1756]I was  so  impatient  to  take  up  my  abode  in  the  Hermitage,  that  Icould  not  wait  for  the  return  of  fine  weather;  and,  as  soon  as  mynew  home  was  ready,  I hastened  to  betake  myself  thither,  amidstthe  loud  ridicule  of  the  Holbachian  clique,  who  openly  predictedthat  I should  not  be able  to  endure  three  months’  solitude,  and  thatthey  would  soon  see  me  returning  to  confess  my  failure  and  live  inParis  as  they did.  I myself,  who  had  been  for fifteen  years  out  of myelement,  and  now  saw  that  I was  on  the  point  of  returning  to  it,took  no  notice  of  their  raillery.  Ever  since  I had  been  thrown  intothe  world  against  my  will,  I had  not  ceased  to  regret  my  dear  Char-mettes,  and  the  blissful  life  which  I had  led  there.  I felt  that  I wasborn  for  the  country  and  retirement;  it  was  impossible  for  me  tolive  happily  anywhere  else.  At  Venice,  amidst  the  bustle  of  publicbusiness,  in  the  position  of  a  kind  of  diplomatic  representative,  inmy  proud  hopes  and  schemes  of promotion;  at  Paris—in  the  whirlof high  society,  in the  sensual  enjoyment  of suppers,  in the  brilliantspectacles  of the theatre,  in the cloud  of vain-glory  which  surroundedme—the  recollection  of  my  groves,  brooks,  and  solitary  walks  wasever  present  to  distract  and  sadden  me,  to  draw  from  me  sighs  oflonging  and  regret.  All  the  toil  to  which  I had  been  able  to  subjectmyself,  all  the  ambitious  schemes  which,  by  fits  and  starts,  hadroused  my  zeal,  had  no  other  end  in view  but that  of one  day enjoy-ing the  happy  country  ease,  to  which  at  that  moment I flattered  my-self  I had  attained.  Without  having  acquired  the  respectable  inde-pendence  which  I considered  could  alone  lead  me  to  it, I consideredthat,  owing  to  my  peculiar  position,  I was  able  to  dispense  with  it,and  to  reach  the  same  end  by quite a  different  road.  J had no  incomewhatever;  but  I had  a name,  I possessed  ability.  I was  temperate  and414THE  HERMITAGE415had  freed  myself from  the most  expensive  wants,  which  are  satisfiedin  obedience  to  popular  offinion.  Besides,  although  indolent,  I couldwork  hard  when  I chose;  and  my  indolence  was  not  so  much  thatof a  confirmed  idler  as  of an  independent  person,  who  only cares  towork  when  he  is in  the  humour  for  it.  My  copying  was  neither  abrilliant  nor  a  lucrative  employment,  but  it was  certain.  The  worldapproved  of  my  courage  in  having  chosen  it.  I could  always  feelsure  of  work,  and,  if  I worked  hard,  of  earning  sufficient  to  liveupon.  Two  thousand  francs,  the  remains  of the  profits  of the Devindu  Village  and  my  other  writings,  was  a  sufficient  capital  to  keepme  from  being  pushed  for  money  for  some  time,  and  several  workswhich  I had  in  hand  promised  me,  without  being  obliged  to  drawupon  the  booksellers,  a  sufficient  addition  to  my  funds  to  enable  meto  work  comfortably  without  over-exerting  myself  and  even  to  em-ploy to  advantage  the  leisure  of my  walks.  My little  household,  con-sisting  of  three  people,  who  were  all  usefully  employed,  was  notvery  expensive  to  keep  up.  In  short,  my  resources,  which  corre-sponded  to  my  wants  and  desires,  bade  fair  to  promise  me  lastinghappiness  in the  life  which  my  inclination  had  chosen  for  me.I might  have  thrown  myself  entirely  into  the most  lucrative  path,and, instead  of lowering  my  pen  to  copying,  I might  have  devoted  itentirely  to  writings,  which,  in  the  flight  which  I had  taken,  andwhich  I felt  myself  capable  of continuing,  might  have  enabled  meto  live  in  opulence,  even  in  luxury,  if only  I had  been  disposed  tocombine,  in  the  smallest  degree,  an  author’s  tricks  with  carefulnessto produce  good  books.  But  I felt  that  writing  for bread  would  soonhave  stifled  my  genius  and  destroyed  my  talents,  which  were  morethose  of the  heart  than  of  the  pen,  and  arose  solely  from  a  proudand  elevated  manner  of thinking,  which  alone  could  support  them.Nothing  great,  nothing  vigorous  can  proceed  from  a  pen  that  isentirely  venal.  Necessity,  perhaps  avarice,  might  have  led  me  towrite  with  greater  rapidity  than  excellence.  If  the  need  of  successhad  not  plunged  me  into  cabals,  it might have  made  me  strive  to  saywhat  might  please  the  multitude,  rather  than  what  was  true  anduseful,  and  instead  of a  distinguished  author  which  I might  possiblybecome,  I should  have  ended  in becoming  nothing  but  a  mere  scrib-bler.  No, no!  I have  always  felt  that  the position  of an  author  is not416THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUand  cannot  be  distinguished  or  respectable,  except  in  so  far  as  it isnot  a  profession.  It is too  difficult  to  think  nobly,  when  one  thinksonly in order  to  live.  In order  to  be able  and  to  venture  to  utter  greattruths,  one  must  not  be  dependent  upon  success.  I threw  my  booksamongst  the  public  with  the  sure  consciousness  of  having  spokenfor  the  general  good,  without  caring  for  anything  else.  If the  workwas  rejected,  so  much  the  worse  for  those  who  refused  to  profit  byit.  As  for  myself,  I did  not  need  their  approval  in  order  to  live;  myprofession  would  support  me,  if my  books  did  not  sell;  and  it wasjust  this  which  made  them  sell.It was  on  the  oth of April,  1756,  that  I left Paris,  never  to  live  inacity  again,  for  I do  not  reckon  the brief  periods  for  which  I after-  .wards  stayed  in  Paris,  London  and  other  cities,  only  when  passingthrough  them,  or  against  my  will.  Madame  d’Epinay  took  us  allthree  in  her  carriage;  her  farmer  took  charge  of my  small  amountof  luggage,  and  I was  installed  in  my  new  home  the  same  day.  Ifound  my  little  retreat  arranged  and  furnished  simply,  but  neatlyand  even  tastefully.  The  hand  which  had  attended  to  these  arrange-ments  conferred  upon  them  in  my  eyes  an  inestimable  value,  and  Ifound  it delightful  to  be  the  guest  of  my  friend,  in  a  house  of  myown  choice,  which  she  had  built  on  purpose  for  me.  Although  itwas  cold,  and  there  was  still  some  snow  on  the  ground,  the  earthwas  beginning  to  show  signs  of  vegetation:  violets  and  primrosescould  be seen,  the buds  were  beginning  to  open  on  the trees,  and  thenight of my  arrival  was  marked  by the  first  song  of the  nightingale,which  made  itself  heard  nearly  under  my  window,  in  a  wood  ad-joining  the  house.  When  I awoke,  after  a  light  sleep,  forgetting  mychange  of abode,  I thought  that  I was  still  in  the  Rue  de  Grenelle,when  suddenly  this  warbling  made  me  start,  and  in  my  delight  Iexclaimed,  “At  last  all  my  wishes  are  fulfilled!”  My  first  thoughtwas  to  abandon  myself  to  the  impression  caused  by the  rural  objectsby which  I was  surrounded.  Instead  of  beginning  to  set  things  inorder  in  my  new  abode,  I began  by making  arrangements  for  mywalks;  there  was  not  a  path,  not  a  copse,  not  a  thicket,  not  a  cornerround  my  dwelling,  which  I had  not  explored  by the  following  day.The  more  I examined  this  charming  retreat,  the  more  I felt  that  itwas  made  for  me.  This  spot,  solitary  rather  than  wild,  transportedPLANS  FOR  FUTURE  WORK417me  in  spirit  to  the  end  of the  world.  It possessed  those  impressive_  beauties  which  are  rarely  seen  in  the  neighbourhood  of  cities;  noone,  who  had  suddenly  been  transported  there,  would  have  believedthat  he  was  only  four  leagues  from  Paris.After  having  devoted  some  days to  my  rustic  enthusiasm,  I beganto  think  about  putting  my  papers  in  order  and  distributing  my  oc-cupations.  I set  aside  my  mornings  for copying,  as  I had  always done,and  my  afternoons  for  walking,  armed  with  my  little  note-bookand  pencil;  for, as  I had  never  been  able  to  write  or  think  freely,  ex-cept  sub  divo,'  I felt  no  temptation  to  change  my  method,  and  Ireckoned  that  the  forest  of Montmorency,  which  was  almost  at  mydoor,  would  in future  be my  study.  I had  several  works  already  be-gun,  and  I went  over  them  again.  I was  magnificent  enough  in  myschemes;  but,  amidst  the  bustle  of the  city,  they  had  hitherto  madebut  little  progress.  I counted  upon  being  able  to  devote a little  moreattention  to  them  when  I should  have  less  to  distract  me.  I think  thatI have  fairly  fulfilled  this  expectation;  and, for  a man  who  was  oftenill,  often  at  La  Chevrette,  Epinay,  Eaubonne  and  the  Chateau  ofMontmorency,  often  beset  in  his  own  house  by curious  idlers,  andalways  busy half  the  day in copying,  if one  counts  and  considers  thework  which  I produced  during  the  six  years  spent  at  the  Hermitageand  Montmorency,  I am  convinced  that  it will  be  agreed  that,  if Ilost my  time  during  this period,  it was  at least  not  wasted  in idleness.Of  the  different  works  which  I had  on  the  stocks,  the  one  whichI had  long had  in my  head,  at  which  I worked  with  the  greatest  in-clination,  to  which  I wished  to  devote  myself  all my  life, and  which,in my  own  opinion,  was  to  set  the  seal  upon  my  reputation—was  my“Institutions  Politiques.”  Thirteen  or  fourteen  years  ago,  I had  con-ceived  the  idea  of it, when,  during  my  stay  at  Venice,  I had  had  oc-casion  to  observe  the  faults  of  its  much-vaunted  system  of  govern-ment.  Since  then,  my  views  had  become  greatly  enlarged  by the  his-torical  study  of morals.  I had  come  to  see  that  everything  was  radi-cally  connected  with  politics,  and  that,  however  one  proceeded,  nopeople  would  be  other  than  the  nature  of its  government  made  it;thus  this  great  question  of the best  government  possible  appeared  tome  to  reduce  itself  to  the  following:  What  kind  of government  is1Jn  the  open  air.418THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUbest  adapted  to  produce  the  most  virtuous,  the most  enlightened,  thewisest,  and,  in  short,  the  best  people,  taking  the  word  “best”  in  itswidest  signification?  I thought  that  I perceived  that  this  questionwas  very  closely  connected  with  another,  very  nearly,  although  notquite  the  same.  What  is the  government  which,  from  its  nature,  al-ways  keeps  closest  to  the  law?  This  leads  to  the  question,  What  isthe  law?  and  to a series  of questions  equally  important.  I saw  thatall  this  led  me  on  to  great  truths  conducive  to  the  happiness  of thehuman  race,  above  all,  to  that  of  my  country,  in  which  I had  notfound,  in  the  journey  I had  just  made  thither,  sufficiently  clear  orcorrect  notions  of liberty  and  the  laws  to  satisfy  me;  and I believedthat this indirect  method  of communicating  them  was  the best  suitedto  spare  the pride of those  whom  it concerned,  and  to  secure  my  ownforgiveness  for  having  been  able  to  see  a little  further  than  them-selves.Although  I had  been  already  engaged  five  or  six  years  upon  thiswork,  it was  still  in  a  very  backward  state.  Books  of  this  kind  re-quire  meditation,  leisure,  and  tranquillity.  Besides,  I worked  at  it,as  the  saying  is, en  bonne  fortune,  without  communicating  my  in-tention  to  anyone,  not  even  to  Diderot.  I was  afraid  that  it mightappear  too  foolhardy,  considering  the  age  and  country  in  which  Iwrote,  and  that  the  alarm  of my  friends  would  embarrass  me  in itsexecution.’  I was  not  yet  sure  whether  it would  be finished  in time,and  in such  a  manner  as  to  admit  of its being  published  during  mylifetime.  I wished  to  be  able  to  devote  to  my  subject,  withcut  re-straint,  all the  efforts  which  it demanded  of me;  for  I felt convincedthat,  as  I had  no  satirical  vein,  and  never  desired  to  be  personal,  Ishould  always  be  free  from  blame,  if fairly  judged.  I naturally  de-2 Secretly.3It  was  the  prudent  strictness  of  Duclos  in  particular  that  inspired  me  withthis  apprehension.  As  for  Diderot,  somehow  or  other,  all  my  conversations  withhim  always  tended  to  make  me  more  satirical  and  caustic  than  I was  naturallyinclined  to  be.  This  very  circumstance  hindered  me  from  consulting  him  in  re-gard  to  an  undertaking,  in  which  I desired  to  employ  nothing  but  the  force  ofargument,  without  the  least  trace  of irritation  or  party-feeling.  The  tone  which  Iadopted  in  this  work  may  be gathered  from  that  of  the  “Contrat  Social,”  whichis taken  from  it.REFLECTIONS  ON  HIS  BOOKS419sired  to  employ  to  the  full the right of thin  ine: which  was  mine  bybirth,  but  always in  such 4 manner  as  to  show  respect  towards  thegovernment  under  which I lived,  without  ever  disobeying  its  laws;and, while  extremely  careful  not  to  violate  the law of nations,  I by nomeans  intended  to  renounce  the  advantages  it afforded,  owing  toany  considerations  of  fear.  I even  confess  that,  as  a  stranger  andliving in France,  I found  my position  advantageous  for speaking  thetruth  boldly.  I knew  well  that,  if I continued,  as  I intended,  to  havenothing  printed  in  the  State  without  permission,  I was  under  noresponsibility  to  anyone  as  regarded  my  principles  and  their  publica-tion  in  any  other  country.  I should  have  been  less  independent  evenat  Geneva,  where  the  authorities  had  the  right  to  criticise  the  con-tents  of my  writings  wherever  they  might  have  been  printed.  Thisconsideration  had  greatly  contributed  to  make  me  yield  to  the  en-treaties  of Madame  d’Epinay,  and  to  abandon  my  intention  of  set-tling  at  Geneva.  I felt,  as  I have  stated  in  my  “Emile,”  that,  unlessa  man  is a  born  intriguer,  he  must  by no  means  compose  his  booksin  the  bosom  of  his  country,  if  he  desires  to  devote  them  to  itswelfare.What  made  me  feel  still  happier  was,  that  I was  persuaded  thatthe  Government  of  France,  without  perhaps  regarding  me  with  avery  favourable  eye,  would  make  it a  point  of honour,  if not  to  pro-tect  me,  at  least  to  leave  me  unmolested.  This  appeared  to  me  a  verysimple,  but,  nevertheless,  very  clever  stroke  of  policy—to  make  amerit  of tolerating  what  could  not  be prevented,  since,  if  I had  beendriven  from  France,  which  was  all the  authorities  had a right  to  do,my  books  would  have  been  written  just the  same,  and  perhaps  withless  reserve;  whereas,  by leaving  me  undisturbed,  they  would  keepthe  author  as  surety  for  his  works;  and,  further,  would  abolish  prej-udices  deeply  rooted  in the rest  of Europe,  by gaining  the reputationof having  an  enlightened  respect  for  the  rights  of nations.Those  who  judge,  from  the  result,  that  my  confidence  deceivedme,  may  be  deceived  themselves.  In  the  storm  which  has  over-whelmed  me  my  books  have  served  as  an  excuse,  but  it was  againstmyself  personally  that  the  attack  was  directed.  They  cared  littleabout  the author,  but  were  eager  to  ruin  Jean  Jacques;  and  the  worstthing  that  could  be  found  in  my  writings,  was  the  honour  which420THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthey might possibly  pay  me.  But  let us  not  anticipate  the future.  I donot  know  whether  this  mystery—for  such  it still  is to  me—will  sub-sequently  be cleared  up  in the  eyes  of my  readers.  I only  know  that,if my  publicly-declared  principles  had  deserved  to  bring  upon  methe  treatment  I  have  suffered,  I should  have  become  its  victimsooner,  since  the  treatment  of all  my  writings,  in  which  these  prin-ciples are  unfolded,  with  the greatest  hardihood,  not  to  say  audacity,appeared  to  have  produced  its  effect  even  before  my  retirement  tothe  Hermitage,  without  it having  occurred  to  anyone,  I will  not  sayto  pick a  quarrel  with  me,  but  even  to  hinder  the  publication  of thework  in  France,  where  it was  sold  as  openly  as  in  Holland.  After-wards  the  “Nouvelle  Héloïse”  appeared  with  no  greater  difficulty,and,  I venture  to  say,  with  the  same  approval;  and,  what  seems  al-most  incredible,  the  profession  of  faith  of  this  same  Héloïse  isexactly  the  same  as  that  of the  Savoyard  Vicar.  All  that  is outspokenin the  “Contrat  Social”  had  formerly  appeared  in the  “Discours  surVInégalité.”  All that  is outspoken  in “Emile”  had  formerly  appearedin  “Julie.”  But  these  outspoken  passages  created  no  outcry  againstthe  two  earlier  works,  therefore  it could  not  have  been  they  whichcreated  it against  the latter.Another  undertaking,  much  of the same  nature,  the  idea  of whichhad  occurred  to  me  later,  occupied  my  attention  more  at  this  mo-ment.  This  was  “Selections”  from  the  works  of the  Abbé  de  Saint-Pierre,  of whom I have  hitherto  been  unable  to  speak,  having  beencarried  away  by the  thread  of my  narrative.  The  idea  had  been  sug-gested  to  me,  after  my  return  from  Geneva,  by the  Abbé  de  Mably,not  directly,  but  through  the  intervention  of  Madame  Dupin,  whohad a sort  of interest  in getting  me  to  take  it up.  She  was  one  of thethree  or  four  pretty  women  of Paris  whose  spoilt  child  the  old  Abbéhad  been;  and,  if she  had  not  decidedly  enjoyed  the  preference,  shehad  at  least  shared  it with  Madame  d’Aiguillon.  She  preserved  forthe  memory  of the  good  old  man a feeling  of respect  and  affectionwhich  did  honour  to  both, and  her  vanity  would  have  been  flatteredby seeing  the  still-born  works  of her  friend  brought  to  life  again  byher  secretary.  These  works  themselves,  however,  contained  some  ex-cellent  things,  but  so  badly  expressed,  that  it was  a  wearisome  under-taking  to  read  them;  and  it is astonishing  that  the  Abbé,  who  re-.WORKS  OF  THE  ABBE  DE  SAINT-PIERRE421garded  his  readers  merelygas  grown-up  children,  should,  neverthe-less,  have  addressed  them  as  men,  to  judge  by the  little  trouble  hetook  to  gain  a  hearing  from  them.  With  this  idea  the  task  had  beenproposed  to  me,  as  useful  in itself,  and  very  suitable  for  a man  whowas  an  industrious  worker,  but  idle  as  an  originator,  who,  findingthe effort  of thinking  very  fatiguing,  preferred,  in things which  wereto  his  taste,  to  elucidate  and  advance  the ideas  of another  to  creatingideas  of his  own.  Besides,  as  I did  not  confine  myself  to  the  part  ofa  mere  translator,  I was  not  prohibited  from  sometimes  thinking  formyself;  and  I was  at liberty  to  give my  work  such  a  form,  that  manyimportant  truths  might  find  their  way  into  it under  the  mantle  ofthe Abbé  de Saint-Pierre  with  less  risk  than  under  my  own.  In addi-tion,  the  undertaking  was  no  light one;  it was  a  question  of nothingless than  reading,  thinking  over,  and  making  selections  from  twenty-three  volumes,  diffuse,  confused,  full  of prolixities,  repetitions,  andnarrow  or  false  views,  amongst  which  it was  necessary  to  fish  outsome  few  that  were  great  and  lofty,  which  gave  one  the  courage  toendure  the  painful  task.  I myself  was  often  on  the  point  of  relin-quishing  it, if I could  have  drawn  back  with  decency—but,  by ac-cepting  the  Abbé’s  manuscripts,  which  were  given  to  me  by hisnephew  the Comte  de Saint-Pierre,  at  the  entreaty  of Saint-Lambert,I had  in a  manner  pledged  myself  to  make  use  of them,  and  it wasnecessary  for me  either  to  return  them,  or  to  endeavour  to  turn  themto  account.  It was  with  the  latter  intention  that  I had  brought  thesemanuscripts  to  the  Hermitage,  and  it was  the  first  work  to  whichI intended  to  devote  my  spare  time.I contemplated  a  third  work,  the idea of which  was  due  to  certainobservations  which  J had  made  upon  myself;  and I felt  the  more  en-couraged  to  undertake  it, as  I had  reason  to  hope  that  I might  pro-duce  a  book  really  useful  to  mankind,  even  one  of the  most  usefulthat  could  be offered  to  it, if the  execution  worthily  corresponded  tothe  plan which  I had  sketched  for myself.  The  observation  has  beenmade,  that  most  men,  in the  course  of their  lives,  are  frequently  un-like  themselves,  and  seem  transformed  into  quite  different  men.  Itwas  not  to  establish  a  truth  so  well  known  that  I desired  to  write  abook;  I had  a  newer  and  even  more  important  object.  This  was  toinvestigate  the  causes  of  these  changes,  confining  myself  to  thoseTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU422which  depended  on  ourselves,  in  order  to  show  how  we  might  our-selves  control  them,  in order  to  make  ourselves  better  and  more  cer-tain  of ourselves.  For  it is unquestionably  more  difficult  for  an  hon-ourable  man  to  resist  desires,  already  fully  formed,  which  he oughtto  overcome,  than  it is to  prevent,  change  or  modify  these  same  de-sires  at  the  fountain-head,  supposing  him  to  be in a position  to  tracethem  back  to  it.  A man  resists  temptation  at  one  time  because  he  isstrong;  another  time,  he  yields  to  it because  he  is  weak;  if he  hadbeen  the same  as  before,  he would  not  have  yielded.While  examining  myself,  and  endeavouring  to  find,  in  the  caseof others,  upon  what  these  different  conditions  of being  depended,  Idiscovered  that  they  depended  in  great  part  upon  the  impressionwhich  external  objects  had  previously  made  upon  us,  and  that  we,being  continually  modified  by  our  senses  and  our  bodily  organs,exhibited,  without  perceiving  it,  the  effect  of  these  modificationsof ourselves,  in our  ideas,  our  feelings,  and  even  in  our  actions.  Thenumerous  and  striking  observations  whch  I had  collected  were  un-assailable,  and,  from  their  physical  principles,  seemed  to  me  welladapted  to  furnish  an  external  rule  of conduct,  which,  being  alteredaccording  to  circumstances,  might  place  or  keep  the  mind  in  thecondition  most  favourable  to  virtue.  From  how  many  errors  wouldthe  reason  be  preserved,  how  many  vices  would  be  strangled  attheir  birth,  if mankind  knew  how  to  compel  the  animal  economy  tosupport  the  moral  order,  which  it so  frequently  disturbs!  Differentclimates,  seasons,  sounds,  colours,  darkness,  light, the elements,  food,noise,  silence,  movement,  repose—all  affect  the  bodily  machine,  andconsequently  the mind;  all afford  us  a thousand  opportunities,  whichwill  almost  infallibly  enable  us  to  govern  those  feelings  in  theirfirst  beginnings,  by  which  we  allow  ourselves  to  be  dominated.Such  was  the  fundamental  idea  which  I had  already  sketched  uponpaper,  and  from  which I expected,  in the  case  of well-disposed  per-sons,  who,  loving  virtue  sincerely,  mistrust  their  weakness,  a  surereffect,  inasmuch  as  it appeared  easy  to  me  to  make  of it a  book  asagreeable  to  read  as  it was  to  write.  However,  I have  made  but littleprogress  in  the  work,  the  title  of  which  was  La  Morale  Sensitive,or  Le  Matérialisme  du  Sage.  Distractions,  the  cause  of  which  thereader  will  soon  learn,  prevented  me  from  giving  it attention,  andHIS  “DICTIONARY  OF  MUSIC”423he  will  also  learn  what  was  the  fate  of my  sketch,  which is  moreclosely  connected  with  my own  than  it might  appear.Besides  all  this,  I had  for  some  time  contemplated  a  system  ofeducation,  to  which  Madame  de  Chenonceaux,  who  trembled  forher  son’s  future,  as  the  result  of the  education  which  he  was  receiv-ing from  his father,  had  begged  me  to  give attention.  The  power  offriendship  caused  this  subject,  although  less  to  my  taste  in  itself,  toclaim  my  attention  more  than  all the  rest.  For  this  reason  this  is theonly  project,  amongst  all  those  which  I have  just  mentioned,  that  Ihave  carried  out.  The  object which  I proposed  to  myself  in this  workshould,  in my  opinion,  have  brought  the  author a different  reward.But let us  not  here  anticipate  this  melancholy  topic.  I shall  have  onlytoo  much  reason  to  speak  of it in the  sequel.All these  various  projects  afforded  me  material  for meditation  dur-ing my  walks,  for, as  I believe  I have  already  said,  I can  only  thinkwhile  walking:  as  soon  as  I stop,  I can  think  no  longer;  my  braincan  only  move  with  my  feet.  However,  I had  taken  the  precautionof  providing  myself  with  an  indoor  task  for  rainy  days.  This  wasmy  “Dictionary  of  Music”;  the  scattered,  mutilated,  and  raw  ma-terials  of  which  made  it necessary  to  rewrite  the  work  almost  en-tirely.  I bought  some  books  which  I required  for  the  purpose.  I hadspent  two  months  in making  extracts  from  a number  of others  whichI borrowed  from  the  King’s  library,  and  some  of which  I was  evenallowed  to  take  with  me  to  the  Hermitage.  These  were  my  materialsfor  compiling  indoors,  when  the  weather  did  not  allow  me  to  goout,  or  when  I was  tired  of  my  copying.  This  arrangement  suitedme  so  well,  that  I adhered  to  it both  at  the  Hermitage  and  at  Mont-morency,  and  even,  subsequently,  at  Motiers,  where  I finished  thiswork  while  continuing  others;  and  I always  found a real  relaxationin a  change  of occupation.I followed  for  some  time,  with  tolerable  exactness,  the  distribu-tion  of time  that  I had  marked  out  for  myself,  and  was  very  wellsatisfied  with  it; but,  when  the  fine  weather  brought  back  MadamedEpinay  more  frequently  to  Epinay  or  La  Chevrette,  I found  thatattentions,  which  at  first  did  not  cost  me  much,  but  which  I hadnot  reckoned  upon,  greatly  upset  my  other  arrangements.  I havealready  said  that Madame  d’Epinay had some  very  amiable  qualities;THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU424she was  very  devoted  to  her  friends  and  served  them  most  zealously;and,  as  she  spared  neither  time  nor  trouble,  she  certainly  deservedthat  they  should  show  her  some  attentions  in return.  Hitherto  I hadfulfilled  this  duty  without  feeling  that  it was  one;  but at  last  I dis-covered  that  I had  loaded  myself  with  a  chain,  the  weight  of whichonly  friendship  prevented  me  from  feeling:  I had  made  the  burdenheavier  by my  dislike  of crowded  rooms.  Madame  d’Epinay  availedherself  of this  to  make  a proposal,  which  seemed  to  suit  me  well,  andsuited  her  even  better;  this  was  that  she  should  let  me  know  whenshe  would  be  alone,  or  nearly  so.  I consented,  without  foreseeingto what  I was  binding  myself.  The consequence  was,  that  I no  longervisited  her  when  it was  convenient  to  me,  but  when  it suited  her,  sothat I was  never  sure  of having  a  whole  day at  my  disposal.  This  tieconsiderably  spoiled  the  pleasure  which  my  visits  to  her  had  for-merely  afforded  me.  I found  that  the  freedom  which  she  had  sooften  promised  me,  was  only granted  to  me  on  condition  that  I nevermade  use  of it; and, when  once  or  twice  I attempted  to  do so,  it gaveoccasion  to  so  many  messages,  so  many  notes  and  such  apprehensionsconcerning  my  health,  that I plainly  saw  that nothing  but being com-pletely  confined  to  my  bed  could  excuse  me  from  running  to  her  atthe  first  intimation  of  her  wishes.  I was  obliged  to  submit  to  thisyoke.  I submitted,  and  with  tolerably  good  grace  for  so  bitter  anenemy  of  dependence  as  I was,  since  my  sincere  attachment  to  herprevented  me  in great  measure  from  feeling  the chain  which  accom-panied  it.  She  also  filled  up  in  this  manner,  more  or  less,  the  voidwhich  the absence  of her  usual  circle  left  in  her  amusements.  It wasfor her a very  poor  stop-gap,  but it was  better  than  complete  solitude,which  was  unbearable  to  her.  However,  she  was  able  to  fill  it muchmore  easily  after  she  began  to  try  her  hand  at  literature,  and  tookit into  her head  to  write,  no  matter  how,  romances,  letters,  comedies,tales, and  such  trifles.  But what  amused  her  was  not  so  much  writingas  reading  them;  and  if she  by chance  managed  to  scribble  two  orthree  consecutive  pages,  it was  absolutely  necessary  for  her  to  feelsure  of having at least two  or  three  favourable  hearers,  when  she hadcompleted  this  enormous  task.  I rarely  had  the  honour  of being  oneof  the  chosen,  except  by the  favour  of  another.  By  myself,  I washardly  ever  considered  at  all  in anything,  not  only  in the  society  ofMADAME  D’EPINAY425Madame  d’Epinay,  but  i#  that  of  M.  d'Holbach,  and  whereverGrimm  set  the  fashion.  This  complete  insignificance  suited  me  per-fectly well, except  in a téte-d-téte,  when  I did not  know  what  attitudeto  assume,  as  I did  not  venture  to  talk  about  literature,  of  whichI was  not  competent  to  judge,  nor  about  gallantry,  since  I was  toobashful,  and  I feared,  more  than  death  itself,  the  ridiculous  appear-ance  of an  old  beau.  Besides,  this  idea  never  occurred  to  me  whenwith  Madame  d’Epinay,  and  would  perhaps  never  have  occurredto me  once  in my  life,  even  had  I spent  it altogether  in her  society;not  that  I had  any  personal  repugnance  to  her—on  the  contrary,  Iperhaps  loved  her  too  much  as a friend,  to  be  able  to  love  her  as  alover.  It gave  me  pleasure  to  see  her  and  to  talk  with  her.  Her  con-versation,  although  agreeable  enough  in society,  was  dull  in private;my  own,  which  was  by no  means  fluent,  was  not  much  assistanceto  her.  Ashamed  of a too  lengthy  silence,  I strained  every  nerve  toenliven  the  interview;  and,  although  it  often  tired  me,  it  neverwearied  me.  I was  very  glad  to  show  her  trifling  attentions,  to  giveher  little  brotherly  kisses,  which  did  not  appear  to  excite  her  sensu-ality  any  more  than  my  own,  and  that  was  all.  She  was  very  thin,very  pale, her  breast  was  as  flat as  my  hand.  This  defect  alone  wouldhave  been  sufficient  to chill  me;  my  heart  and  senses  have  never  beenable  to  see  a  woman  in  one  who  has  no  breasts;  and  other  reasons,which  it would  be useless  to mention,  always caused  me  to  forget  hersex.Having  thus  made  up  my  mind  to  an  inevitable  servitude,  I re-signed  myself  to  it without  resistance,  and  found  it, at  least  duringthe first year,  less burdensome  than  I should  have  expected.  Madamed’Epinay,  who  usually  spent  the  whole  summer  in the  country,  onlyspent part of the  summer  of this  year  there,  either  because  her  affairsrequired  her  to  be more  at  Paris,  or  because  the  absence  of Grimmrendered  her  stay  at  La  Chevrette  less  agreeable.  I profited  by theintervals  of her  absence,  or  when  she  had  much  company,  to  enjoymy  solitude  with  my  good  Thérése  and  her  mother  in  a  mannerwhich  made  me  thoroughly  appreciate  it.  Although  for  some  yearsI had  visited  the  country  pretty  frequently,  I had  rarely  enjoyed  it;and  those  excursions,  always  taken  in  the  company  of  pretentiouspersons,  and  always  spoiled  by a  feeling  of restraint,  only  whettede426THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUmy  appetite  for country  pleasures,  and,  the  nearer  the  glimpse  I hadof them,  the  more  I felt  the  want  of them.  I was  so  weary  of salons,waterfalls,  groves,  flower-gardens,  and  their  still  more  wearisomeexhibitors;  I was  so  tired  of stitching,  pianos,  sorting  wool,  makingbows,  foolish  witticisms,  insipid  affectations,  trifling  story-tellers,and  big suppers  that,  when  I caught  a  glimpse  of  a  simple  thorn-bush,  a  hedge,  a  barn,  or  a meadow;  when I inhaled,  while  passingthrough  a  hamlet,  the  fragrance  of  a  savoury  chervil  omelette;when  I heard  from  a  distance  the  rustic  refrain  of  the  disquiéres,*I wished  all  rouge,  furbelows,  and  ambergris®  at  the  devil;  and,regretting  the  good-wife’s  homely  dinner  and  the  native  wine,  Ishould  have  been  delighted  to  slap the  face  of M.  le chef  and  M.  lemaitre,  who  forced  me  to  dine  at  my  usual  supper-hour,  and  to  supat  a  time  when  I am  usually  asleep;  above  all,  I should  have  likedto  slap MM.  les laquais,  who  devoured  with  their  eyes  the  morsels  Iate,  and, if I was  not  prepared  to  die  of thirst,  sold  me  their master’sadulterated  wine  at  ten  times  the  price  I should  have  paid  for  wineof a  better  quality  at  an  inn.Behold  me,  then,  at  last,  in my  own  house,  in a  pleasant  and  soli-tary  retreat,  able  to  spend  my  days  in  the  independent,  even,  andpeaceful  life,  for  which  I felt  that  I was  born.  Before  describing  theeffect  of this  situation,  so  new  to  me,  upon  my  heart,  it behoves  meto  recapitulate  its  secret  inclinations,  that  the  progress  of these  newmodifications  may  be better  followed  up  in its origin.I have  always  considered  the  day which  united  me  to  my  Théréseas  that  which  determined  my  moral  being.  I needed  an  attachment,since  that  which  should  have  sufficed  me  had been  so  cruelly  broken.The  thirst  for  happiness  is never  quenched  in man’s  heart.  Mammawas  growing  old  and  degraded.  It  was  clear  to  me  that  she  couldnever  again  be happy  in this  world.  Thus,  the  only thing left  for mewas  to  seek  for a  happiness  which  should  be my  own,  since  I had  forever  lost  all  hope  of sharing  hers.  I drifted  for  some  time  from  oneidea,  from  one  plan,  to  another.  My  voyage  to  Venice  would  haveplunged  me  into  public  affairs,  if the  man  with  whom I was  to  be“Female  goatherds.5 Used  for  perfume.REFLECTIONS  UPON  THERESE427connected  had  been  possessed  of  common  sense.  I am  easily  dis-couraged,  especially i in  difficult  and  long-winded  undertakings.  Myill-success  in  this  disgusted  me  with  all  others;  and  since,  in  accord-ance  with  my  old  maxim,  I looked  upon  distant  objects  as  decoysfor  fools,  I determined  to  live  henceforth  without  any  fixed  plan,  asI no  longer  saw  anything  in  life  which  might  have  tempted  me  toexert  myself.It was  just  at  that  time  that  we  became  acquainted.  The  gentlecharacter  of this  good  girl appeared  to  me  so  well  suited  to  my  own,that I united  myself  to  her  by means  of an  attachment  which  neithertime  nor  wrongs  have  been  able  to  lessen,  and  everything  whichought  to  have  broken  it has  only  increased  it.  The  strength  of thisattachment  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel,  when  I lay bare  the  woundsand  pangs  with  which  she  has  rent  my  heart  during  the  height  ofmy  misery,  without  a  word  of  complaint  to  anyone  ever  escapingme,  until  the moment  when  I am  writing  these  lines.When  it becomes  known  that,  after  having  done  all  and  bravedeverything,  to  avoid  being  separated  from  her,  after  having  livedwith  her  for  twenty-five  years,  in  spite  of  destiny  and  mankind,  Ifinally  married  her  in my  old  age,  without  any  expectation  or  solici-tation  on  her  part,  without  any  engagement  or  promise  on  my  own,it will  be believed  that  a  mad  love,  which  turned  my  head  from  thefirst  day, gradually  led  me  on  to  the  last  extravagance;  and  it will  bethe  more  readily  believed,  when  the  special  and  weighty  reasons,which  should  have  prevented  me  froin  ever  doing  such  a  thing,  alsobecome  known.  What  then  will  the  reader  think,  when  I declare  tohim,  in all  the  sincerity  which  he must  now  recognise  as  part  of mycharacter,  that,  from  the  first  moment  when  I saw  her  up  to  thisday,  I never  felt  the  least  spark  of love  for  her;  that  I no  more  de-sired  her  possession  than  that  of Madame  de  Warens,  and  that  thesensual  needs,  which  I satisfied  in her person,  were  only for me  theseof  sexual  impulse,  without  being  in  any  way  connected  with  theindividual?  He  will  perhaps  believe  that,  being  constituted  differ-ently  from  other  men,  I was  incapable  of feeling  love,  since  it  didnot  enter  into  the  feelings  which  attached  me  to  those  women  whohave  been  most  dear  to  me.  Patience,  reader!  the  fatal  moment  is ap-proaching,  when  you  will  be only  too  rudely  undeceived.428THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUI repeat  myself;  I know  it; but  it is  unavoidable.  The  first,  thegreatest,  the  most  powerful,  the most  irrepressible  of  all  my  needswas  entirely in  my  heart;  it was  the need  of a  companionship  as  inti-mate as  was  possible;  it was  for that  purpose  especially that  I neededa  woman  rather  than  a  man,  a  female  rather  than  a  male  friend.This  singular  want  was  such,  that  the  most  intimate  corporal  unionhad  been  unable  to  satisfy  it; I should  have  wanted  two  souls  in thesame  body;  without  that,  I was  always  conscious  of a  void.  I thoughtthat  the  moment  had  come,  when  I should  feel  it  no  longer.  Thisyoung  person,  amiable  by reason  of  a  thousand  excellent  qualities,and,  at  that  time,  even  by her  personal  appearance,  which  was  with-out  a  trace  of unnaturalness  or  coquetry,  would  have  confined  mywhole  existence  in  herself,  if  I had  been  able  to  confine  hers  to  me,as  I had  hoped.  I had  nothing  to  fear  from  men;  I am  certain  thatI am  the  only  man  she  ever  truly  loved,  and  her  passions  were  socool,  that  she  rarely  felt  the  want  of  other  men,  even  when  I hadreased  to  be one  to  her  in this  respect.  I had  no  family;  she  had  one;and  this  family,  the  members  of  which  were  all  of  a  far  differentcharacter  from  herself,  was  not  such  that  I could  ever  have  regardedit  as  my  own.  This  was  the  first  cause  of  my  unhappiness.  Whatwould  I  not  have  given  to  have  been  able  to  make  myself  hermother’s  child!  I tried  all I could  to  do so, but never  succeeded.  It wasuseless  for  me  to  attempt  to  unite  all our  interests;  it was  impossible.She  always  created  interests  different  from  mine,  set  them  in opposi-tion  to  mine,  and  even  to  those  of her  daughter,  which  were  alreadyidentical  with  them.  She  and  her  other  children  and  grandchildrenbecame  so  many  leeches,  and  the least  injury  they did  to  Thérése  wasthat  of robbing  her.  The  poor  girl,  who  was  accustomed  to  give  in,even  to  her  nieces,  allowed  herself  to  be  robbed  and  ruled  withoutsaying  a  word;  and  it pained  me  to  see  that,  while  I exhausted  mymoney  and  good  advice  in  vain,  I could  do  nothing  to  assist  her.  Itried  to  get  her  away  from  her  mother;  but  she  always  opposed  it.I respected  her  opposition,  and  esteemed  her  the  more  for  it;  butthis  refusal  was  none  the less prejudicial  to  her interests  and  my  own.Devoted  to  her mother  and  the rest  of her family,  she belonged  moreto  them  than  to  me,  even  more  than  to  herself.  Their  greed  was  notso  ruinous  to  her  as  their  advice  was  pernicious;  in  short,  if, thanksREFLECTS ON  HIS  CONDITION429to  her  love  for  me  and  hes naturally  good  disposition,  she  was  notcompletely  their  slave,  she  was  sufficiently  so  to  prevent,  in  greatpart,  the  effect  of the  good  principles  which  I endeavoured  to  instilinto  her,  and  to  cause  us  always  to  remain  two,  in  spite  of  all  myefforts  to  the  contrary.Thus  it came  to  pass  that,  notwithstanding  a  sincere  and  mutualattachment,  upon  which  I had  bestowed  all  the  tenderness  of  myheart,  the  void  in  this  heart  was  never  completely  filled.  Children,who  might  have  effected  this,  were  born  to  us;  but  this  only  madematters  worse.  I shuddered  at  the  thought  of handing  them  over  tethe  care  of  this  badly  brought  up  family,  to  be  brought  up  evenworse.  The  risks  of bringing  up  at  the  Foundling  Hospital  were  farless.  This  reason  for  the  resolution  which  I took,  stronger  than  allthose  which  I stated  in my  letter  to  Madame  de Francueil,  was,  how-ever,  the  only  one  which  I did  not  venture  to  tell  her.  I preferred  toremain  not  completely  cleared  from  so  grave  a  reproach,  in order  tospare  the  family  of  a  person  whom I loved.  But  it may  be  judged,from  the  behaviour  of  her  miserable  brother,  whether,  in  spite  ofanything  that  may  be  said  about  it, I should  have  been  justified  inexposing  my  children  to  the  risk  of receiving  a  similar  education  tohis.Being  unable  to enjoy to  the full  this intimate  intercourse  of whichI felt  the  need,  I  sought  to  supplement  it  in  a  manner  which,although  it did  not  completely  fill  the  void,  caused  me  to  feel  it less.For  want  of a friend,  who  should  be entirely  devoted  to  me,  I neededfriends  whose  impulse  might  overcome  my  indolence.  For  this  rea-son  I cultivated  and  strengthened  my  relations  with  Diderot  and  theAbbé  de  Condillac,  entered  into  fresh  and  still  closer  relations  withGrimm,  and,  in  the  end,  owing  to  the  unlucky  Essay,  the  historyof which  I have  related,  I found  myself  thrown  back,  without  anyidea  of it, upon  literature,  which  I thought  I had  abandoned  for  ever.My first  appearance  led  me  by a  new  path  into  another  intellec-tual  world,  the  simple  and  lofty  economy  of which  I was  unable  tolook  upon  without  enthusiasm.  My  continued  attention  to  it soonconvinced  me,  that  there  was  nothing  but  error  and  folly in the  doc-trine  of  our  philosophers,  and  misery  and  oppression  in  our  socialarrangements.  Deluded  by my  foolish  pride,  I thought  that  I was430THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUborn  to  destroy  all  these  illusions,  and,  believing  that,  in  order  togain  a  hearing,  it was  necessary  for  my  manner  of life  to  harmonizewith  my  principles,  I adopted  the  singular  course  which  J have  notbeen  permitted  to  continue,  in which  I set  an  example  for  which  mypretended  friends  have  never  forgiven  me,  which  at  first  made  meridiculous,  and  would  have  ended  by making  me  respectable,  if ithad  been  possible  for  me  to  persevere  in it.Hitherto  I had  been  good;  from  that  moment  I became  virtuous,or,  at  least,  intoxicated  with  virtue.  This  intoxication  had  com-menced  in my  head,  but  had  passed  on  into  my  heart.  The  noblestpride sprang  up  therein  on  the ruins  of uprooted  vanity.  I pretendednothing;  I became  really  what  I seemed;  and,  for  the  four  years  atleast,  during  which  this  state  of effervescence  lasted  in  ail  its  force,there  was  nothing  great  or  beautiful,  which  a  man’s  heart  could  con-tain,  of  which  I was  not  capable  between  heaven  and  myself.  Thiswas  the  origin  of  my  sudden  eloquence,  of  the  truly  celestial  firewhich  inflamed  me  and  spread  over  my  first  writings,  and  which  forforty  years  had  not  emitted  the  least  spark,  since  it  was  not  yetkindled.I was  truly  transformed;  my  friends  and  acquaintances  no  longerrecognised  me.  I was  no  longer  the  shy, bashful  rather  than  modestman,  who  did  not  venture  to  show  himself  or  utter  a word,  whoma  playful  remark  disconcerted,  whom  a  woman’s  glance  caused  toblush.  Audacious,  proud,  undaunted,  I carried  with  me  everywherea  confidence,  which  was  firmer  in  proportion  to  its  simplicity,  andhad  its  abode  rather  in  my  soul  than  in  my  outward  demeanour.The  contempt  for the manners,  principles,  and  prejudices  of my  age,with  which  my  deep  meditations  had  inspired  me,  rendered  me  in-sensible  to  the  raillery  of those  who  possessed  them,  and  I pulverisedtheir  trifling  witticisms  with  my  maxims,  as  I should  have  crushedan  insect  between  my  fingers.  What  a  change!  All  Paris  repeatedthe  penetrating  and  biting  sarcasms  of the  man  who,  two  years  be-fore  and  ten  years  afterwards,  never  knew  how  to  find  the  thing  heought  to  say,  nor  the  expression  he  ought  to  use.  Anyone  who  en-deavours  to  find  the condition  of all others  most  contrary  to  my  na-ture  will  find  it  in  this.  If  he  desires  to  recall  one  of  those  briefmoments  in my  life  during  which  I ceased  to  be myself,  and  becameHIS  TRANSFORMATION_431another,  he will  find  it agajn  in  the  time  of which  I speak;  but, in-stead  of lasting  six  days or  six  weeks,  it lasted  nearly  six  years,  andwould,  perhaps,  have  lasted  until  now,  had  it not  been  for  the  spe-cial circumstances  which  put an  end  to  it, and  restored  me  to  Nature,'  above  which I had  attempted  to  elevate  myself.This  change  began  as  soon  as  I had  left  Paris  and  the  sight of thevices  of the great  city ceased  to  keep  up  the  indignation  with  whichit had  inspired  me.  As  soon  as I lost  sight of men,  I ceased  to  despisethem;  as  soon  as I lost  sight  of  the  wicked,  I ceased  to  hate  them.My heart,  little  adapted  for  hatred,  only  caused  me  to  deplore  theirwretchedness,  from  which  it did  not  distinguish  their  wickedness.This  gentler,  but  far  less  lofty,  frame  of mind  soon  dulled  the  burn-ing enthusiasm  which  had  so  long  carried  me  away,  and,  withoutanyone  perceiving  it, even  without  perceiving  it  myself,  I becameagain  shy,  courteous,  and  timid;  in  a  word,  the  same  Jean  Jacquesas  I had  been  before.If this  revolution  had  merely  restored  me  to  myself,  and  had  goneno  further,  all  would  have  been  well;  but,  unfortunately,  it  wentmuch  further,  and  carried  me  away  rapidly  to  the  other  extreme.From  that  time  my  soul,  in  a  state  of agitation,  no  longer  kept  itscentre  of gravity,  and its oscillations,  ever  renewed,  always destroyedit.  I must  describe  at  some  length  this  second  revolution—the  ter-rible  and  fatal  epoch  of a  destiny  without  example  among  mankind.As we  were  only a party  of three  in our  retreat,  leisure  and  solitudenaturally  increased  the  intimacy  of our  intercourse.  This  was  whatoccurred  in the  case  of Thérése  and  myself.  We  spent  some  delight-ful  hours  together  under  the  shady  trees,  more  delightful  than  anyI had  ever  enjoyed  before.  She  herself  appeared  to  appreciate  it morethan  she  had  hitherto  done.  She  opened  her  heart  to  me  without  re-serve,  and  told  me  things  about  her  mother  and  her  family,  whichshe  had  been  strong-minded  enough  to  conceal  from  me  for  a  longtime.  Both  had  received  from  Madame  Dupin  a  number  of presentsintended  for  me,  which  the cunning  old  woman,  to  save  me  annoy-ance,  had  appropriated  for  herself  and  her  other  children,  withoutleaving  any  for  Thérése,  whom  she  strictly  forbade  to  say  anythingto  me  about  them—a  command  which  the poor  girl obeyed  with  anobedience  which  is almost  incredible.432THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUA thing which  surprised  me  still  more,  was  the  discovery  that, be-sides  the  secret  conversations  which  Diderot  and  Grimm  had  fre-quently  held  with  both,  in  order  to  estrange  them  from  me,  butwhich  had  failed  in their  object  owing  to  the  opposition  of Thérèse,both  of them  had  since  then  held  frequent  secret  conferences  withher mother,  without  her  knowing  anything  of what  was  brewing  be-tween  them.  She  only knew  that  sundry  little  presents  played  a  partin  it;  that  there  were  little  journeys  to  and  fro,  which  they  at-tempted  to  conceal  from  her,  of  the  reason  of which  she  was  com-pletely  ignorant.  At the time  when  we  left Paris,  Madame  le Vasseurhad  long been  in the habit  of calling upon  Grimm  two  or  three  timesa  month,  and  spending  some  time  there  with  him  in private  conver-sation,  on  which  occasions  even  his  servant  was  always  sent  out  ofthe  room.I judged  that  the  motive  of  all  this  was  no  other  than  the  samescheme  into  which  they  had  attempted  to  make  the  daughter  enter,by promising  to  procure  for  them,  through  Madame  d’Epinay’s  in-fluence,  a licence  to retail  salt, or  a tobacco-shop;  in a word,  by tempt-ing them  with  the  prospect  of gain.  They  had  represented  to  thesewomen  that,  as  I was  not  in  a  position  to  do  anything  for  them,  Icould  not  do  anything  for  myself  either,  on  account  of them.  As  Isaw  nothing  in  all  this  but  good  intentions,  I was  not.  absolutelyannoyed  with  them.  Only  the  secrecy  revolted  me,  especially  on  thepart  of the  old  woman,  who,  in addition,  daily  showed  herself  moretoadying  and  wheedling  in  her  manner  towards  me,  which,  how-ever,  did  not  prevent  her  from  incessantly  reproaching  her  daughterin  private  with  being  too  fond  of  me  and  telling  me  everything,saying that  she was  a fool, and would  find  herself  taken  in in the end.This  woman  possessed  in the  highest  degree  the  art  of killing  twobirds  with  one  stone,  of  concealing  from  one  what  she  receivedfrom  another,  and  from  me,  what  she  received  from  all.  I mighthave  pardoned  her  for  her  avarice,  but  I could  not  forgive  her  dis-simulation.  What  could  she  have  to  conceal  from  me—from  me,whose  happiness  she  so  well  knew  depended  almost  entirely  uponher  daughter’s  happiness  and  her  own?  What  I had  done  for  herdaughter,  I had  done  for  myself,  but  what  I had  done  for  her  de-served  some  acknowledgment  on  her  part;  she  at  least  should  haveMADAME  LE  VASSEUR433been  grateful  to  her  daughter  for  it, and  should  have  loved  me  also:out  of  love  for  her  who  léved  me.  I had  rescued  her  from  uttermisery;  from  me  she received  the means  of existence,  to  me  she owedall  those  acquaintances  whom  she  so  well  knew  how  to  make  useof.  Thérése  had  long  supported  her  by her  own  exertions,  and  wasnow  supporting  her  with  bread  supplied  by me.  She  owed  ail  tothis  daughter,  for whom  she had  done  nothing,  while  her  other  chil-dren,  on  whom  she  had  bestowed  marriage  portions,  and  for  whomshe  had  ruined  herself,  far  from  helping  to  support  her,  devouredher  substance  and  my  own.  It  seemed  that,  under  these  circum:stances,  she  should  have  regarded  me  as  her  only  friend,  as  her  mostreliable  protector,  and,  far  from  keeping  me  in  the  dark  as  to  myown  affairs,  far  from  joining  in a  plot against  me  in my  own  house,should  have  faithfully  informed  me  of  everything  that  might  con-cern  me  when  she  learned  it sooner  than  I did.  In  what  light,  then,could  I regard  her  deceitful  and  mysterious  conduct?  Above  all,what  was  I to  think  of the  sentiments  with  which  she  endeavouredto  inspire  her  daughter?  What  monstrous  ingratitude  must  havebeen  the  mother’s,  when  she  sought  to  instil  it into  the  daughter!All  these  considerations  finally  alienated  my  heart  so  completelyfrom  this  woman,  that  I could  no  longer  look  upon  her  without  con-tempt.  However,  I never  ceased  to  treat  the  mother  of  the  partnerof my  life  with  respect,  and  to  show  her  in  everything  almost  theconsideration  and  esteem  of  a  son;  but  I must  admit  that  I nevercared  to  remain  long  in  her  company,  and  I am  ill  able  to  put  re-straint  upon  myself.This,  again,  is  one  of  the  brief  moments  of  my  life,  in  which  Ihave  been  almost  within  sight  of happiness,  without  being  able  toattain  to  it, although  through  no  fault  of  my  own.  If this  womanhad  been  of good  character,  we  should,  all  three,  have  been  happyto  the  end  of our  days;  the  last  survivor  would  alone  have  deservedpity.  Instead  of this,  the  reader  will  see  the  development  of  events,and  be able  to  judge  whether  I could  have  altered  it.Madame  le  Vasseur,  seeing  that  I  had  gained  ground  in  herdaughter’s  heart  while  she  had  lost  it, endeavoured  to  recover  it;and,  instead  of  regaining  my  esteem  through  the  daughter,  at-tempted  to  alienate  her  from  me  altogether.  One  of the  means  that434THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUshe  employed  was  to  invoke  the  assistance  of  her  family.  I hadbegged  Thérése  not  to  invite  any  of  them  to  the  Hermitage,  andshe  had  promised  not  to  do  so.  They  were  invited  in  my  absence,without  consulting  her,  and  they  then  made  her  promise  to  saynothing  to  me  about  it. When  the  first  step  was  taken,  the  rest  waseasy.  When a person  once  keeps  anything  secret  from  one  whom  heloves, he soon  feels  no  scruple  about  concealing  everything  from  him.As  soon  as  I was  at  La  Chevrette,  the  Hermitage  was  full  of people,who  enjoyed  themselves  tolerably  well.  A mother  has  always  greatinfluence  over  a  daughter  of good  disposition;  nevertheless,  in  spiteof all her efforts,  the  old woman  could  never  induce  Thérése  to  enterinto  her  views,  or  persuade  her  to  join the conspiracy  against  me.  Asfor  herself,  she  made  up  her  mind  irrevocably.  As  she  saw,  on  theone  side, her daughter  and  myself,  at  whose  house  she could  live  andthat  was  all;  and,  on  the  other,  Diderot,  Grimm,  d’Holbach,  andMadame  d’Epinay,  who  promised  much  and  gave  something,  itnever  entered  her  head  that  she  could  possibly  be  in  the  wrong  incompany  with  a  farmer-general’s  wife  and  a  Baron.  If I had  beenmore  observant,  I should  have  seen,  from  that  moment,  that  I wasnourishing  a  serpent  in my  bosom;  but  my  blind  confidence,  whichnothing  had  as  yet diminished,  was  such  that  it never  even  occurredto me,  that  anyone  could  wish  to  injure  a  person  who  deserved  to  beloved.  While  I saw  a  thousand  conspiracies  formed  around  me,  allE could  complain  of  was  the  tyranny  of  those  whoin  I called  myfriends,  and  whose  only  object,  as  I imagined,  was  to  force  me  tobe happy in their  own  fashion  rather  than  in my  own.Although  Thérése  refused  to  enter  into  the  conspiracy  with  hermother,  she  again  kept  her  secret.  Her  motive  was  praiseworthy;I will  not  undertake  to  decide  whether  she  did  well  or  ill.  Twowomen  who  have  secrets  are  fond  of chattering  together  about  them.This  brought  them  closer  together;  and  Thérése,  by dividing  herattentions,  sometimes  caused  me  to  feel  that  I was  alone,  for  I couldno  longer  regard  as  a  society  the  relations  between  us  three.  Then  itwas  that  I felt keenly  the  mistake  which  I had  committed,  at  the be-ginning  of  our  connection,  in  not  having  taken  advantage  of  thepliability  which  was  the result  of her  affection,  to  improve  her  mindand  furnish  her  with  a  store  of knowledge,  which  by drawing  usSTRANGE  CONDUCT  OF  THERESE435closer  together  in  our  retifément,  would  have  filled  up  her  timeand  my  own  agreeably,  and  prevented  us  from  ever  noticing  thelength  of a  téte-d-téte.  Not  that  our  conversation  ever  flagged,  or  thatshe  showed  any  signs of weariness  during  our  walks;  but  we  had nota  sufficient  number  of ideas  in common  to  make a great  stock.  Wecould  no  longer  speak  incessantly  of  our  plans,  which  henceforthwere  limited  to  plans  of enjoyment.  The  objects  around  us  inspiredme  with  reflections  which  were  beyond  her  comprehension.  An  at-tachment  of  twelve  years  had  no  longer  need  of  words;  we  kneweach  other  too  well  to  be  able  to  find  anything  fresh.  The  only  re-source  left  was  gossip,  scandal,  and feeble  jokes. It is in solitude  espe-cially  that  one  feels  the  advantage  of  living  with  someone  whoknows  how  to  think.  I had  no  need  of  this  resource  to  amuse  my-self  in her  society;  but  she  would  have  needed  it, in order  to  be ablealways  to  amuse  herself  in mine.  The  worst  thing  was,  that  we  wereobliged  to  hold  our  interviews  secretly;  her mother,  who  had  becomea  nuisance  to  me,  forced  me  to  look  out  for  opportunities.  I feltunder  restraint  in my  own  house—this  is saying  everything.  The  at-mosphere  of love  ruined  simple  friendship.  We  enjoyed  an  intimateintercourse  without  living  in intimacy.As  soon  as  I thought  I observed  that  Thérése  sometimes  soughtexcuses  to  avoid  the  walks  which  I proposed  to  her,  I ceased  to  pro-pose  them,  without  being  annoyed  with  her  for not  finding  as  muchpleasure  in them  as  myself.  Pleasure  does  not  depend  upon  the  will.I was  sure  of  her  affection,  and  that  was  enough  for  me.  As  longas  my  pleasures  were  hers,  I enjoyed  them  with  her;  when  this  wasnot  the  case,  I preferred  her  contentment  to  my  own.Thus  it happened  that,  half  deceived  in  my  expectation,  leadinga  life  after  my  own  inclination,  in  a  spot  which  I had  chosen  formyself,  with  a person  who  was  dear  to  me,  I nevertheless  at  lengthfound  myself  almost  isotated.  What  I still  lacked  prevented  mefrom  enjoying  what  I possessed.  In the  matter  of happiness  and  en-joyment,  I must  have  all  or  nothing.  It will  afterwards  be  seen  whyI now  resume  theI have  considered  this  explanation  necessary.thread  of my  narrative.I believed  that  I possessed  a  veritable  treasure  in  the  manuscriptswhich  the Comte  de Saint-Pierre  had given me.  On examining  them436THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUmore  attentively,  I found  that  they  were  little  more  than  the  col-lection  of his  uncle’s  printed  works,  corrected  and  annotated  by hisown  hand,  together  with  a  few  trifling  fragments  which  had  neverbeen  published.  His  writings  on  moral  subjects  confirmed  me  in theidea  which  some  letters  from  him,  which  Madame  de  Créqui  hadshown  me,  had  given  me,  that  he  possessed  much  greater  talentthan  I had  imagined;  but, after  a  thorough  examination  of his  polit-ical  works,  I found  nothing  but  superficial  views,  or  schemes,  usefulindeed,  but  rendered  impracticable  by the  idea  which  the  authorcould  never  get  rid  of,  that  men  acted  in  accordance  with  theirlights  rather  than  their  passions.  The  high  opinion  of  modernlearning  which  he  entertained  had  caused  him  to  adopt  this  falseprinciple  of wisdom  brought  to  perfection,  the  foundation  of all  hisproposed  institutions,  and  the  origin  of  all  his  political  sophisms.This  singular  man,  an  honour  to  his  age  and  his  kind—the  onlyman  perhaps  who,  since  the  human  race  has  existed,  has  had  noother  passion  than  that  of reason—nevertheless  wandered  from  oneerror  to  another  in  all  his  systems,  in  his  desire  to  make  men  likehimself,  instead  of taking  them  as  they are,  and  as  they will  continueto  be. He laboured  only  for imaginary  beings,  while  believing  that hewas  working  for  his  contemporaries.Recognising  all  this,  I found  myself  somewhat  embarrassed  as  tothe  form  I should  give  to  my  work.  By  allowing  the  author’s  vi-sionary  ideas  to  remain  undisturbed,  I should  render  no  service;  byrefuting  them  rigorously,  I should  be  guilty  of  discourtesy,  sincethe delivery  of his manuscripts,  which  I had  accepted  and  even  askedfor,  imposed  upon  me  the  obligation  of  treating  their  author  hon-ourably.  I finally  decided  upon  the  course  of action  which  appearedto  me  most  becoming,  most  judicious,  and  most  useful:  this  was,  topresent  the  author’s  and  my  own  ideas  separately,  and,  with  thisobject,  to  enter  into  his  views,  to  elucidate  them,  to  enlarge  them,and  to  omit  nothing  which  could  secure  them  full  appreciation.My work,  therefore,  was  to  be composed  of two  entirely  separateparts.  The  one  was  intended  to explain,  in the manner  I have  just in-dicated,  the  different  schemes  of the author;  in the  other,  which  wasnot  intended  to  appear  until  the first had  produced  its effect, I shouldhave  brought  my  judgment  to bear  upon  these  same  schemes,  which,HIS  READING437I confess,  might  certainly  have exposed  them  sometimes  to  the  fateof  the  sonnet  of  the  “Misanthrope.”  At  the  commencement  of  thewhole  work I intended  to  give a  life  of the  author,  for  which  I hadcollected  a  quantity  of  sufficiently  good  material,  which  I flatteredmyself  I should  be able  to  make  use  of without  spoiling.  I had  seenthe Abbé  de Saint-Pierre  two  or  three  times  in his old  age,  and  the re-spect  which  I had  for his memory  was  a  guarantee  to  me  that,  uponthe  whole,  M.  le Comte  would  not  be  dissatisfied  with  the  mannerin which I treated  his  relation.I made  my  first attempt  upon  the  “Paix  perpetuelle,”  the  most  im-portant  and  the  most  elaborate  of all  the  works  which  made  up  thecoltection;  and,  before  I began  my  reflections  upon  it,  I had  thecourage  to  read  absolutely  everything  that  the  Abbé  had  writtenupon  this  fine  subject,  without  once  allowing  myself  to  be  dis-couraged  by its  prolixity  and  repetitions.  As  the  public  has  seen  thisabstract,  I have  nothing  to  say about  it. The judgment  which  I passedupon  it has never  been  printed,  and  I do not  know  if it ever  will  be;but  it  was  written  at  the  same  time.  I next  went  on  to  the  “Poly-synodie,”  or  “Plurality  of Councils,”  a  work  written  in the  Regent’stime,  to  support  the  form  of  administration  which  he  had  intro-duced,  which  led  to  the  expulsion  of  the  Abbé  from  the  FrenchAcademy,  in consequence  of certain  attacks  upon  the  preceding  ad-ministration,  which  irritated  the  Duchesse  de  Maine  and  the  Car-dinal  de  Polignac.  I finished  this  work  in  the  same  manner  as  thepreceding,  both  abstract  and  judgment;  but  I stopped  there,  as  I didnot  intend  to  finish  this  undertaking,  which  I ought  never  to  havecommenced.The  consideration  which  caused  me  to  abandon  it presented  itselfnaturally,  and  it is  surprising  that  it never  occurred  to  me  before.Most  of  the  Abbé’s  writings  consisted  of  or  contained  critical  ob-servations  upon  certain  aspects  of the  French  system  of government,and  some  of  them  were  so  outspoken,  that  he  had  reason  to  con-gratulate  himself  upon  escaping  scot-free.  But,  in  the  ministerialoffices,  he had  always  been  looked  upon  as a sort  of preacher  ratherthan  as  a  serious  politician,  and  he  was  allowed  to  say  what  hepleased,  because  it was  well  known  that  nobody  would  listen  to  him.If I had  succeeded  in  getting  him  a  hearing,  the  case  would  haveí438THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUbeen  different.  He  was  a  Frenchman,  I was  not;  and,  if I repeatedhis  censures,  even  in  his  own  name,  I ran  the  risk  of  being  askedrudely,  but  with  perfect justice,  what  I was  interfering  with.  Luckily,before  going  too  far,  I saw  the  handle  I was  about  to  give  to  othersagainst  myself,  and  I speedily  withdrew.  I knew  that,  living  alonein the  midst  of men,  all  more  powerful  than  myself,  I should  neverbe  able,  in  spite  of  all  that  I could  do,  to  shelter  myself  from  anyinjury  they  might  choose  to  inflict  upon  me.  There  was  only  onething  that  depended  upon  myself:  to  make  it impossible  for  them,should  they desire  to  injure me,  to  do so  without  injustice.  This  prin-ciple,  which  made  me  give  up  the  Abbé  de  Saint-Pierre,  has  fre-quently  caused  me  to  renounce  far  more  cherished  schemes.  Thosewho  are  always  ready  to  look  upon  misfortune  as  a  crime,  would  begreatly  surprised  if  they  knew  the  pains  I have  taken,  all  my  lifethrough,  to  prevent  anyone  being  able  to  say  to  me  with  truth,  intime  of my  misfortune:  “You  have  well  deserved  it.”The  relinquishment  of this  work  left me  for  some  time  undecidedas  to  what  I should  undertake  next;  and  this  interval  of  idlenesswas  my  ruin,  since  it gave  me  time  to  direct  my  thoughts  towardsmyself,  for  lack  of  anything  outside  to  claim  my  attention.  I nolonger  had  any  schemes  for  the  future  to  amuse  my  imagination;it was  not  even  possible  for  me  to  form  any,  since  my  present  situa-tion  was  exactly  that  in  which  all  my  desires  were  united;  I couldimagine  no  more,  and  yet  my  heart  was  still  conscious  of  a  void.My condition  was  the  more  cruel,  as  I saw  none  that  could  be  pre-ferred  to  it. I had  centred  my  tenderest  affection  upon a person  aftermy  own  heart,  who  returned  it.I lived  with  her  without  restraint,  and,  so  to  say,  as  I pleased.Nevertheless,  a  secret  feeling  of  oppression  never  left  me,  whetherI was  with  her  or  away  from  her.  While  possessing  her,  I felt  thatshe  was  still  not  mine;  and  the  mere  idea  that  Ý was  not  all in all toher, caused  her  to  seem  hardly  anything  to  me.Thad  friends  of both  sexes,  to  whom  I was  attached  by the  purestfriendship  and  the  most  perfect  esteem.  I counted  upon  the  truestreturn  of these  feelings  on  their  part,  and  it never  even  occurred  tome  ever  once  to  doubt  their  sincerity;  yet  this  friendship  was  morepainful  to  me  than  agreeable,  owing  to  their  obstinacy,  even  theirMEMORIES  OF  LES  CHARMETTES439affectation,  in  opposing  al¥ my inclinations,  tastes,  and  manner  oflife.  It  was  enough  for  me  to  seem  to  desire  anything  which  con-cerned  myself  alone,  and  which  did  not  depend  upon  them,  inorder  to  see  them  all  immediately  combine  to  force  me  to  renounceit. This  obstinate  desire  to  control  me  absolutely  in  all  my  fancies—which  was  the  more  unjust  as,  far from  attempting  to  control  theirs,I did  not  even  take  the  trouble  to  make  myself  acquainted  withthem—became  so  cruelly  burdensome  to  me,  that  at  last  I never  received  a  letter  from  them  without  feeling,  when  I opened  it, a certainalarm,  which  was  only  too  well  justified  by  the  perusal  of  it.  Ithought  that,  in  the  case  of people  who  were  all  younger  than  my-self,  and  who  all  stood  in  sore  need  themselves  of  the  good  advicewhich  they  lavished  upon  me,  it was  treating  me  too  much  like  achild.  “Love  me,”  said  I to  them,  “as  I love  you;  as  for  the  rest,  donot  interfere  with  my  affairs,  any  more  than  I interfere  with  yours.That  is all  I ask  of you.”  If they  have  granted  me  one  of these  tworequests,  it has  certainly  not  been  the  latter.I had  a  retired  abode  in  a  charming  solitude.  Master  within  myown  four  walls,  I could  live  there  in my  own  fashion,  without  beingsubjected  to  anyone’s  control.  But  this  abode  imposed  upon  me  cer-tain  duties  which  were  pleasant  to  fulfil,  but  indispensable.  My lib-erty  was  altogether  precarious.  In  a  position  of  greater  subjectionthan  if I had  been  under  orders,  I could  not  help being  so  by inclina-tion.  When  I got  up,  I could  never  once  say  to  myself:  I will  spendthis  day  as  I please.  Besides  being  dependent  upon  Madame  d’Epi-nay’s arrangements,  I had  still  a more  importunate  claim  upon  me—that  of the  public  and  chance  visitors.  The  distance  of my  residencefrom  Paris  did  not  prevent  the  daily arrival  of crowds  of idlers,  who,not  knowing  what  to  do with  their  own  time,  wasted  mine  withoutthe  slightest  scruple.  When  I least  expected  it,  I was  mercilesslyassailed,  and  I rarely  made  agreeable  plans  for  spending  the  daywithout  finding  them  upset  by  the  arrival  of  some  unexpectedvisitor.In  short,  amidst  the  blessings  which  I had  most  eagerly  longedfor,  finding  no  pure  enjoyment,  I returned  by fits  and  starts  to  theunclouded  days  of  my  youth,  and  I sometimes  cried,  with  a  sigh,to  myself,  “Ah!  this  is not  Les  Charmettes!”440.  THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUThe  recollections  of the  different  periods  of my  life  led  me  to  re-flect  upon  the  point  which  I had  reached,  and  I saw  myself,  alreadyin  my  declining  years,  a  prey  to  painful  evils,  and  believed  that  Iwas  approaching  the  end  of  my  career,  without  having  enjoyed  inits  fulness  scarcely  one  single  pleasure  of those  for  which  my  heartyearned,  without  having  given  scope  to  the  lively  feelings  which  Ifelt  it had  in  reserve,  without  having  tasted  or  even  sipped  that  in-toxicating  pleasure  which  I felt  was  in  my  soul  in  all  its  force,  andwhich,  for  want  of an  object,  always  found  itself  kept in check,  and.  unable  to  give  itself  vent  in  any  other  way  but  through  my  sighs.How  came  it  to  pass  that  I, a  man  of  naturally  expansive  soul,for  whom  to  live  was  to  love,  had  never  yet  been  able  to  find  afriend  entirely  devoted  to  myself,  a  true  friend—I,  who  felt  admi-rably adapted  to  be one  myself?  How  came  it to  pass  that,  with  feel-ings  so  easily  set  on  fire,  with  a  heart  full  of affection,  I had  neveronce  been  inflamed  with  the  love  of  a  definite  object?  Consumedby  the  desire  of  loving,  without  ever  having  been  able  to  satisfyit completely,  I saw  myself  approaching  the  portals  of old  age,  anddying  without  having  lived.These  melancholy  but  touching  reflections  caused  me  to  turn  mythoughts  towards  myself  with  a  regret  which  was  not  without  itspleasure.  It seened  to  me  that  destiny  owed  me  something  which  ithad  not  yet granted  me.  Why had  I been  born  with  delicate  faculties,if they  were  to  remain  unemployed  to  the  end?  The  consciousnessof  my  inner  value,  while  calling  forth  the  feeling  of  having  beenunfairly  depreciated,  in some  degree  compensated  for  it, and  causedme  to  shed  tears  which  it was  a  pleasure  to  me  to  allow  to  flow.I pursued  these  reflections  in the most  beautiful  season  of the year,in the  month  of June,  in cool  groves,  amidst  the  song  of the nightin-gale and  the  purling  of brooks.  Everything  combined  to  plunge  meagain  into  that  too  seductive  indolence,  to  which  I was  naturallyinclined,  but  from  which  the  hard  and  austere  frame  of  mind,  towhich a long period  of inner  ferment  had  brought  me,  should  havedelivered  me  once  and  for  all.  Unhappily,  I went  on  to  recall  thedinner  at  the  Chateau  of Toune,  and  my  meeting  with  those  twocharming  girls  at  the  same  season  of the  year,  and  in  a  spot  almostlike  that  where  I was  at the moment.  This  recollection,  rendered  stillREFLECTIONS  ON  HIS  CONDITION441more  charming  by  the  breath  of  innocence  which  pervaded  it,brought  back  others  of  the’same  kind.  Presently,  I saw  gatheredround  me  all the  objects  which  had  touched  my  heart  with  emotionduring  my  youth—Mademoiselle  Galley,  Mademoiselle  de Graffen-ried,  Mademoiselle  de  Breil,  Madame  Basile,  Madame  de Larnage,my  young  pupils,  even  the  piquant  Zulietta,  whom  my  heart  cannever  forget.  I saw  myself  surrounded  by a seraglio  of  houris  andby my  old  acquaintances,  the  liveliest  desire  for  whom  was  no  newsensation  for  me.  My  blood  became  heated  and  inflamed,  my  headswam,  in  spite  of  my  hairs  already  growing  grey:  and  the  seriouscitizen  of  Geneva,  the  austere  Jean  Jacques,  close  upon  his  forty-fifth  year,  suddenly  became  again  the  love-sick  shepherd.  The  in-toxication  which  seized  me,  although  so  sudden  and  extravagant,was,  notwithstanding,  so  strong  and  lasting,  that  nothing  less  thanthe  unforeseen  and  terrible  crisis  of  the  unhappiness  into  which  itplunged  me  would  have  been  able  to  cure  me  of it.However,  this  intoxication,  to  whatever  point  it was  carried,  didnot  go  so  far  as  to  make  me  forget  my  age  and  my  position,  flatterme  with  the  idea  that  I could  still  inspire  love,  or  make  me  attemptto  communicate  this  devouring,  but  barren  fire,  by  which,  fromchildhood,  I felt  my  heart  in  vain  consumed.  I did  not  hope,  I didnot  even  desire  it;  I knew  that  the  time  for  love  was  over;  I was  tookeenly conscious  of the ridicule  heaped  upon  elderly  beaux,  to exposemyself  to  it, and  I was  not  the  man  to  become  presumptuous  andself-confident  in my  declining  years,  after  having  so  rarely  displayedsuch  qualities  during  my  best  days.  Besides,  as  a  friend  of peace,  Ishould  have  dreaded  domestic  storms,  and  I loved  Thérése  too  sin-cerely,  to  expose  her  to  the  annoyance  of seeing  me  entertain  livelierfeelings  for others  than  those  with  which  she herself  inspired  me.What  did  I do  on  this  occasion?  The  reader  must  have  alreadyguessed,  if  he  has  hitherto  followed  me  with  the  least  attention.The  impossibility  of  grasping  realities  threw  me  into  the  land  ofchimeras,  and,  seeing  nothing  in existence  which  was  worthy  of myenthusiasm,  I sought nourishment  for it in an  ideal  world,  which  myfertile  imagination  soon  peopled  with  beings  after  my  own  heart.This  resource  was  never  so  welcome  to  me  or  so  fruitful.  In my  con-tinued  ecstasies,  I intoxicated  myself  with  full  draughts  of the  mostTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU442delightful  sensations  that  have  ever  entered  the  heart  of man.  I en-tirely  forgot  the  human  race,  and  created  for  myself  societies  of per-fect  beings,  heavenly  alike in  their  beauties  and  virtues;  trusty,  ten-der,  and  loyal  friends  such  as  I never  found in  this  world  below.I found  such  pleasure in  soaring  into  the  empyrean,  in  the  midst  ofthe  charming  objects  by which  I was  surrounded,  that  I passed  thehours  and  days  in  it without  taking  count  of  them,  and,  forgettingeverything  else, no  sooner  had I hastily  eaten  a  morsel  of food,  than  Iburned  to  escape,  in  order  to  run  to  my  groves  again.  When  readyto  set  out  for  my  world  of  enchantment,  if  I saw  some  wretchedmortals  arrive  who  came  to  keep  me  back  upon  earth,  J was  unableto  conceal  or  restrain  my  annoyance,  and,  losing  control  over  myself,[ gave  them  so  rude a reception,  that  it  might  almost  have  beencalled  brutal.  This  only  increased  my  reputation  as  a  misanthrope,whereas  it  would  have  gained  for  me  a  very  different  one,  if  theworld  had  read  my  heart  better.At the height of my  greatest  exaltation,  I was  suddenly  pulled backlike  a  kite  by the  string,  and  restored  to  my  place  by Nature,  assistedby a  smart  attack  of  my  complaint.  I employe?  the  only  remedywhich  afforded  me  relief,  that  is  to  say,  the  bougies,  which  put  astop  to  my  celestial  amours;  for,  besides  that  a  man  is  seldomamorous  when  he  is suffering,  my  imagination,  which  is  animatedin  the  open  air  and  under  the  trees,  languishes  and  dies  in  a  roomand  under  the  rafters  of a  ceiling.  I have  often  regretted  that  Dryadsdid  not  exist;  it would  most  assuredly  have  been  amongst  them  thatI should  have  found  the  object  of my  attachment.Other  domestic  disturbances  occurred  at  the  same  time  to  in-crease  my  annoyance.  Madame  le Vasseur,  while  paying me  the mosteffusive  compliments,  was  doing her utmost  to  alienate  her  daughterfrom  me.  I received  letters  from  my  old  neighbourhood,  in  which  Iwas  informed  that  the  worthy  old  woman,  without  my  knowledge,had  contracted  debts  in the  name  of Thérése,  who  knew  it, but  saidnothing  to  me  about  it. That  I had  to  pay  them  annoyed  me  muchless  than  their  having  been  kept  a  secret  from  me.  How  could  she,from  whom  I had  never  kept a  secret,  keep  one  from  me?  Can  oneconceal  anything  from  those  whom  one  loves?  The  Holbachianclique,  finding  that  I never  went  to  Paris,  began  to  be  seriouslyWRITES  TO  VOLTAIRE443afraid  that  I was  comfortable  in  the  country,  and  that  I should  befoolish  enough  to  remain  there.  Then  began  those  intrigues,  the  ob-ject  of  which  was  to  get  me  back,  indirectly,  to  the  city.  Diderot,who  did  not  want  to  show  himself  so  soon,  began  by  detachingDeleyre  from  me,  whom  I had  made  acquainted  with  him,  andwho  feceived  and  handed  on  to  me  the  impressions  which  Diderotdesired  to  give him,  without  perceiving  their  real  purpose.Everything  seemed  in  league  to  tear  me  from  my  delightful  andfoolish  reveries.  Before  I had  recovered  from  my  attack  of  illness,I received  a  copy  of the  poem  on  the  destruction  of Lisbon,  whichI supposed  was  sent  to  me  by the  author.  This  put  me  under  theobligation  of writing  to  him, and  saying  something  about  his compo-sition.  This  I did  in  a  letter  which  was  printed  a  long  time  after-wards  without  my  consent,  as  will  be  mentioned  later.Surprised  to  hear  this  poor  man,  overwhelmed,  so  to  speak,  byfame  and  prosperity,  declaim  bitterly  against  the  miseries  of  thislife,  and  declare  everything  to  be  bad,  I formed  the  senseless  planof  bringing  him  to  himself  again,  and  proving  to  him  that  every-thing was  good.  Voltaire,  while  always  appearing  to  believe  in God,has  never  really  believed  in  anything  but  the  Devil,  since  his  pre-tended  God  is  nothing  but  a  malicious  being,  who,  according  tohim,  finds  no  pleasure  except  in  doing*injury.  The  absurdity  ofthis  doctrine,  which  is  obvious,  is  particularly  revolting  in  a  manloaded  with  blessings  of every  kind,  who,  from  the  bosom  of  hap-piness,  endeavours  to  reduce  his fellows  to  despair  by the fearful  andcruel  picture  of all  the  calamities  from  which  he is himself  exempt.I, who  had a better  right to  count  and  weigh  the  evils  of human  life,examined  them  impartially,  and  proved  to  him  that  Providence  isacquitted  of  responsibility  in  regard  to  every  single  one,  and  thatthey  all  have  their  origin  in  man’s  abuse  of  his  faculties,  ratherthan  in  the  nature  of things  themselves.  I treated  him  in this  letterwith  all  possible  regard,  consideration,  delicacy,  and,  I venture  tosay,  respect.  But,  as  I knew  how  easily  his  self-love  was  irritated,  Idid  not  send  the  letter  to  himself,  but  to  Dr.  Tronchin,  his  physi-cian  and  friend,  with  full  authority  to  deliver  or  suppress  it, which-ever  he  thought  best.  Tronchin  gave  him  the  letter.  Voltaire,  inreply,  wrote  me  a  few  lines  to  the  effect  that,  as  he  was  ill and  also444THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUnurse  to  someone  else,  he  would  defer  his  answer  to  another  occa-sian,  and  said  not  a  word  about  the  subject.  Tronchin,  who  sent  thisletter  to  me,  enclosed  it in  one  from  himself,  in  which  he  expressedlittle  esteem  for the person  who  had handed  it to  him.I have  never  published,  or  even  shown,  these  two  letters,  since  Iam  not  fond  of making  a  show  of such  petty  triumphs;  the  originalswill  be  found  in  my  collection  (Bundle  A, Nos.  20  and.21).  Sincethen,  Voltaire  has  published  the  answer  which  he promised  me,  butnever  sent.  It is no  other  than  the  romance  of  “Candide,”  of whichI cannot  speak,  because  I have  not  read  it.All  these  distractions  ought  to  have  cured  me  completely  of  myfantastic  amours,  and  they  were  perhaps  a  means  offered  me  byHeaven  to  prevent  their  fatal  consequences;  but  my  unlucky  starwas  in the ascendant,  and  I had  scarcely  begun  to  go out  again,  whenmy  heart,  my  head,  and  my  feet  again  took  the  same  paths.  I saythe  same,  in  certain  respects;  for  my  ideas,  a  little  less  exalted,  thistime  remained  upon  earth,  but  made  so  dainty a selection  of every-thing  amiable  that  could  be  found,  that  this  selection  was  hardlyless  chimerical  than  the  imaginary  world,  which  I had  abandoned.I represented  to  myself  love  and  friendship,  the  two  idols  of myheart,  under  the  most  enchanting  forms.  I took  delight  in adorningthem  with  all  the  charms  of  the  sex  which  I had  always  adored.  Iimagined  two  female  friends,  rather  than  two  of  my  own  sex,  be-cause  if  an  instance  of  such  friendship  is  rarer,  it  is  at  the  sametime  more  amiable.  I bestowed  upon  them  two  analogous,  but  dif-ferent,  characters;  two  faces,  not  perfect,  but  after  my  taste,  lightedup  by kindliness  and  sensibility.  I made  one  dark,  the  other  fair;one  lively,  the  other  gentle;  one  prudent,  the  other  weak,  but  withso  touching  a  weakness,  that  virtue  seemed  to  gain  by it.  I gave  toone  a  lover,  whose  tender  friend  the  other  was,  and  even  somethingmore;  but  I admitted  no  rivalry,  no  quarrelling,  no  jealousy,  be-cause  it is difficult  for  me  to  imagine  painful  feelings,  and  I did  notwish  to  mar  this  charming  picture  by anything  which  degradedNature.  Smitten  by my  two  charming  models,  I identified  myselfwith  the  lover  and  the  friend  as  far  as  it was  possible  for  me;  butI made  him  young  and  amiable,  bestowing  upon  him,  in  addition,the virtues  and  defects  which  I was  consctous  of in myself.“REVERIES445In order  to  place my  chagacters  in the  midst  of suitable  surround-ings,  I successively  passed  in  review  the  most  beautiful  spots  that  Ihad  seen  in the  course  of my  travels.  But  I found  no  woodland  sufh-ciently  delightful,  no  landscape  sufficiently  moving,  to  satisfy  mytaste.  The  valleys  of Thessaly  might  have  satisfied  me,  if I had  seenthem;  but  my  imagination,  tired  of  inventing,  wanted  some  actualspot  which  might  serve  as  a  foundation,  and  create  for  me  an  illu-sion  as  to  the  reality  of  the  inhabitants  whom I intended  to  placethere.  For  a  long  time  I thought  of  the  Borromean  Islands,’  thecharming  aspect  of which  had  delighted  me;  but  I found  too  muchornament  and  artificiality  there.  However,  a  lake  was  absolutelynecessary,  and  I ended  by choosing  that  one,  on  the  shores  of whichmy  heart  has  never  ceased  to  wander.  I fixed  upon  that  part  of  theshore,  where  my  wishes  had  long placed  my  residence,  in the imagi-nary  happiness  to  which  my  destiny  has  limited  me.  The  birthplaceof my  poor  mamma  still  possessed  a  special  charm  for  me.  The  con-trast  of natural  situations,  the  richness  and  variety  of the  landscape,the  magnificence,  the  majesty  of  the  whole,  which  enchants  thesenses,  moves  the  heart,  and  elevates  the  soul,  finally  decided  me,and  I established  my  young  protégés  at  Vévai.  This  was  all  I imag-ined  at  the  moment;  the  remainder  was  not  added  until  later.For  a  long  time  I confined  myself  to  this  indefinite  plan,  becauseit was  sufficient  to  fil! my  fancy  with  agreeable  objects,  and  my  heartwith  feelings,  upon  which  it loves  to  feed  itself.  These  fictions,  by  ,their  constant  recurrence,  at  length  assumed  greater  consistency,  andfixed  themselves  in my  brain  under  a  definite  shape.  It was  then  thatit occurred  to  me  to  give expression  upon  paper  to  some  of the  situa-tions  which  they  offered  me,  and,  recalling  all  the  feelings  of  myyouth,  to  give play, to  a  certain  extent,  to  the  desire  of loving,  whichI had  never  been  able  to  satisfy,  and  by which I felt  myself  devoured.At  first,  I scribbled  upon  paper  a  few  scattered  letters,  withoutsequence  or  connection;  and  when  I wanted  to  put  them  together,  Iwas  often  greatly  embarrassed.  What  seems  almost  incredible,  butis nevertheless  perfectly  true,  is that  the  first  two  parts  were  writtenalmost  entirely  in this  manner,  without  my  having  formed  any  defi-nite  plan,  and  without  my  foreseeing  that  I  should  one  day  beIn  the  Lago  Maggiore.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU446tempted  to  make  a regular  work  of it. Thus  it will  be seen,  that  thesetwo  parts,  composed  too  late  of  materials  which  were  not  shapedfor the place  which  they occupy,  are  full  of wordy  padding,  which  isnot  found  in the others.In  the  height  of  my  reveries,  I received  a  visit  from  Madamed'Houdetot,  the  first  she  had  ever  paid  me  in  her  life,  but  which,unfortunately,  was  not  the  last,  as  will  be  seen  later.  The  Comtessed’Houdetot  was  the  daughter  of the  late  M.  de  Bellegarde,  farmer-general,  and  sister  of  M.  d’Epinay  and  MM.  de  Lalive  and  de  laBriche,  both  of whom  were  afterwards  introducers  of ambassadors."I have  mentioned  how  I became  acquainted  with  her  before  she  wasmarried.  Since  then,  I never  saw  her  except  at  the  festivities  at  LaChevrette,  at  Madame  d’Epinay’s,  her  sister-in-law.  Having  fre-quently.  spent  several  days  with  her,  both  at  Epinay  and  at  LaChevrette,  I not  only  found  her  always  very  amiable,  but  I fanciedthat  I perceived  that  she  was  favourably  disposed  towards  myself.She was  fond  of walking  with  me;  we  were  both  of us  good walkers,and  our  conversation  never  flagged.  However,  I never  visited  her  inParis,  although  she asked,  and  even  pressed  me  to  do so.  Her  connec-tion  with  M.  de  Saint-Lambert,  with  whom  I was  becoming  inti-mate,  rendered  her  still  more  interesting  to  me;  and  it was  in  orderto  bring  me  news  of this  friend,  who  at  the  time  was,  I believe,  atManon,  that  she  came  to  the  Hermitage.This  visit  somewhat  resembled  the  commencement  of a  romance.She  lost  her  way.  Her  coachman  had  left  the  road  at  a  place  whereit turned  off,  and  tried  to  cross  straight  from  the  mill  at  Clairvauxto  the  Hermitage;  her  carriage  stuck  in  the  mud  at  the  bottom  ofthe  valley;  she  decided  to  get  out  and  finish  the  journey  on  foot.Her  thin  shoes  were  soon  wet  through;  she  sank  in  the  mire;  herservants  had  the  greatest  trouble  imaginable  to  extricate  her, and  atlast  she  reached  the  Hermitage  in  a  pair  of  boots,  making  the  airring  with  shouts  of  laughter,  in  which  I joined  when  I saw  herarrive.  She  was  obliged  to  change  all  her  clothes;  Thérése  providedfor  her  wants,  and  I persuaded  her  to  put  aside  her  dignity,  andjoin  us  in-a  rustic  collation,  at  which  she  greatly  enjoyed  herself."Certain  persons  whose  duty  it  was  to  conduct  ambassadors  and  foreignprinces  to  an  audience  with  the  Sovereign  or  head  of  the  State.ROUSSEAU  AND  THE  GARDENER447It  was  late,  and  she  remaified  only  a  short  time;  but  the  meetingwas  so  cheerful  that  she  was  delighted,  and  seemed  disposed  to comeagain.  However,  she  did  not  carry  out  her  intention  until  the  fol-lowing  year;  but  alas!  this  delay  was  not  of the  least  avail  to  protectme.I spent  the  autumn  in an  occupation  which  no  one  would  suspect—that  of  protecting  M.  d’Epinay’s  fruit.  The  Hermitage  was  thereservoir  for  the  park  of La  Chevrette;  there  was  a  garden  enclosedby  walls,  planted  with  espaliers  and  other  trees,  which  suppliedM.  d’Epinay  with  more  fruit  than  his  kitchen-garden  at  La  Chev-rette,  although  three-quarters  of it was  stolen.  Not  to  be  an  entirelyuseless  guest,  I undertook  the  management  of  the  garden  and  thesuperintendence  of  the  gardener.  All  went  well  until  the  fruit  sea-son;  but,  in  proportion  as  it  ripened,  I found  that  it  disappeared,without  knowing  what  became  of it.  The  gardener  assured  me  thatthe  dormice  ate  it all.  I accordingly  waged  war  upon  the  dormice,and  destroyed  a  large  number  of  them;  but  the  fruit  disappearedall  the  same.  I kept  watch  so  carefully,  that  at  length  I discoveredthat the gardener  himself  was  the chief  dormouse.  He lived  at  Mont-morency,  and  used  to  come  from  there  in the  evening,  with  his  wifeand  children,  to  take  away  the  stores  of fruit  which  he had  put asideduring  the  day, and  which  he offered  for  sale  in the  Paris  market  asopenly  as  if he  had  had  a  garden  of his  own.  This  wretch,  whom  Iloaded  with  kindnesses,  whose  children  Thérèse  clothed,  and  whosefather,  who  went  out  begging,  I almost  supported,  robbed  us  withequal  ease  and  effrontery,  since  not  one  of us  three  was  sufficientlywatchful  to  put a stop  to  it; and,  in  a  single  night,  he  succeeded  inemptying  my  cellar,  which  I found  completely  stripped  on  the  fol-lowing  morning.  As  long  as  he only  seemed  to  devote  his  attentionto  me,  I bore  it all; but,  as  I wished  to  render  an  account  of the  fruit,I was  obliged  to  denounce  the  thief.  Madame  d’Epinay  asked  me  topay  him,  discharge  him,  and  look  out  for another  gardener,  which  Idid.  As this  rascal  prowled  round  the  Hermitage  every  night,  armedwith  a  large  iron-tipped  stick  like  a  club,  and  accompanied  by othervagabonds  of his own  sort,  in order  to  reassure  the  women-folk,  whowere  terribly  alarmed  at  him,  I made  his  successor  sleep  at  the  Her-mitage;  and,  as  even  this  failed  to  quiet  their  fears,  I sent  to  ask.448THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUMadame  d’Epinay  for  a  gun,  which  I gave  to  the  gardener  to  keepin his room,  with  instructions  only to  make  use  of it in case  of neces-sity, if an  attempt  was  made  to  break  open  the  door  or scale  the gar-den  wall,  and  only  to  fire  a  discharge  of powder,  simply  to  frightenthe  thieves.  These  were  assuredly  the  least  measures  of  precautionwhich  a  man  in  ill-health,  who  had  to  pass  the  winter  in  the  midstof the  forest,  alone  with  two  nervous  women,  could  have  taken  forthe  common  safety.  Lastly,  I procured  a little  dog  to  serve  as  sen-tinel.  When  Deleyre  came  to  see  me  during  that  time,  I told  him  mystory,  and  joined  him  in  laughing  at  my  military  preparations.  Onhis  return  to  Paris,  he  tried  in  his  turn  to  amuse  Diderot  with  anaccount  of  them;  and  this  was  how  the  Holbachian  clique  learnedthat  I seriously  intended  to  pass  the  winter  at  the  Hermitage.  Thisconsistency  on  my  part,  which  they  could  never  have  imagined,quite  disconcerted  them;  and,  in  the  meantime,  until  they  couldthink  of some  other  annoyance  to  render  my  stay  unpleasant,®  theyseparated  from  me,  through  Diderot,  this  same  Deleyre,  who  at  firstconsidered  my  precautions  quite  natural,  and  ended  by calling  themcontrary  to  my  principles  and  worse  than  ridiculous,  in  some  letterssn  which  he  overwhelmed  me  with  sarcasms,  sufficiently  biting  tooffend  me,  if I had  been  in the  humour.  But  at  that  time,  steeped  inaffectionate  and  tender  sentiments,  and  susceptible  of  no  others,  Ivegarded  his  bitter  sarcasms  as  nothing  but  a  joke,  and  looked  uponhim  as  merely  silly, when  anyone  else  would  have  considered  him  amadman.  Thus  those  who  prompted  him  lost  their  trouble  on  thisoccasion,  and  I passed  the  winter  without  being  in  the  least  dis-vurbed.By dint  of care  and  watchfulness,  I succeeded  so  well  in  protect-ing the  garden  that,  although  the  yield  of fruit  was  almost  entirelya  failure  this  year,  the  result  was  triple  that  of the  preceding  year.  IAt the  present  moment,  I marvel  at  my  stupidity  in  not  having  seen,  when1 was  writing  this,  that  the  annoyance,  which  the  Holbachians  felt  when  theysaw  me  go  to  stay  in  the  country,  was  chiefly  due  to  the  fact  that  they  no  longerliad  Madame  le Vasseur  at  hand,  in  order  to  guide  them  in  their  system  of  in-trigues  at  fixed  places  and  times.  This  idea,  which  occurs  to  me  too  late,  com-pletely  explains  the  strangeness  of  their  conduct,  which  is inexplicable  under  anyuther  supposition.>  REVERIES449certainly  spared  no  pains  to  preserve  it.  I even  accompanied  the con-signments  which  I sent  to  La  Chevrette  and  Epinay,  and  carriedsome  baskets  myself.  I remember  that  “aunt”  and  myself  once  car-ried  one  that  was  so  heavy that, to  avoid  succumbing  under  the load,we  were  obliged  to  rest  every  dozen  steps,  and  arrived  bathed  inperspiration.[1757.]—When  the  bad  weather  began  again,  and  I was  confinedto  the  house,  I tried  to  resume  my  stay-at-home  occupations,  butfound  it impossible.  I saw  everywhere  nothing  but my  two  charmingfriends,  their  friend,  their  surroundings,  the  country  in  which  theylived,  the  objects  which  my  fancy  created  or  embellished  for  them.  Ino  longer  belonged  to  myself  for  a  single  moment.  My  deliriumnever  left  me.  After  several  fruitless  attempts  to  banish  all  theseimaginary  creations  from  my  mind,  I became  at  last  completely  se-duced  by them,  and  all  my  efforts  were  thenceforth  devoted  to  re-ducing  them  to  some  sort  of order  and  coherence,  in  order  to  workthem  up  into  a  kind  of romance.I was  chiefly  embarrassed  by the  shame  which I felt  at  contradict-ing myself  so  openly  and  so  boldly.  After  the  strict  principles  whichI had  just  laid  down  with  so  much  noise,  after  the  austere  maximswhich  I had  preached  so  strongly,  after  the  biting  invectives  whichI had  launched  against  the  effeminate  books  which  breathed  noth-ing  but  love  and  tenderness,  could  anything  more  unexpected  ormore  shocking  be  imagined,  than  to  see  me,  all  at  once,  enrol  my-self  with  my  own  hand  amongst  the  authors  of those  books  which  Ihad  so  strongly  censured?  J felt  this  inconsistency  in  all  its  force.  Ireproached  myself  with  it, I blushed  for  it, I was  vexed  with  myselffor it; but all this  was  unable  to  bring me  back  to  reason.  Completelyenthralled,  I was  forced  to  submit  to  the  yoke  at  all  risks,  and  tomake  up  my  mind  to  brave  public  opinion,  except  in regard  to  con-sidering  later,  whether  I should  decide  to  show  my  work  or  not:  forI did  not  as  yet  suppose  that  I should  ever  determine  to  publish  it.Having  taken  this  resolution,  I threw  myself  heartily  into  myreveries,  and,  after  repeatedly  turning  them  over  and  over  in  myhead,  I at  last  sketched  the  kind  of  plan,  with  the  execution  ofwhich  the  public  is  acquainted.  This  was  certainly the best  advan-tage  that  could  be  derived  from  my  follies:  the  love  of  the  good,THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU450which  has  never  left  my  heart,  turned  them  naturally  towards  use-ful  objects,  which  might  have  been  productive  of moral  advantage.My voluptuous  pictures  would  have  lost  all their  grace,  if the  gentlecolouring  of innocence  had  been  wanting  in them.  A weak  girl is anobject of pity, which  may  be rendered  interesting  by love, and  whichis frequently  not  less  amiable;  but  who  can  endure  without  indigna-tion  the  sight  of fashionable  manners?  What  can  be  more  revoltingthan  the  pride  of an  unfaithful  wife,  who,  openly  trampling  underfoot  all  her  duties,  nevertheless  claims  that  her  husband  should  bedeeply  grateful  for  the  favour  which  she  grants  him—of  being  kindenough  not  to  allow  herself  to  be  caught  in  the  act?  Perfect  beingsdo  not  exist;  the  lessons  which  they  give  are  too  far  remote  fromus.  But—that  a  young  person,  born  with  a  heart  equally  tender  andvirtuous,  while  still  unwedded,  should  allow  herself  to  be  overcomeby love,  and,  when  wedded,  should  find  strength  to  overcome  it inher  turn  and  become  virtuous  again—if  anyone  should  tell  you  thatthis  picture  is, on  the  whole,  scandalous  and  unprofitable,  he  is  aliar  and  a  hypocrite:  do not  listen  to  him.Besides  morality  and  conjugal  fidelity,  which  are  radically  con-nected  with  all social  order,  I had  another  and  deeper  object in view—harmony  and  public  peace,  an.  object  greater  and  perhaps  moreimportant  in  itself,  and  certainly  so  at  the  moment.  The  storm.  aroused  by the  “Encyclopédie,”  far  from  subsiding,  was  at  that  timeat  its  height.  The  two  parties,  let loose  against  each  other  with  des-perate  frenzy,  were  more  like  mad  wolves  ready  to  tear  each  otherto  pieces  in  their  rage,  than  Christians  and  philosophers  desirous  ofmutually  enlightening,  convincing,  and  leading  each  other  backinto  the  way  of truth.  It may  almost  be said  that  nothing  was  want-ing on  either  side  but  active  leaders  of sufficient  importance,  for  thequarrel  to  degenerate  into  civil  war;  and  God  only  knows  whatwould  have  been  the  result  of  a  civil  war  waged  on  behalf  of  re-ligion,  in which  the most  cruel  intolerance  was  in the main  the  sameon  both  sides.  A  born  enemy  of all  party  spirit,  I had  frankly  toldsome  hard  truths  to  both  parties,  to  which  they  had  paid  no  atten-tion.  I bethought  myself  of  another  expedient,  which,  in  my  sim-plicity,  I considered  admirable:  this  was  to  soften  their  mutual  ha-tred  by destroying  their  prejudices,  and  to  point  out  to  each  party«séJULIE99451the  merits  and  virtues  of the  other  as  worthy  of public  esteem  andthe respect  of all mankind.  This  by no  means  sensible  scheme,  whichassumed  good  faith  amongst  men,  and  which  led  me  into  the  mis-take  with  which  I reproached  the  Abbé  de  Saint-Pierre,  met  withthe  success  which  it deserved:  it entirely  failed  to  reconcile  the  twoparties,  and  only  brought  them  together  again  in  order  to  over-whelm  me.  Meanwhile,  until  experience  had  shown  me  my  folly,  Idevoted  myself  to  it,  I venture  to  say,  with  a  zeal  worthy  of the  mo-tive  which  inspired  me,  and  I sketched  the  two  characters  of  Wol-mar  and  Julie  in  a  state  of  rapture,  which  made  me  hope  that  Ishould  succeed  in  making  both  amiable,  and,  what  is  more,  bymeans  of each  other.Satisfied  with  having  roughly  sketched  my  plan,  I returned  to  thesituations  of detail  which  I had  marked  out.  The  result  of the  form,in  which  I arranged  them  was  the  two  first  parts  of Julie,  which  Iwrote  and  made a fair  copy  of during  the  winter  months  with  in-describable  pleasure,  using  the  finest  gilt-edged  paper,  blue  and  sil-ver  writing-sand  to  dry the  ink, and  blue  ribbon  to  fasten  my  manu-script;  in  short,  nothing  was  sufficiently  elegant  or  refined  for  thecharming  girls,  with  whom,  like  another  Pygmalion,  I was  infatuated.  Every  evening,  by the  fireside,  I read  and  read  again  these  twoparts  to  the  women-folk.  The  daughter,  without  saying  a  word,  andmoved  to  tenderness,  joined  her  sobs  to  mine;  the mother,  finding nocompliments  in  it, understood  nothing  of  it, remained  quiet,  andcontented  herself  with  repeating  to  me,  during  the  intervals  of  si-lence,  “That  is very  fine,  sir.”Madame  d’Epinay,  uneasy  at  knowing  that  I was  alone  in winter,in  the  middle  of the  forest,  in  a  lonely  house,  frequently  sent  to  in-quire  after  me.  I had  never  received  such  genuine  proofs  of  herfriendship,  and  my  own  feelings  towards  her  never  responded  tothem  with  greater  warmth.  Amongst  these  proofs,  I  should  bewrong  to  omit  to  state  that  she  sent  me  her  portrait,  and  asked  meto  tell  her  how  she  could  procure  mine,  which  had  been  painted  byLatour,  and  exhibited  at  the  Salon.  Nor  ought  I to  omit  anothermark  of her  attention,  which  will  appear  laughable,  but  is a  featurein the  history  of my  character,  by reason  of the  impression  which  itproduced  upon  me.  One  day,  when  it  was  freezing  very  hard,  I452THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUopened  a  parcel  which she had  sent,  containing  several  things  whichshe had  undertaken  to  procure  for  me,  and  found  in it a  little  under-petticoat  of English  flannel,  which  she  informed  me  she  had  worn,out  of which  she  desired  me  to  make  myself  a  waistcoat.  The  stvleof  her  note  was  charming,  full  of  tenderness  and  simplicity.  Thismark  of attention,  which  was  more  than  friendly,  appeared  to  me  sotender,  as  if she  had  stripped  herself  to  clothe  me,  that,  in my  emo-tion,  I kissed  the  note  and  the  petticoat  with  tears.  Thérése  thoughtthat  I had  gone  mad.  It is singular  that,  of all  the  marks  of friend-ship  lavished  upon  me  by  Madame  d’Epinay,  not  one  has  evermoved  me  so  much,  and,  even  since  the  rupture  between  us,  I havenever  thought  of it without  emotion.  I kept her  little  note  for  a  longtime,  and  I should  still  have  it in my  possession,  if it had  not  sharedthe  fate  of all  my  other  letters  of that  period.Although  the  difficulty  I had  in making  water  gave  me  little  restduring  the  winter,  and,  for  part  of  the  time,  I was  obliged  to  useprobes,  yet,  on  the  whole,  it was  the  mdst  enjoyable  and  most  quiettime  that  I had  spent  since  my  arrival  in France.  For  the four  or  fivemonths,  during  which  the bad  weather  secured  me  still  further  fromthe  interruptions  of unexpected  visitors,  I enjoyed,  more  than  I everhad  or  have  done  before  or  since,  this  independent,  even,  and  simplelife,  the  enjoyment  of  which  only  increased  its  value,  without  anyother  society  than  that  of the  two  women  in reality,  and  that  of thetwo  cousins  in  idea.  It was  at  that  time,  especially,  that  I congratu-lated  myself  more  and  more  every  day upon  the  resolution  which  Ihad  had  the  good  sense  to  take,  without  paying  heed  to  the  outcriesof  my  friends,  who  were  annoyed  to  see  me  delivered  from  theirtyranny;  and,  when  I heard  of  the  attempt  of  a  madman,®  whenDeleyre  and  Madame  d’Epinay  informed  me  in  their  letters  of  thedisturbance  and  agitation  prevailing  in  Paris,  I heartily  thankedHeaven  for  having  kept  me  at  a  distance  from  those  spectacles  ofhorror  and  crime,  which  would  only  have  fed  and  sharpened  thehilious  temperament,  which  the  sight  of public  disturbances  stirredup  within  me;  whereas  now,  seeing  myself  surrounded  by nothingbut smiling  and  peaceful  objects  in my  retreat,  my  heart was  entirelyziven  up  to  amiable  feelings.  I here  record  with  satisfaction  the? The  attempt  made  by  Damiens  to  assassinate  Louis  XV.¥DIDEROT  AND  THE  ‘‘FILS  NATUREL  °-Lai453course  of the  last  peaceful  moments  which  I have  been  permitted  toenjoy.  The  spring  which  followed  this calm  winter  saw  the germs  ofthe  misfortunes  which  I have  still  to  describe  burst  forth,  in  theseries  of which  will  be  found  no  similar  intervals,  in  which  I havehad  time  to  take  breath.I think,  however,  that  I remember  that,  during  this  interval  ofpeace,  and  even  in  the  depths  of my  solitude,  I did  not  remain  alto-gether  undisturbed  by the  Holbachians.  Diderot  stirred  up  some  an-noyances  against  me,  and,  unless  I am  very  much  mistaken,  it wasduring  this  winter  that  the  “Fils  Naturel”  appeared,  of which  I shallhave  to  speak presently.  Not  to  mention  that,  for reasons  which  wil]subsequently  appear,  very  few  trustworthy  records  of  that  periodhave  been  preserved,  even  those  which  I have  been  permitted  takeep  are  very  inaccurate  in regard  to  dates.  Diderot  never  dated  hisletters.  Madame  d’Epinay  and  Madame  d’Houdetot  only  put  the  -day of the  week,  and  Deleyre  usually  did  the  same.  When  I wantedto  arrange  these  letters  in  order,  I was  obliged  to  grope  in  the  darkand  to  supply  the  omissions  by uncertain  dates,  upon  which I can.not  rely.  Therefore,  as  I am  unable  to  fix  with  certainty  the  date  ofthe  commencement  of  these  quarrels,  I prefer  to  relate  afterwards,in  a  single  section,  all  that  I can  recollect  about  them.The return  of spring had  redoubled  my  tender  frenzies,  and  in myerotic  transports  I had  composed  for  the  last  parts  of Julie  severalletters  which  have a flavour  of the rapturous  frame  of mind  in whichI wrote  them.  I may  mention,  amongst  others,  that  which  deals  withthe  Elysium  and  the  walk  along  the  shores  of the  lake,  which,  if Irightly  recollect,  are  at  the end  of the fourth part.  If anyone  can  readthese  two  letters,  without  feeling  his  heart  softened  and  melted  bythe  same  emotion  which  dictated  them  to  me,  he had  better  shut  thebook;  he is incapable  of judging  of matters  of sentiment.Exactly  at  the  same  time,  I had  a  second  unexpected  visit  from,Madame  d’Houdetot.  In  the  absence  of  her  husband,  who  was  acaptain  in  the  Gendarmerie,  and  of her  lover,  who  was  also  in  theservice,  she  had  come  to  Eaubonne,  in  the  midst  of  the  valley  ofMontmorency,  where  she  had  taken a very  nice  house.  It was  from,there  that  she  made  a  second  excursion  to  the  Hermitage.  On  thisoccasion,  she came  on  horseback,  dressed  in men’s  clothes.  Although454THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU{ am  not  fond  of such  masquerades,  I was  charmed  with  the  air  ofromance  in this particular  case,  and  this  time—it  was  love.  As it wasthe first  and  only time  in my  life, and  its consequences  have  stampedit indelibly  upon  my  recollection  with  terrible  force,  I must  be per-mitted  to  enter  with  some  detail  into  the  matter.Madame  la  Comtesse  d’Houdetot  was  approaching  her  thirtiethyear,  and  was  by no  means  handsome.  Her  face  was  pitted  withsmall-pox,  her complexion  was  coarse,  she  was  short-sighted,  and  hereyes  were  rather  too  round,  but, notwithstanding,  she  looked  young,and  her  features,  at  once  lively  and  gentle,  were  attractive.  She  hadan  abundance  of luxuriant  black  hair,  which  curled  naturally,  andreached  down  to  her  knees.  Her  figure  was  neat,  and  all her  move-ments  were  marked  by awkwardness  and  grace  combined.  Her  witwas  both  natural  and  agreeable;  gaiety,  lightheartedness,  and  sim-plicity  were  happily  united  in it. She  overflowed  with  delightful  sal-lies  of wit,  which  were  perfectly  spontaneous,  and  which  often  fellfrom  her  lips  involuntarily.  She  possessed  several  agreeable  accom-plishments,  played  the piano,  danced  well, and  composed  very  prettyverses.  As  for  her  character,  it was  angelic;  gentleness  of  soul  wasthe  foundation  of  it;  and,  with  the  exception  of  prudence  andstrength,  all  the  virtues  were  combined  in it.  Above  all,  she  was  socompletely  to  be trusted  in her  intercourse,  and  was  so  loyal to  thosewith  whom  she  associated,  that  even  her  enemies  had  no  need  toconceal  themselves  from  her.  By her  enemies,  I mean  those  men,  or,rather,  those  women  who  hated  her;  for,  as  for  herself,  her  heartwas  incapable  of hatred,  and I believe  that  this  similarity  of disposi-tion  greatly  contributed  to  inspire  me  with  passion  for  her.  In  theconfidences  of the  most  intimate  friendship,  I have  never  heard  herspeak  ill of the  absent,  not  even  of her  sister-in-law.  She  was  unableeither  to  disguise  her  thoughts  from  anyone,  or  to  repress  any  of herfeelings:  and  I am  quite  convinced  that  she  spoke  of her  lover  evento  her  husband,  as  she  spoke  of him  to  her  friends,  acquaintances,and  everybody,  without  distinction,  Lastly,  what  proves  unquestion-ably the  purity  and  sincerity  of her  excellent  disposition  is, that, be-ing subject  to fits of most  remarkable  absence  of mind,  she was  oftenguilty  of the  most  ridiculous  indiscretions,  which  were  in the  high-MADAME  D’HOUDETOT455est  degree imprudent,  as  far as  she  was  herself  concerned,  but  whichwere  never  offensive  to  others.2She  had  been  married  very  young  and  against  her  inclinations  tothe  Comte  d'Houdetot,  a  man  of position  and a gallant  soldier,  buta  gambler  and  a  shuffler,  and  a  person  of but  few  amiable  qualities,whom  she  had  never  loved.  She  found  in  M.  de  Saint-Lambert  allthe  good  qualities  of  her  husband,  together  with  others  that  weremore  agreeable—intellect,  virtue,  and  talent.  If one  can  excuse  any-thing  in  the  manners  of  the  age,  it is undoubtedly  an  attachment,which  is  refined  by its  duration,  honoured  by its  effects,  and  onlycemented  by mutual  esteem.As  far  as  I have  been  able  to  judge,  she  came  to  see  me a littlefrom  her  own  inclination,  but  more  from a desire  to  please  Saint-Lambert,  who  had  exhorted  her  to  do so,  and  was  right  in believingthat  the  friendship,  which  was  beginning  to  be  formed  between  us,would  make  this  society  agreeable  to  all  three.  She  knew  that  I wasaware  of their  relations,  and,  being  able  to  speak  of him  to  me  with-out  restraint,  it was  natural  that  she  should  find  my  society  agree-able.  She  came;  I saw  her.  I was  intoxicated  with  love  without  anobject.  This  intoxication  enchanted  my  eyes;  this  object  became  cen-tred  in her.  I saw  my  Julie  in  Madame  d’Houdetot,  and  soon  I sawonly Madame  d’Houdetot,  but  invested  with  all the perfections  withwhich  I had  just adorned  the  idol  of my  heart.  To  complete  my  in-toxication,  she  spoke  to  me  of Saint-Lambert  in the  language  of pas-sionate  love.  O  contagious  power  of  love!  When I listened  to  her,when I found  myself  near  her, I was  seized  with  a  delightful  shiver-ing, which  I have  never  felt when  with  anyone  else.  When  she spoke,I felt  myself  overcome  by emotion.  I imagined  that  I was  interestingmyself only in her feelings,  when  my  own  were  similar.  I swallowedin deep  draughts  the  contents  of the  poisoned  cup,  of which  as  yet Ionly tasted  the  sweetness.  At  last,  without  either  of us  perceiving  it,she  inspired  me  with  all  those  feelings  for  herself  which  she  ex-pressed  for  her  lover.  Alas!  it was  very  late, it was  very  hard  for  me,to  be consumed  by a passion,  as  violent  as  it was  unfortunate,  for  awoman  whose  heart  was  full  of love  for another!In  spite  of  the  extraordinary  emotions  which  I had  felt  in  her.456THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUpresence,  I did  not  at  first  understand  what  had  happened  to  me.  Itwas  not  until  she  had  left  me  that,  when  I attempted  to  think  ofJulie,  I was  surprised  to  find  that  I could  think  of  nothing  butMadame  d'Houdetot:  Then  the  scales  fell  from  my  eyes;  I under-stood  my  misfortune,  I groaned  over  it, but  I did  not  foresee  its  re-sults.  I hesitated  for  a  long  time  how  I should  behave  towards  her,as  if real  love  left  anyone  sufficiently  rational  to  be able  to  act  in ac-cordance  with  the result  of such  deliberations.  I had  not  made  up mymind,  when  she  came  again  and  took  me  by surprise.  On  this  occa-sion,  I understood  the  state  of things.  Shame,  the  companion  of evil,made  me  speechless.  I trembled  before  her,  not  venturing  to  openmy  mouth  or  lift my  eyes.  I was  inexpressibly  troubled,  and  she musthave  seen  it. I resolved  to  confess  it, and  to  leave  her  to  guess  the rea-son.  This  would  be  telling  her  the  truth  plainly  enough.If I had  been  young  and  attractive,  and  Madame  d’Houdetot  hadshown  herself  weak,  I should  here  blame  her  conduct.  Nothing  ofthe kind;  I can  only applaud  and  admire  it. The  course  she took  wasequally  generous  and  prudent.  She  could  not  suddenly  give  up  myacquaintance  without  telling  Saint-Lambert  the  reason,  for  he  hadhimself  persuaded  her  to  visit  me.  This  would  have  exposed  twofriends  to  the  risk  of  a  rupture,  and,  perhaps,  of  a  public  scandal,which  she  desired  to  avoid.  She  esteemed  me  and  wished  me  well.She  pitied  my  folly,  and,  without  flattering,  lamented  it, and  en-deayoured  to  cure  me  of it. She  was  very  glad to  be able  to  keep forherself  and  her  lover  a  friend  whom  she  valued.  Nothing  gave  hermore  pleasure  than  to  speak  of the  close  and  happy  intimacy  whichwe  might  form  between  us,  as  soon  as  I should  have  recovered  mysenses.  She  did  not,  however,  altogether  confine  herself  to  thesefriendly  exhortations,  and, when  necessary,  did not  spare  the harsherteproaches  which  I had  so  well  deserved.I spared  myself even  less.  As  soon  as  I was  alone,  I came  to  myselfagain.  I was  calmer  for  having  spoken.  Love,  when  it is known  toher  who  inspires  it,  becomes  more  endurable.  The  energy  withwhich  I reproached  myself for the love  which I felt, must  have  curedme  of it, if it had  been  possible.  I summoned  to  my  aid  all  the  mostpowerful  arguments  I could  think  of, to  stifle  it.  My  moral  sense,my  feelings,  my  principles,  the  shame,  the  disloyalty,  the  crime,  theHIS  gPASSION  FOR  HER457abuse  of  a  trust  confided  to  me  by friendship,  and,  lastly,  the  ab-surdity,  at  my  age,  of being  inflamed  with  a  most  extravagant  pas-sion  for  one  whose  heart,  already  engaged,  could  neither  make  meany  return,  nor  permit  me  to  entertain  the least  hope—a  passion,  besides,  which,  far from  having  anything  to  gain by constancy,  becamemore  unbearable  from  day to  day:thought  of all  these.Who  would  believe  that  the  last consideration,  which  should  haveadded  weight  to  all  the  rest,  was  the  one  hichi weakened  theirforce?  What  scruples,  said  I to  myself,  need  I entertain  in regard  toa  folly  by which  I am  the  only  sufferer?  Am  I a  young  gallant  ofwhom  Madame  d’Houdetot  should  feel  alarmed?  Would  it not  besaid,  to  judge  from  my  conceited  remorse,  that  my  gallantry,  mymanner,  and  my  personal  appearance  were  on  the  way  to  lead  herastray?  O poor  Jean  Jacques!  love  on  to  your  heart’s  content,  with  aperfectly  safe  conscience,  and  have  no  fear  that  your  sighs  will  everinjure  Saint-Lambert.My  readers  have  seen  that  I was  never  presuming,  even  in  myyouth.  This  way  of  thinking  was  in  keeping  with  the  bent  of mymind;  it flattered  my  passion;  it’was  sufficient  to  make  me  abandonmyself  to  it unreservedly,  and  even  laugh  at  the  irrelevant  scruples,which  I thought  I had  created  rather  out  of vanity  than  in  accord-ance  with  the  dictates  of  reason.  What  a  lesson  for  honest  souls,whom  vice  never  attacks  openly,  but  whom  it  finds  the  means  tosurprise,  ever  hiding  itself  under  the  mask  of  some  sophism—fre-quently,  of some  virtue!Guilty  without  remorse,  I soon  became  so  without  measure:  andI beg the reader  to  observe  how  my  passion  followed  the  track  of mydisposition,  to  drag  me  finally  into  the  abyss.  At  first,  it assumed  ahumble  attitude,  to  reassure  me;  and  then,  in order  to  encourage  me,pushed  this  humility  to  mistrust.  Madame  d’Houdetot,  without  re-laxing  her  efforts  to  recall  me  to  my  duty  and  reason,  without  everflattering  my  folly  for  a moment,  treated  me  in  other  respects  withthe  greatest  gentleness,  and  assumed  towards  me a tone  of the  ten-derest  friendship.  This  friendship  would  have  been  enough  for  ine,I deciare,  if I had  believed  it to  be sincere;  but, as  I found  it too  pro-nounced  to  be  true,  I proceeded  to  get  the  idea  into  my  head  thatlove,  which  was  from  this  time  forth  so  ill-suited  to  my  age  and  gen-458THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUeral  appearance,  had  degraded  me  in the  eyes  of Madame  d’Houde-tot;  that, in the extravagance  of her youth,  she  only desired  to  amuseherself  with  me  and  my  superannuated  passions;  that  she  had  takenSaint-Lambert  into  her  confidence,  and  that,  indignation  at  my  dis-loyalty  having  brought  him  over  to  her  views,  there  was  an  under-standing  between  them  to  turn  my  head  completely,  and  then  tolaugh at  me.  This  folly, which  had  caused  me,  at  twenty-six  years  ofage,  to  make  a  fool  of myself with  Madame  de Larnage,  whom I didnot  know,  would  have  been  excusable  in me,  at  the  age  of forty-five,in the case  of Madame  d’Houdetot,  if I had  not  known  that  she  andher  lover  were  both  too  honourable  to  indulge  in so  cruel  an  amuse-ment.Madame  d’Houdetot  continued  to  pay  me  visits,  which  I was  notslow  to  return.  Like  myself,  she  was  fond  of walking:  we  took  longwalks  in an  enchanted  country.  Content  to  love  her,  and  to  ventureto  declare  it, my  situation  would  have  been  most  delightful,  had  notmy  extravagant  folly  completely  destroyed  its  charm.  At  first,  sheutterly  failed  to  understand  the  silly petulance  with  which  I receivedher  tenderness;  but  my  heart,  which  has  ever  been  incapable  of con-cealing  any  of its  emotions,  did  not  long  leave  her  in  ignorance  ofmy  suspicions.  She  tried  to  treat  them  as  a  joke;  but  this  expedientwas  unsuccessful.  Violent  attacks  of  rage  would  have  been  the  re-sult:  she  accordingly  altered  her  tone.  Her  compassionate  gentlenessremained  unshaken.  She  reproachad  me  in  a  manner  which  cut  meto  the heart;  she  exhibited,  in regard  to  my  unjust  apprehensions,  anuneasiness  which  I abused.  I demanded  proof that  she was  not  laugh-ing at  me.  She  saw  that  there  was  no  other  way  of reassuring  me.  Ibecame  pressing;  the  matter  was  a  delicate  one.  It is surprising—it  is,perhaps,  unique—that  a  woman,  who  had  ventured  to  go  so  far  asto  hesitate  should  have  got  out  of the  affair  so  well.  She  refused  menothing  that  the  most  tender  friendship  could  grant.  She  grantednothing  that  could  expose  her  to  the  charge  of infidelity,  and  I hadthe humiliation  of seeing  that  the flames,  which  the  slightest  favourson  her part  kindled  in my  heart,  never  threw  the  slightest  spark intoher  own.I have  said,  somewhere,  that  one  must  grant  nothing  to  the senses,when  one  desires  to  refuse  them  something.  In order  to  see  how  thisrREFLECTIONS  UPON  LOVE459maxim  was  falsified  in  the  case  of  Madame  d’Houdetot,  and  howcompletely  she  was  justified  in her  self-dependence,  it will  be neces-sary  to  enter  into  the  details  of  our  long  and  frequent  téte-d-tétes,and  to  describe  them,  in all their  liveliness,  during  the  four  months  `which  we  spent  together,  in  the  course  of  an  intimacy  almost  un-precedented  between  two  friends  of  opposite  sexes,  who  confinethemselves  within  the  limits  beyond  which  we  never  went.  Ah!  if itwas  so  late  before  I felt  true  love,  my  heart  and  senses  paid  dearlyfor  the  arrears!  How  great  are  the  transports  one  must  feel,  by theside  of a  dearly-loved  object  of affection,  who  returns  our  love, wheneven  a  love  which  is unrequited  can  inspire  those  which  it does!But  I am  wrong  in  speaking  of an  unrequited  love;  to  some  ex-tent  mine  was  returned;  it was  equal  on  both  sides,  although  it wasnot  mutual.  We  were  both  intoxicated  with  love;  she  for  her  lover,i for  her.  Our  sighs,  our  delightful  tears  mingled  together.  Tenderconfidants,  our  feelings  were  so  closely  connected,  that  it  was  im-possible  that  they  should  not  unite  in  something;  and  yet,  amidstthis  dangerous  intoxication,  she  never  forgot  herself  for  a moment;as  for  myself,  I protest,  I swear  that  if, sometimes  carried  away  bymy  senses,  I attempted  to  make  her  unfaithful,  I never  truly  desiredit. The  vehemence  of my  passion  of itself  kept it within  bounds.  Theduty of self-denial  had  exalted  my  soul.  The  splendour  of all the vir-tures  adorned  in  my  eyes  the  idol  of  my  heart;  to  have  soiled  itsdivine  image  would  have  been  its  annihilation.  I might  have  com-mitted  the  crime;  it  has  been  committed  a  hundred  times  in  myheart;  but—to  degrade  my  Sophie!  could  that  ever  have  been  pos.sible?  No,  no!  I told  her  so  myself  a  hundred  times.  Had  it been  inmy  power  to  satisfy  myself,  had  she  abandoned  herself  to  me  of herown  accord,  I should,  except  in  a  few  brief  moments  of  delirium,have  refused  to  be  happy  at  such  a  cost.  I loved  her  too  dearly  todesire  to  possess  her.It is nearly  a  league  from  the  Hermitage  to  Eaubonne;  on  my  fre-quent  visits,  I sometimes  passed  the  night  there.  One  bright  moon-light  evening,  after  having  supped  together,  we  went  for  a  walk  inthe  garden.  At  the  bottom  of  this  garden  there  was  a  rather  largecopse,  through  which  we  made  our  way  to  a  pretty  grove,  adornedwith  a  cascade,  the  idea  of which  she  had  carried  out  at  my  sugges-460THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUtion.  Immortal  souvenir  of innocence  and  bliss!  It was  in  this  grovethat,  seated  by her  side  on  a  grassy  bank,  under  an  acacia  in  fullbloom,  I found,  to  express  the  feelings  of  my  heart,  language  thatwas  really  worthy  of them.  For  the  first  and  only  time  in  my  life  Iwas  sublime,  if  one  may  so  call  all  the  amiability  and  seductivecharm  that  the tenderest  and  most  ardent  love  can  inspire  in a  man’sheart.  What  intoxicating  tears  I shed  upon  her  knees!  What  tears  Icaused  her to  shed  in spite of herself!  At hast, in an  involuntary  trans-port,  she  exclaimed,  “Never,  no,  never  was  a  man  so  amiable;  neverdid  a  lover  love  like  you!  But  your  friend  Saint-Lambert  is listeningto  us.  My heart  cannot  love  twice.”  I sighed;  and  was  silent;  I em-braced  her—what  an  embrace!  But  that  was  all.  For  six  months  shehad  lived  alone,  that  is to  say,  far  from  her  lover  and  her  husband;during  three  of these  months  I saw  her  nearly  every  day,  and  Lovewas  always  with  us.  We  had  supped  alone;  we  were  alone,  ina  grove,beneath  the  light  of  the  moon;  and,  after  two  hours  of the  liveliestand  tenderest  conversation,  she  left,  in  the  middle  of the  night,  thisgrove  and  the  arms  of her  friend,  as  free  from  guilt,  as  pure  in heartand  person  as  she  had  entered  it.  Reader,  weigh  all  these  circum-stances:  I will  add  no  more.At  the  same  time,  let  no  one  imagine  that,  on  this  occasion,  myfeelings  left  me  as  undisturbed  as  in  the  presence  of  Thérése  ormamma.  I have  already  said  that  this time  it was  love—iove  in all itsforce  and  in all its frenzy.  I will  not  describe  the agitation,  the  shiver-ing,  the  palpitation,  the  convulsive  movements,  or  the  faintness  ofthe  heart,  which  I felt  continually.  The  reader  can  judge  of it fromthe  impression  which  her  image  alone  produced  upon  me.  I havesaid  that  it was  a  considerable  distance  from  the  Hermitage  to  Eau-bonne.  I went  past  the  hills  of  Andilly,  which  are  delightful.  As  Iwalked,  I dreamed  of her  whom  I was  going to  see,  of the  tender  re-ception,  of the kiss which  awaited  me  on  my  arrival;  This  kiss  alone,this  fatal  kiss, even  before  I received  it, inflamed  my  blood  to  such  adegree  that  I felt dizzy,  my  eyes  swam,  I was  blinded;  my  tremblingknees  could  no  longer  support  me;  I was  obliged  to  stop  and  sitdown;  my  whole  bodily  machinery  was  utterly  out  of  gear;  I feltteady  to  faint.  Aware  of the  danger,  I tried,  when I set  out  again,  todistract  my  attention  and  to  think  of something  else.  I had  scarcely<MONT  OLYMPEe461gone  twenty  yards,  when  the  same  recollections  and  their  incidentalresults  returned  to  the  attack,  and  I found  it  impossible  to  shakethem  off.  In  spite  of all  my  efforts,  I do not  believe  that  I have  eversucceeded  in  accomplishing  this  journey  alone,  without  paying  thepenalty.  I arrived  at  Eaubonne,  weak,  exhausted,  and  worn  out,scarcely  able  to  stand  upright.  The  moment  I saw  her,  I was  com-pletely  reinvigorated.  By her  side,  I felt nothing  but  the importunityof  an  inexhaustible  and  ever  useless  vigour.  On  the  road,  withinsight of Eaubonne,  there  was  a pleasant  terrace  called  Mont  Olympe,where  we  sometimes  met.  If I arrived  first,  I had  to  wait  for  her.How  painful  was  this  waiting!  In  order  to  divert  my  attention,  I at-tempted  to  write  notes  with  my  pencil,  which  I might  have  writtenwith  my  purest  blood.  I was  never  able  to  finish  a  single  one  thatwas  legible.  When  she  found  one  in the  niche  which  we  had  agreedupon,  all  she  could  read  in it was  the  truly  deplorable  state  I was  inwhen  I wrote  it.  This  state,  and,  above  all,  its  continuance  duringthree  months  of excitement  and  self-restraint,  so  exhausted  me  thatI did  not  recover  for  several  years,  and,  finally,  brought  on  a  rup-ture,  which  I shall  carry  with  me,  or  which  will  carry  me  with  it,into  the  grave.  Such  was  the  only amorous  enjoyment  of the man  ofthe  most  inflammable  temperament,  but,  at  the  same  time,  of  themost  retiring  disposition  that  Nature  has  perhaps  ever  produced.Such  were  the  last  happy  days that  have  been  permitted  to  me  uponearth.  I now  commence  the  long series  of the  misfortunes  of my  life,which  was  seldom,  if ever,  interrupted.Throughout  the  course  of  my  life,  as  has  been  seen,  my  heart,transparent  as  crystal,  has  never  been  able  to  conceal,  even  for  a  mo-ment,  any  feelings  at  all  lively  which  may  have  taken  refuge  in  it.The  reader  can  judge  whether  I found  it  possible  to  conceal  forlong  my  affection  for  Madame  d’Houdetot.  Our  intimacy  was  pat-ent  to  everybody;  we  made  no  secret  or  mystery  of it:  it was  not  ofa  kind  to  require  it; and,  as  Madame  d’Houdetot  had  the  tenderestfriendship  for  me,  of which  she  made  no  reproach,  while I felt  forher  an  esteem,  the  full  justice  of  which  no  one  knew  better  thanmyself,  we  afforded—she,  by her  frankness,  absence  of  mind,  andthoughtlessness;  I, by my  truthfulness,  awkwardness,  pride,  impa-tience,  and  impetuosity—in  our  delusive  security,  more  opportunity,462THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUfor attack  than  we  should  have  done  if we  had  been  guilty.  We  wenttogether  to  La  Chevrette,  we  frequently  met  there,  sometimes  evenby appointment.  We  lived  there  as  usual,  walking  alone  every  daywhile  talking  of  our  love,  our  duties,  our  friend,  our  innocentschemes,  in  the  park,  opposite  Madame  d’Epinay’s  apartments,  be-neath  her  windows,  from  which  she  continually  watched  us,  and,thinking  herself  defied,  glutted  her  heart,  by  means  of  her  eyes,with  rage  and  indignation.;All  women  possess  the  art  of  concealing  their  anger,  especiallywhen  it is strong.  Madame  d’Epinay,  who  was  violent  but  deliber-ate,  possesses  this  art  in  an  eminent  degree.  She  pretended  to  seenothing,  to  suspect  nothing;  and,  while  she  redoubled  her  care  andattention  to  me,  and  almost  flirted  with  me,  she  at  the  same  timepretended  to  overwhelm  her  sister-in-law  with  rudeness  and  marksof contempt,  with  which  she  appeared  to  wish  to  inspire  me  as  well.It may  be imagined  that  she  did  not  succeed;  but  I was  on  the  rack.Torn  by contradictory  feelings,  while  at  the  same  time  I felt  touchedby her  tenderness,  I had  difficulty  in  restraining  my  anger,  when  Isaw  her  wanting  in  respect  to  Madame  d’Houdetot.  The  angelicgentleness  of  the  latter  enabled  her  to  endure  everything  withoutcomplaining,  even  without  resenting  it. Besides,  she  was  frequentlyso  absent-minded,  and  always  so  little  sensitive  to  such  things,  thathalf  the  time  she  did  not  even  notice  it.I was  so  taken  up with  my  passion,  that, seeing nothing  but Sophie—this  was  one  of Madame  d’Houdetot’s  names—I  did  not  even  no-tice  that  I had  become  the  talk  of the  whole  household  and  of thevisitors.  Baron  d'Holbach,  who,  as  far  as  I know,  had  never  beforebeen  to  La  Chevrette,  was  one  of  the  latter.  If  I had  been  as  mis-trustful  as  I afterwards  became,  I should  have  strongly  suspectedMadame  d’Epinay  of arranging  this  visit, in order  to  afford  him  thegratification  of the  amusing  spectacle  of the  amorous  citizen.  But  atthat  time  I was  so  stupid,  that  I did  not  even  see  what  was  glaringlyobvious  to  everyone.  However,  all  my  stupidity  did  not  prevent  mefrom  finding  the  Baron  more  contented  and  jovial  than  usual.  In-stead  of scowling  at  me,  he discharged  at  me  a  volley  of witticisms,of which  I understood  nothing.  I opened  my  eyes  wide  without  an-2SAINT-LAMBERT  IS  INFORMED463swering;  Madame  d’Epinay was  obliged  to  hold  her  sides  to  restrainher  laughter;  I could  not  make  out  what  was  the  matter  with  them.As  the  limits  of  jest  were  not  yet  exceeded,  the  best  thing  I couldhave  done,  if I had  understood,  would  have  been  to  join  in it. Butit is true  that,  amidst  all  the  Baron’s  mocking  joviality,  it was  easyto  perceive  the  light of a  spiteful  joy in  his  eyes,  which  would  per-haps have  made  me  uneasy,  if I had  noticed  it as  much  at  the  time,as  I afterwards  did when I recalled  it to mind.One  day,  when  I went  to  see  Madame  d’Houdetot  at  Eaubonne,on  her  return  from  one  of her journeys  to  Paris,  I found  her  sad, andsaw  that  she  had  been  crying.  I was  obliged  to  restrain  myself,  sinceMadame  de Blainville,  her  husband’s  sister,  was  present;  but, as  soonas  I had  a moment  to  myself,  I told  her  of my  uneasiness.  “Ah!”  shesaid, with a sigh, “I am  much  afraid  that  your  follies  will  deprive  meof all peace  for the rest  of my  life.  Saint-Lambert  has  been  informed,and  wrongly  informed.  He  does  me  justice,  but  he is annoyed,  and,what  is worse,  he does  not  tell  me  all. Happily,  I have  made  no  secretof our  friendship,  which  was  formed  under  his  auspices.  My letters,like  my  heart,  were  full  of you;  I have  concealed  nothing  from  himexcept  your  insensate  love,  of which  I hoped  to cure  you,  and  which,although  he  does  not  mention  it, I can  see  that  he considers  a  crimeon  my  part.  Someone  has  done  us  an  ill turn,  and  wronged  me;  butnever  mind.  Let  us  either  break  off our  acquaintance,  or  do you  be-have  yourself  as  you  ought.  I do not  wish  to  have  anything  more  toconceal  from  my  lover.”This  was  the  first  moment  when  | was  sensible  of  the  shame  ofseeing  myself  humiliated,  through  the  consciousness  of my  offence,in the presence  of a  young  woman,  whose  reproaches  I felt  to  be just,and  whose  Mentor  I ought  to  have  been.  The  indignation  whichthis  caused  me  to  feel  against  myself  might  perhaps  have  beenstrong  enough  to  overcome  my  weakness,  had  not  the  tender  com:passion  with  which  its victim  inspired  me  again  softened  my  heart.Alas!  was  that  the  moment  to  be  able  to  harden  it, when  it over-flowed  with  tears  which  penetrated  it from  all  directions?  This  ten-derness  soon  changed  to  anger  against  the  vile  informers,  who  hadonly  seen  the  evil  of a criminal  but  involuntary  feeling,  without  be-464THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUlieving,  or  even  suspecting,  the  honourable  sincerity  of heart  whichredeemed  it. We  did  not  Jong remain  in doubt  as  to  the  hand  whichhad  dealt  the blow.We  both  of us  knew  that  Madame  d’Epinay  corresponded  withSaint-Lambert.  It  was  not  the  first  storm  which  she  had  raisedagainst  Madame  d’Houdetot;  she  had  made  countless  attempts  toget  him  away  from  her,  and  the  past  success  of  some  of  these  at-tempts  made  Madame  d’Houdetot  tremble  for  the  future.  In  addi-tion,  Grimm,  who I believe  had  followed  M. de Castries  to  the  army,was  in  Westphalia,  as  well  as  Saint-Lambert;  and  they  sometimessaw  each  other.  Grimm  had  made  some  advances  to  Madamed’Houdetot,  which  had  been  unsuccessful.  This  so  annoyed  himthat  he  gave  up  visiting  her.  One  can  imagine  the  sang-froid  withwhich,  considering  his  well-known  modesty,  he  received  the  sup-position  that  she  preferred  a  man  older  than  himself,  and  of whom,since  he had  been  admitted  to  the  society  of the  great,  he only spokeas  his  protégé.My  suspicions  of  Madame  d’Epinay  became  certainties,  when  Iheard  what  had  happened  at  home.  While  I was  at  La  Chevrette,Thérèse  often  came  there  to  bring  my  letters  or  to  do certain  thingsfor  me  which  my  ill-health  rendered  necessary.  Madame  d’Epinayhad  asked  her  whether  Madame  d’Houdetot  and  myself  corre-sponded.  When  she  told  me  that  we  did,  Madame  d’Epinay  pressedher  to  hand  Madame  d’Houdetot’s  letters  to  her,  assuring  her  thatshe  would  seal  them  up  again  so  cleverly  that  it would  not  be  no-ticed.  Thérése,  without  letting  it be  seen  how  shocked  she  was  atthis  proposal,  and  even  without  informing  me,  contented  herselfwith  taking  greater  precautions  to  conceal  the  letters  which  shebrought  me—a  very  wise  precaution,  for  Madame  d’Epinay  had  herwatched  when  she  came,  and,  waiting  for  her  as  she  passed,  on  sev-eral  occasions  carried  her  boldness  so  far  as  to  feel  in  her  bib.  Shedid  more:  she  invited  herself  one  day,  together  with  M.  de  Mar-gency,  to  dinner  at  the  Hermitage,  for  the  first  time  since  I hadlived  there,  and  took  advantage  of the  moment  when  I was  walkingwith  Margency,  to  go  into  my  study  with  the mother  and  daughter,and  begged  them  to  show  her  Madame  d’Houdetot’s  letters.  If themother  had  known  where  they  were,  they  would  certainly  haverLETTER  FROM  MADAME  D’EPINAY565been  handed  to  her,  but,  luckily,  only  the  daughter  knew,  and  shedeclared  that  I had  not  kept any  of them.  This  was  a  falsehood,  be-yond  dispute,  most  honourable,  loyal,  and  generous,  while  to  havetold  the  truth  would  have  been  simply  an  act  of treachery.  Madamed’Epinay,  seeing  that  she  could  not  seduce  her,  attempted  to  rouseher  jealousy  by reproaching  her  with  her  good-nature  and  blind-ness.  “How  can  you,”  she  said  to  her,  “fail  to  perceive  that  theirconnection  is a  criminal  one?  If, in spite  of all  you  can  see  for  your-self  with  your  own  eyes,  you  still  want  further  proofs,  assist  in whatyou  must  do  to  obtain  them:  you  say  that  he  tears  up  Madamed’Houdetot’s  letters  as  soon  as  he has  read  them;  well,  then!  pick  upthe  pieces  carefully,  and  give  them  to  me;  I will  put  them  togetheragain.”  Such  were  the  lessons  which  my  friend  gave  to  my  com.panion.Thérèse  had  the  discretion  to  say  nothing  to  me  for  a  long  timeabout  all  these  attempts;  but  at  last,  seeing  my  embarrassment,  sh¢felt  bound  to  tell  me  all, so  that,  knowing  with  whom I had  to  deal,I might  take  steps  to  protect  myself  against  the  treachery  which  wa:intended  against  me.  My  indignation  and  fury  were  indescribable,Instead  of dissembling  with  Madame  d’Epinay,  as  she had  done  withme,  and  employing  counterplots,  I abandoned  myself  without  re-straint  to  my  natural  impetuosity,  and,  with  my  usual  thoughtless-ness,  broke  out  openly.  My  imprudence  may  be  gauged  by the  fol-lowing  letters,  which  sufficiently  show  how  each  of us  proceeded  onthis  occasion:LETTER  FROM  MapaMe  p’Epinay  (Packer  A,  No.  44).“What  is the  reason  that  I do  not  see  you,  my  dear  friend?  I amuneasy  about  you.  You  promised  me  faithfully  that  you  would  con-fine  yourself  to  going  backwards  and  forwards  from  the  Hermitage.Upon  that,  I left  you  to  do  as  you  pleased;  but  no,  you  have  let  aweek  go  by.  Unless  I had  been  told  that  you  were  well,  I shouldthink  that  you  were  ill.  I expected  you  yesterday  or  the  day before,but  I see  no  signs of you.  My God!  what  can  be the matter  with  you?You  have  no  business,  you  can  have  nothing  to  annoy  you  either:  forI flatter  myself  that  you  would  have  come  at  once  to  confide  in me.You  must  be  ill, then.  Relieve  my  anxiety  immediately,  I beg you.466THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUAdieu,  my  dear  friend.  May  this  ‘Adieu’  bring  a  ‘Good  morning’from  you.”ANSWER.“Wednesday  Morning.“I cannot  yet  say  anything  to  you.  I am  waiting  until  I am  betterinformed,  as  I shall  be, sooner  or  later.  Meanwhile,  rest  assured  thataccused  innocence  will  find  a  defender  sufficiently  zealous  to  givethe  slanderers,  whoever  they may  be, some  cause  for  repentance.”SEconp  LETTER  FRoM  MapaME  pD’Epinay  (Packet  A, No.  45).“Do  you  know  that  your  letter  alarms  me?  What  does  it mean?[ have  read  it more  than  five-and-twenty  times.  In  truth,  I do  notunderstand  it.  I can  only  learn  from  it that  you  are  uneasy  and  tor-mented,  and  that  you  are  waiting  until  you  are  so  no  longer,  beforespeaking  to  me  about  it.  My  dear  friend,  is this  what  we  agreed?What  has  become  of our  friendship,  our  confidence?  and  how  haveI lost  it?  Are  you  angry  with  me  or  because  of  me?  In  any  case,come  this  evening,  I entreat  you.  Remember  that  you  promised,  nota  week  ago,  to  keep nothing  on  your  mind,  but  to  let me  know  of it.  Stay!  Iat  once.  My  dear  friend,  I rely  upon  that  confidence.  .have  just  read  your  letter  again.  I do  not  understand  it any  better,but  it makes  me  tremble.  You  seem  to  me  painfully  agitated.  I wishI could  calm  you;  but  as  I do not  know  the reason  of your  uneasiness,I do not  know  what  to  say  to  you,  except  that  I shall  be as  unhappyas  yourself  until  I have  seen  you.  If you  are  not  here  by six  o’clockthis  evening,  I shall  start  to-morrow  for  the  Hermitage,  whateverkind  of weather  it is, and  whatever  my  state  of health,  for  I can  nolonger  endure  this  uneasiness.  Good  day,  my  dear,  good  friend.  Atall  risks,  I venture  to  tell  you,  without  knowing  whether  I need  doso  or  not,  to  try  and  take  care  of  yourself  and  arrest  the  progresswhich  solitude  allows  uneasiness  to  make.  A fly becomes  a  monster.I have  often  experienced  it.”.ANSWER.“Wednesday  Evening.“I can  neither  come  to  see  you  nor  receive  your  visit, as  long as  mypresent  uneasiness  continues.  The  confidence  of which  you  speak noHIS  REPLYa467longer  exists,  and  it will  not  be easy  for  you  to  regain  it. At present,I see  in your  eagerness  nothing  but  the  desire  of extracting  from  theconfessions  of  another  some  advantage  which  may  promote  yourviews.  My heart,  so  ready  to  unbosom  itself  to  another  which  opensto  receive  it, shuts  its doors  in the face  of slyness  and  cunning.  I rec-ognise  your  usual  adroitness  in  the  difficulty  which  you  find  inunderstanding  my  letter.  Do you  believe  me  simple  enough  to  thinkthat  you  have  not  understood  it?  No;  but  I shall  know  how  to  over-come  your  cunning  by frankness.  I am  going  to  explain  myself  moreclearly,  in order  that  you  may  comprehend  me  still  less.“Two  lovers,  firmly  united  and  worthy  of  each  other’s  love,  aredear  to  me;  I expect  that  you  will  not  understand  whom  I meanunless  I tell  you  their  names.  I assume  that  attempts  have  been  madeto  part them,  and  that  I have  been  made  use  of to  inspire  one  of themwith  jealousy.  The  choice  is not  very  clever,  but  it appeared  conven-ient  for  malicious  purposes;  and  it is you  whom I suspect  of thesedesigns.  I hope  that  this  makes  matters  clearer.“So  then  the  woman,  whom I esteem  above  all  others,  with  myknowledge,  would  have  the  infamy  of  dividing  her  heart  and  herperson  between  two  lovers,  and  I the  disgrace  of being  one  of thesetwo  wretches?  If I knew  that,  for  a  single  moment  in your  life,  youcould  have  entertained  such  thoughts  of her  and  me,  I should  hateyou  to  my  dying  day;  but  I only  accuse  you  of having  said,  not  ofhaving  thought  it. I do not  understand,  in such  a  case,  which  of thethree  you  have  desired  to  injure;  but,  if you  love  tranquillity,  youshould  dread  being  so  unfortunate  as  to  succeed.  I have  neither  con-cealed  from  you,  nor  from  her,  how  much  evil  I see  in  certain  con-nections;  but  I desire  that  they  should  be put  an  end  to  by means  ashonourable  as  the  feelings  which  originally  formed  them,  and  thatan  illicit  love  should  be changed  into  an  eternal  friendship.  Should  I,who  never  injured  anyone,  be  made  the  innocent  means  of  doingharm  to  my  friends?  No;  I would  never  forgive  you;  I should  be-come  your  irreconcilable  enemy.  Your  secrets  alone  should  be  re-spected;  for  I will  never  be disloyal.“I  do  not  imagine  that  my  present  embarrassment  can  last  long.I shall  soon  know  whether  I am  mistaken.  Then  I shall  perhaps  havea  great  injury  to  repair,  and  I shall  never  have  done  anything  in mylife  with  greater  goodwill.  But,  do  you  know  how I shall  repair  myerrors  during  the  short  time  which  I have  still  to  spend  near  you?By  doing  what  no  one  but  myself  will  do;  by telling  you  franklywhat  the  world  thinks  of you,  and  the  breaches  in  your  reputationTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU468which  you  have  to  repair.  In  spite  of  all  the  pretended  friends  bywhom  you  are  surrounded,  when  you  see  me  depart,  you  may  sayfarewell  to  truth;  you  will  never  find  anyone  else  to  tell it to you.”Tuirp  Lerrer  From  MapaMe  p’Eprinay  (Packet  A, No.  46).“I  did  not  understand  your  letter  of this  morning;  I told  you  so,because  it was  the truth.  I understand  that  of this  evening.  Do not  beafraid  that  I shall  ever  answer  it; I am  only  too  anxious  to  forget  it;and  although  you  excite  my  pity,  I have  been  unable  to  resist  the bit-terness  with  which  it  fills  my  soul.  I employ  slyness  and  cunningagainst  you! I accused  of the blackest  of infamies!  Good-bye;  I regretthat  you  have—good-bye;  I do  not  know  what  I am  saying—good-bye.  I should  be only  too  glad to  forgive  you.  Come  when  you  like;you  will  meet  with  a better  reception  than  your  suspicions  would  en-title  you  to.  You  can  spare  yourself  the trouble  of thinking  about  myreputation.  It  inatters  little  to  me  what  it is.  My  conduct  is  good;that  is enough  for  me.  I may  add,  that  I am  absolutely  ignorant  ofwhat  has  happened  to  the  two  persons  who  are  as  dear  to  me  as  toyou.This  last  letter  delivered  me  from  one  terrible  embarrassment  andplunged  me  into  another,  which  was  almost  as  great.  Although  allthese  letters  and  answers  had  been  delivered  with  extraordinary  ra-  `pidity  in  the  course  of  a  single  day,  this  interval  had  been  longenough  to  allow  a  break  in  my  transports  of  fury,  and  to  give  metime  to  reflect  upon  my  monstrous  imprudence.  Madame  d’Houde-tot  had  impressed  upon  me,  more  strongly  than  anything  else,  thenecessity  of remaining  calm;  of leaving  her  the  responsibility  of  ex-tricating  herself;  and  of avoiding,  especially  at  the moment,  all noiseand  actual  rupture;  yet  I, by the  most  open  and  monstrous  insults,was  on  the  point  of  completely  filling  with  rage  the  heart  of  awoman,  who  was  already  only  too  much  inclined  towards  it! Natu-rally,  I could  only  expect,  on  her  part,  an  answer  so  proud,  disdain-ful, and  contemptuous,  that  it would  leave  me  no  alternative,  unlessI behaved  like  an  utter  coward,  but  to  leave  her  house  immediately.Happily,  her  cleverness  was  greater  than  my  rage.  She  avoided,  bythe  tone  of  her  answer,  reducing  me  to  this  extremity.  But  it wasabsolutely  necessary  for  me  either  to  leave  the  house  or  to  go  andHIS  ©£MBARRASSMENT469see  her  at  once;  one  or  the  other  was  unavoidable.  I decided  uponthe  latter,  feeling  greatly  embarrassed  as  to  the  attitude  I shouldadopt  in  the  explanation,  which  I foresaw  would  have  to  be  made.How  could  I  extricate  myself  without  compromising  Madamed'Houdetot  or  Thérèse?  And  woe  to  her  whom  I should  name!There  was  nothing  which  the  vengeance  of  an  implacable  and  in-triguing  woman  did  not  cause  me  to  apprehend  for  her  upon  whosehead  it might  fall.  It was  to  prevent  this  misfortune  that  I had  onlyspoken  of  suspicions  in  my  letters  to  avoid  being  compelled  to  pro-duce  my  proofs.  It is true  that  this  made  my  outbursts  the  more  in.excusable,  since  no  mere  suspicion  justified  me  in treating  a  woman,especially  one  who  was  my  friend,  as  I had  just  treated  Madamed’Epinay.  But  here  commences  the  grand  and  noble  task,  which  Ihave  worthily  fulfilled,  of expiating  my  secret  faults  and  weaknesses,by taking  upon  myself  the  responsibility  of  more  serious  faults, ofwhich  I was  incapable,  and  of which  I never  was  guilty.I had  not  to  endure  the  attack  which  I had  feared,  and  got  offwith  a  simple  fright.  When  I approached  her,  Madame  d’Epinayflung  her  arms  round  my  neck,  and  burst  into  tears.  This  unex-pected  reception,  on  the  part  of an  old  friend,  touched  me  greatly,and  I also  wept  freely.  I said  a  few  words  to  her,  which  did  notmean  much:  she  said  a  few  to  me,  which  meant  still  less,  and  thatwas  all.  Dinner  was  served;  we  took  our  seats  at  the  table,  where,  inthe  expectation  of the  explanation,  which  I thought  was  only put  offuntil  after  supper,  I cut  a  very  poor  figure;  for  I am  so  overcome  bythe  slightest  uneasiness  which  takes  possession  of me,  that  I cannotconceal  it even  from  the  most  unobservant.  My embarrassed  mannershould  have  inspired  her  with  courage;  however,  she  did  not  risk  it.There  was  as  little  explanation  after  supper  as  before.  There  wasnone  on  the next  day either;  and  our  silent  ¢éte-d-tétes  were  filled  upwith  indifferent  matters  or  a  few  polite  words  on  my  part,  in which,while  expressing  myself  to  the  effect  that  I could  not  yet  say  any-thing  about  the  foundation  for  my  suspicions,  I protested  with  allsincerity  that,  if they  proved  unfounded,  my  whole  life  would  bedevoted  to  repairing  their  injustice.  She  did  not  exhibit  the  leastcuriosity  to  know  exactly  what  these  suspicions  were,  or  how  theyhad  occurred  to  me;  and  our  reconciliation,  both  on  her part and  my470THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUown,  was  entirely  limited  to  our  embrace  when  we  met.  Since  shealone  was  the  injured  party,  at  least  in  form,  it seemed  to  me  thatit was  not  my  business  to  desire  an  explanation  which  she  herselfdid  not  desire,  and  J returned  home  as  I had  left.  In  other  respectsmy  relations  with  her  remained  unaltered,  I soon  almost  entirelyforgot  the  quarrel,  and  foolishly  believed  that  she  had  forgotten  itherself,  because  she  no  longer  seemed  to  remember  it.As  will  presently  be  seen,  this  was  not  the  only  annoyance  whichmy  own  weakness  brought  upon  me;  but  I also  suffered  others,equally  annoying,  which  I had  certainly  not  brought  upon  myself,and  which  were  caused  solely  by the  desire  of others  to  tear  me  awayfrom  my  solitude,  by dint  of  tormenting  me  in  it.1°  These  annoy-ances  came  upon  me  from  Diderot  and  the  Holbachian  clique.  Sincemy  establishment  at  the  Hermitage,  Diderot  had  never  ceased  toharass  me,  either  himself  or  through  Deleyre;  and  I soon  saw,  fromthe jests of the  latter  upon  my  walks  in the  forest,  with  what  delightthey  had  travestied  the  hermit  as  an  amorous  shepherd.  But  it wasnot  a  question  of  this  in  my  encounter  with  Diderot,  the  cause  ofwhich  was  more  serious.  After  the  publication  of the  “Fils  Naturel,”he had  sent  me  a  copy  of it, which  I had  read  with  the  interest  andattention  which  one  naturally  bestows  on  the  works  of a  friend.  Onreading  the  kind  of poetical  prose  dialogue  which  he  had  added  toit,  I was  surprised,  and  even  somewhat  saddened,  to  find  in  it,amongst  several  discourteous  but endurable  remarks  directed  againstthose  who  live a solitary  life, the  following  harsh  and  bitter  sentence,without  anything  to  tone  it  down:  “Only  the  wicked  are  alone.”This  sentence  is, it appears  to  me,  ambiguous,  and  capable  of  twointerpretations,  one  quite  true,  the  other  equally  false;  since  it is im-possible  for  a man  who  is and  who  desires  to  be alone,  to  be able  ordesirous  to  injure  anyone,  and  therefore  he cannot  be  wicked.  Thesentence  in  itself  therefore  required  an  explanation;  it  required  itstill more  on  the part  of an  author  who, when  he wrote  the  sentence,had  a  friend  who  was  living  in retirement  and  solitude.  It appearedThat  is  to  say,  the  desire  of  tearing  the  old  woman  away  from  it,  whoseservices  Were  necessary  in  arranging  the  conspiracy.  It is astonishing  that,  duringthe  whole  of this  long  storm,  my  stupid  confidence  in others  prevented  me  fromunderstanding  that  it was  not  I, but  she, whom  they  wanted  to  see  in Paris  again.+DIDEROT471to  me  shocking  and  dishonourable  that,  when  publishing  it,  heshould  either  have  forgotten  this  solitary  friend,  or  that,  if he  hadremembered  him,  he  should  not  have  made,  at  least  in  the  generalstatement,  the  honourable  and  just  exception  which  he  owed  notonly to  this  friend,  but  to  the  many  respected  philosophers,  who,  inall  ages,  have  sought  peace  and  tranquillity  in  retirement,  and  ofwhom,  for  the  first  time  since  the  existence  of the  world,  an  authorpermits  himself,  by a  single  stroke  of the  pen,  to  make  so  many  vil-lains  without  distinction.I was  tenderly  attached  to  Diderot,  I esteemed  him  sincerely,  andI reckoned  upon  the  same  feelings  on  his  part  with  perfect  confi-dence.  But,  worn  out  by his  unwearying  obstinacy  in  eternally  op-posing  me  in  my  tastes,  inclinations,  manner  of  living,  in  fact,  ineverything  which  concerned  myself  alone;  disgusted  at  seeing  a  manyounger  than  myself attempting  to control  me  absolutely  like  a child;sick  of his  readiness  in making  promises,  and  his carelessness  in ful-filling  them;  weary  of so  many  appointments  made  and  broken  onhis  part,  and  of his  fancy  for  continually  making  fresh  ones,  only  tobe broken  again;  tired  of waiting  for him  in vain  three  or  four  timesa  month,  on  days  fixed  by himself,  and  of  dining  alone  in  the  eve-ning,  after  having  gone  as  far  as  Saint-Denis  to  meet  him,  afterwaiting  for him  the  whole  day, my  heart  was  already  full  of his con-tinued  want  of consideration.  The  last  instance  appeared  to  me  moreserious,  and  wounded  me  still  more  deeply.  I wrote  to  him  to  com-plain  of it, but  with  a  gentleness  and  emotion  which  caused  me  todrench  the  paper  with  my  tears;  and  my  letter  was  touching  enoughto  have  drawn  tears  from  him.  No  one  would  guess  how  he repliedupon  the  matter;  here  is his  answer  word  for  word  (Packet  A, No-33):“I am  very  glad that  my  work  has  pleased  you,  that  it has  affectedyou.  You  are  not  of  my  opinion  concerning  hermits;  say  as  muchgood  of them  as  you  please,  you  will  be the  only one  in  the  world  ofwhom I shall  think  it; and  yet I should  be able  to  say  a  good  deal  onthe  matter,  if I could  say  it to  you  without  offending  you.  A womanof eighty  years  of age!  etc.  Someone  has  told  me  of a  phrase from  aletter  of  Madame  d’Epinay’s  son,  which  must  have  pained  yougreatly,  or  else  I do not  know  you  thoroughly.”472THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUI must  explain  the  two  last  phrases  of  this  letter.At  the  beginning  of my  stay  at  the  Hermitage,  Madame  le Vas-seur  did  not  seem  comfortable,  and  appeared  to  find  it too  lonely.Her  remarks  on  the  subject  were  repeated  to  me,  and I offered  tosend  her  back  to  Paris  if  she  preferred  it, to  pay  for  her  lodgingthere,  and  to  look  after  her  just as  if she  were  still  with  me.  She  re-fused  my  offer,  declared  that  she  was  very  well  satisfied  with  theHermitage,  and  that  the  country  air did  her good,  which  it was  easyto  see  was  true,  for  she  seemed  to  grow  younger,  and  was  in  farbetter  health  than  at  Paris.  Her  daughter  even  assured  me  that  shewould  have  been,  on  the  whole,  very  sorry  if we  had  left  the  Hermi-tage,  which  really  was  a  charming  residence;  that  she  was  very  fondof pottering  about  in  the  garden  and  in  the  orchard,  of. which  shehad  the  management,  and  that  she  had  only  said  what  she  had  beentold  to  say,  to  try  and  induce  me  to  return  to  Paris.This  attempt  having  proved  unsuccessful,  they  endeavoured  toobtain,  by appealing  to  my  scruples,  the  result  which  my  readinessto  oblige had  not  produced;  they declared  that  it was  a  crime  on  mypart  to  keep the  old  woman  there,  far  from  the  assistance  which  shemight need  at  her  age,  without  considering  that  she  and  many  otherold  people,  whose  life  is prolonged  by the  healthy  air  of the  country,might  procure  this  assistance  from  Montmorency,  which  was  closeto my  doors—as  if Paris  had  been  the only place in which  there  wereold  people,  and  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  live  anywhere  else.Madame  le Vasseur,  who  was  a  large  and  very  ravenous  eater,  wassubject  to  overflows  of  bile  and  violent  attacks  of  diarrhoea,  whichlasted  several  days, and  acted  as  a  remedy.  At Paris  she took  nothingfor  them,  and  let  Nature  take  its  course.  She  did  the  same  at  theHermitage,  since  she  knew  well  that  she  could  do  nothing  better.Never  mind;  because  there  were  no  physicians  and  apothecaries  inthe country,  to  leave  her there  showed  a  wish  for her death,  althoughshe  was  in very  good  health  there.  Diderot  ought  to  have  fixed  theage  at  which  it  is  no  longer  permitted,  under  penalty  of  beingcharged  with  manslaughter,  to  allow  old  people  to  live  out  of Paris,This  was  one  of  the  two  monstrous  accusations,  in  regard  towhich  he made  no  exception  in my  case,  in his statement  that  “Onlythe  wicked  are  alone”;  and  this  was  the  meaning  of his  pathetic  ex-LETTER  TO  MADAME  *D’EPINAY473clamation  and  the  etcetera  which  he so  kindly  added,  “A woman  ofeighty  years  of age!  etc.”oeI thought  I could  not  reply  to  this  reproach  better  than  by refer-ring to  Madame  le Vasseur  herself.  I asked  her to  write  quite simplyand  naturally  to  Madame  d’Epinay  and  tell  her  what  her  opinionwas.  To put  her  completely  at  her  ease,  I did  not  even  ask  to  see  herletter,  and  I showed  her  the  following,  which  I wrote  to  Madamed’Epinay,  in reference  to  an  answer  which  I had  decided  to  make  toa  still  harsher  letter  from  Diderot,  and  which  she  had  prevented  mefrom  sending.“Thursday.“Madame  le Vasseur  is going  to  write  to  you,  my  good  friend.  Ihave  asked  her  to  tell  you  frankly  what  she  thinks.  To  put  her  en-tirely  at  her  ease,  I have  told  her  that  I do not  want  to  see  her  letter,and  I beg you  to  tell  me  nothing  about  its contents.“T will  not  send  my  letter,  since  you  oppose  it; but  as  I feel  griev-ously  offended,  it would  be a  baseness  and  a  falsehood,  which  I can-not  permit  myself,  to  allow  that  I am  wrong.  The  Gospel  certainlyorders  him  who  receives  a  blow  on  one  cheek  to  offer  the  other,  butnot  to  ask  for  pardon.  Do  you  remember  the  man  in  the  comedy,who  exclaims,  while  dealing  blows  with  his  stick,  ‘That  is the  partof the  philosopher’?“Do  not  flatter  yourself  that  you  can  prevent  him  from  coming  inthe  present  bad  weather.  His  anger  will  give  him  the  time  andstrength  which  friendship  refuses  him, and  it will  be the first  time  inhis life  that  he has  come  on  the  day he has  promised.  He  will  do hisutmost  to  come  and  repeat,  with  his  own  mouth,  the  insults  whichhe  has  heaped  upon  me  in  his  letters.  I will  endure  them  with  theutmost  patience.  He  will  return  to  Paris  to  be  ill;  and,  as  usual,  Ishall  be a  very  hateful  person.  But  what  can  I do?  I must  endure  it.“But,  can  you  help  admiring  the  cleverness  of  this  man,  whowanted  to  come  and  take  me  in  a  coach  to  Saint-Denis  to  dinner,and  to  bring  me  back;  and  who,  a  week  afterwards,!!  finds  that  hisfinances  do  not  allow  him  to  visit  the  Hermitage  except  on  foot?  Itis not  absolutely  impossible,  to  adopt  his  language,  that  this  is  thetone  of sincerity;  but,  in this  case,  a  strange  alteration  in the  state  ofhis finances  must  have  taken  place in the course  of a week.1  Packet  A  No.  34.474THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU“I  share  your  grief  at  your  mother’s  iliness;  but  you  see  that  yoursorrow  is not  nearly  as  great  as  mine.  It causes  less  suffering  to  seethose  whom  one  loves,  ill, than  to  see  them  cruel  and  unjust.“Adieu,  my  good  friend;  this  is the  last  time  that  I shall  speak  toyou  about  this  unfortunate  affair.  You  speak  to  me  of going  to  Pariswith  a  coolness  and  indifference,  which,  at  any  other  time,  wouldrejoice  me  greatly.”I informed  Diderot  of what  I had  done  in  regard  to  Madame  leVasseur,  at  Madame  d’Epinay’s  own  suggestion;  and  as  she  chose,as  may  be imagined,  to  remain  at  the Hermitage,  where  she was  verycomfortable,  always  had  company,  and  found  her life very  agreeable,Diderot,  no  longer  knowing  what  crime  to  charge  me  with,  con-strued  this  very  precaution  on  my  part  into  one,  as  well  as  Madamele Vasseur’s  continued  stay  at  the  Hermitage,  although  it had  beenher  own  choice,  and  it had  only  rested,  and  still  rested  with  her,  toreturn  to  Paris  to  live,  with  the  same  assistance  from  me  as  she  re-ceived  at  my  house.Such  is  the  explanation  of the  first  reproach  in  Diderot’s  letter,No.  33.  The  explanation  of the  second  is contained  in his  letter,  No.34:“  “The  man  of letters’  1?  must  have  written  to  you,  that  there  weretwenty  poor  wretches  on  the  rampart  dying of cold  and  hunger,  andwaiting  for  the  farthing  you  used  to  give them.  This  is a  sample  ofour  small-talk—and  if you  were  to  hear  the  rest,  it would  amuse  youas  much  as  this.”Here  is  my  answer  to  this  terrible  argument,  of  which  Diderotseemed  so  proud:“I  believe  that  I replied  to  the  ‘man  of  letters,’  that  is to  say,  theson  of a  farmer-general,  that  I did  not  pity  the  poor  whom  he  hadseen  upon  the  rampart,  waiting  for  my  farthing;  that  he had  appar-ently  amply  compensated  them  for  its loss; that  I had  appointed  himmy  substitute;  that  the  poor  of Paris  would  have  no  reason  tp com-plain  of  the  exchange;  but  that  I could  not  easily  find  an  equallyA  name  jokingly  bestowed  by Grimm  upon  Madame  d’Epinay’s  son.EXPLANATIONS475good  one  for those  of Montmprency,  who  had  much  greater  need  ofit.  There  is  here  a  good  and  worthy  old  man,  who,  after  having_  worked  all  his  life,  can  work  no  longer,  and  is dying  of hunger  inhis old  age.  My conscience  is better  satisfied  with  the two  sous  whichI give him  every  Monday,  than  with  the  hundred  farthings  which  Ishould  have  distributed  to  all  the  beggars  on  the  rampart.  You  areamusing,  you  philosophers,  when  you  regard  all  the  inhabitants  ofcities  as  the  only  people  with  whom  your  duty  bids  you  concernyourselves.  It is in the  country  that  one  learns  to  love  and  serve  hu-manity;  one  only learns  to  despise  it in cities.”Such  were  the  singular  scruples,  which  led  a  man  of intelligenceto  the  folly  of  seriously  making  a  crime  of my  absence  from  Paris,and  made  him  attempt  to  prove  to  me,  by my  own  example,  that  itwas  impossible  for  anyone  to  live  outside  the  city  without  beingwicked.  At the present  day I cannot  understand  how  J was  so  foolishas  to answer  him  and  to  feel  annoyed,  instead  of laughing  in his faceas  my  only  reply.  However,  Madame  d’Epinay’s  decisions  and  theclamours  of  the  Holbachian  clique  had  so  blinded  people’s  mindsin  her  favour,  that  I was  generally  considered  to  be  wrong  in  thematter,  and  Madame  d’Houdetot  herself,  who  was  an  enthusiasticadmirer  of Diderot,  wanted  me  to  go and  see  him in Paris,  and  makeall  the  first  advances  towards  a reconciliation,  which,  sincere  andcomplete  as  it was  on  my  part,  did  not  last  long.  The  triumphantargument,  which  she  made  use  of to  influence  my  heart  was,  thatDiderot,  at  this  moment,  was  unhappy.  Besides  the  storm  arousedagainst  the  “Encyclopédie,”  he  had  at  that  time  to  endure  another,even  more  violent,  caused  by his  piece,  which,  in  spite  of the  littleaccount  prefixed  by him  at  the  commencement,  he  was  accused  ofhaving  taken  entirely  from  Goldoni.  Diderot,  even  more  sensitiveto  criticism  than  Voltaire,  was  overwhelmed.  Madame  de  Graffignyhad  even  had  the  spitefulness  to  circulate  the  report  that  I had  takenthis  opportunity  to  break  off  my  acquaintance  with  him.  I con-sidered  that  it would  be  just  and  generous  publicly  to  demonstratethe contrary,  and  I went  to  spend  two  days, not  only in his company,but  at  his  house.  This  was  my  second  journey  to  Paris  since  mysettlement  at  the  Hermitage.  I had  taken  the  first  in order  to  hastento  poor  Gauffecourt,  who  had  an  attack  of apoplexy,  from  which  he476THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUhas  never  quite  recovered,  during  which  I never  left  his  bedsideuntil  he was  out  of danger.Diderot  received  me  cordially.  How  many  wrongs  can a friend’sembrace  wipe  out!  What  resentment,  after  that,  can  still  remain  inthe heart?  We  entered  into  few  explanations.  There  is no  need  of itin  a  case  of mutual  abuse.  There  is only  one  thing  to  be  done—toforget it.  There  had  been  no  underhand  proceedings,  at  least  as  faras  I knew;  it  was  not  the  same  as  with  `Madame  d’Epinay.  Heshowed  me  the  outline  of the  “Père  de  Famille.”  “That,”  said  I tohim,  “is  the  best  defence  of the  ‘Fils  Naturel.’  Remain  silent,  workthis  piece  out  carefully,  and  then  suddenly  fling  it at  your  enemies’head  as  your  only reply.”  He  did  so,  and  found  the plan successful.  Ihad sent  him the first two  parts  of Julie nearly  six months  before, ask-ing for  his  opinion  of them.  He  had  not  yet  read  them.  We  read  aportion  of them  together.  He  found  it all feuillet;  that  was  the  wordhe used, meaning  that it was  overloaded  with  words  and  full  of pad-ding.  I had  already  felt  this  myself;  but  it was  the  babbling  of delir-ium;  I have  never  been  able  to  correct  it. The  last  parts  are  different.The  fourth  especially,  and  the  sixth,  are  masterpieces  of  diction.On  the  second  day  after  my  arrival,  he  insisted  upon  taking  meto  supper  at  M. d’Holbach’s.  We could  never  manage  to  agree.  I evenwanted  to break  the agreement  concerning  the manuscript  on  Chem-istry,  as  I was  indignant  at  being  under  an  obligation  for  it to  sucha  man.  Diderot  was  completely  victorious.  He  swore  that  M.  d’Hol-bach  had  a most  sincere  affection  for me;  that I must  excuse  his man-ner,  which  was  the  same  to  everybody,  and  from  which  his  friendshad  to  suffer  more  than  anyone.  He  represented  to  me  that  to  refusethe  production  of  this  manuscript,  after  having  accepted  it  twoyears  before,  would  be an  insult  to  the  donor,  which  he had  not  de-served;  that  this  refusal  might  even  be  misinterpreted,  as  a  secretreproach  to  him  for having  been  so  long in fulfilling  the  agreement.“I see  d'Holbach  every  day,”  he added;  “I know  his  inner  self betterthan  you  do.  If you  had  not  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  it, do  youthink  your  friend  capable  of advising  you  to  act  meanly?”  In  short,with  my  usual  weakness,  I allowed  myself  to  be  overcome,  and  wewent  to  supper  with  the  Baron,  who  received  me  in his usual  man-ner;  but his wife  received  me  coldly,  and  almost  rudely.  I no  longer.RETURN  oF  SAINT-LAMBERT477recognised  the  amiable  Caroline  who,  before  she  was  married,showed  me  so  many  marks  of goodwill.  Long  before,  I had  fanciedthat  I perceived  that, since  Grimm  had  been a constant  visitor  at  thehouse  of Aine,  I was  no  longer  regarded  with  so  favourable  an  eye.While  I was  in Paris,  Saint-Lambert  arrived  on  leave.  As  I knewnothing  of it, I did  not  see  him  until  after  my  return  to  the country,at  first  at  La  Chevrette,  and  afterwards  at  the  Hermitage,  where  he  'came  with  Madame  d’Houdetot  to  ask  me  to  invite  him  to  dinner.  ©It may  be  imagined  how  pleased  I was  to  receive  them;  but  I wasstill  more  pleased  to  see  the  good  understanding  between  them.  Re-joiced  that  I had  not  disturbed  their  happiness,  I felt happy  in it my-self;  and  I can  swear  that,  during  the  whole  course  of my  mad  pas-sion,  but  especially  at  this  moment,  even  if I had  been  able  to  takeMadame  d’Houdetot  from  him,  I should  not  have  wished,  and  Ishould  not  even  have  felt  tempted  to  do so.  I found  her  so  amiable,so  devoted  to  Saint-Lambert,  that  I could  hardly  imagine  that  shemight  have  been  equally  devoted  in her  love  for  myself;  and, with-out  desiring  to  disturb  their  union,  all  that  I had  most  truly  desiredfrom  her  in  my  delirium,  was  that  she  should  allow  herself  to  beloved.  In  short,  however  violent  the  passion  with  which  I had  beeninflamed  for  her, I felt  it as  delightful  to  be the  confidant  as  the  ob-ject  of her  affections,  and  I have  never  for  a  moment  regarded  herJover  as  my  rival,  but  always  as  my  friend.  It will  be  said  that  thiswas  not  yet  actual  love.  So  be it; but  then,  it was  more.As  for  Saint-Lambert,  he  behaved  honourably  and  judiciously.As  I was  the  only guilty  party,  I alone  was  punished,  and  that  evenmercifully.  He  treated  me  severely,  but  amicably;  and  I saw  that  Ihad  lost  something  of  his  esteem,  but  nothing  of  his  friendship.  Iconsoled  myself,  since  I knew  that  it would  be  easier  for  me  to  re-gain  the  former  than  the  latter,  and  that  he  was  too  sensible  to  con-found  an  involuntary  and  momentary  weakness  with a radical  vice.If, in all that  had  taken  place,  there  had  been  errors  on  my  part,  theywere  trifling  ones.  Was  it  I who  had  sought  his mistress?  Was  it nothe  who  had  sent  her  to  me?  Was  it not  she  who  had  sought  me?Could  I have  avoided  seeing  her?  What  could  I do?  They alone  haddone  the  mischief,  and  I had  been  the  one  to  suffer  from  it.  In  myplace, he would  have  done  just as  I did, perhaps  worse;  for, in short,478THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUhowever  faithful,  however  estimable  Madame  d’Houdetot  mayhave  been,  she  was  a  woman.  He  was  very  often  absent;  the  oppor-tunities  were  frequent,  the  temptations  were  great,  and  it  wouldhave  been  very  difficult  for  her  always  to  defend  herself  with  equalsuccess  against  a  more  enterprising  lover.  It  was  certainly  a  greatthing for  her  and  for  me,  in such a situation,  that  we  had  been  ableto  fix  the  limits,  which  we  never  permitted  ourselves  to  overstep.Although,  in the  bottom  of my  heart,  I could  produce  sufficientlyhonourable  testimony  in  my  favour,  appearances  were  so  muchagainst  me,  that  the unconquerable  feeling  of shame,  by which  I wasalways  dominated,  gave  me,  in  his  presence,  the  appearance  of  aguilty  person,  and  he  often  abused  it in  order  to  humiliate  me.  Asingle  incident  will  make  our  mutual  relations  clear.  After  dinner  Iread  to  him  the  letter  which  I had  written  to  Voltaire  the  year  be-fore,  and  which  he  had  heard  spoken  of.  He  went  to  sleep  while  Iwas  reading  it;  and  I, formerly  so  proud,  now  so  foolish,  did  notventure  to  discontinue  reading,  and  read  on  while  he  snored.  Thusdid  I humble  myself;  thus  did  he avenge  himself;  but  his  generositynever  permitted  him  to  do  so  except  when  we  three  were  alone.After  he  went  away  again,  I found  Madame  d’Houdetot  greatlyaltered  in her  behaviour  towards  me.  I was  as  surprised  as  if I oughtnot  to  have  expected  it.  I was  more  affected  by it than  I ought to havebeen,  and  this  caused  me  much  suffering.  It seemed  that  everythingby which  I expected  to  be cured  only plunged  deeper  into  my  heartthe  arrow  which  I had  at  length  rather  broken  off  than  pulled  out.I was  resolved  to  conquer  myself  completely,  and  to  leave  nothingundone  to  change  my  foolish  passion  into  a  pure  and  lasting  friend-ship. With  this  object,  I had  formed  the most  admirable  plans in theworld,  which  I needed  Madame  d’Houdetot’s  assistance  in carryingout.  When  I attempted  to  speak  to  her,  I found  her  absent  and  em-barrassed.  I felt that she had ceased  to feel  any  pleasure  in my  society,and  I saw  clearly  that  something  had  taken  place which  she  did  notwant  to  tell  me,  and  which  I have  never  learnt.  This  change,  ofof which  I was  unable  to  obtain  an  explanation,  tortured  me  cruelly.She  asked  me  to return  her letters:  I returned  them  all, with  a fidelitywhich,  to  my  great  mortification,  she  for  a moment  doubted.  Thisdoubt  was  another  unexpected  pang  for  me,  as  she  must  have  wellCOLDNESS  OF  MADAME  D’HOUDETOT479known.  She  did  me  justice,  but  not  immediately.  I understood  thatthe examination  of the packet which  I had returned  to her had  madeher  conscious  of her  injustice.  I even  saw  that  she  reproached  her-self,  and  this  gave  me  a  certain  advantage  again.  She  could  not  takeback  her  own  letters  without  returning  mine.  She  told  me  that  shehad  burnt  them;  in  my  turn,  I ventured  to  doubt  it, and  I confessthat  I doubt  it still.  No;  one  does  not  throw  such  letters  into  the  fire.The  letters  in  Julie  have  been  considered  burning.  Good  heavens!what  would  have  been  thought  of mine?  No,  no;  a  woman  capableof inspiring  such a passion  will  never  have  the  courage  to  burn  theproofs  of it.  But  neither  do  J fear  that  she  has  ever  misused  them.I do not  believe  her  capable  of it; and  besides,  I had  taken  measuresto  prevent  it. The  foolish,  but  lively fear  of being ridiculed  had  mademe  commence  this  correspondence  in  a  tone  which  protected  thecontents  of  my  letters  from  being  communicated  to  others.  I evencarried  the  familiar  tone  which  I adopted  in them  so  far  as  to  theeand  thou  her, but in such  a  manner  that  she certainly  could  not  havebeen  offended.  Certainly,  she  complained  of  it  several  times,  butwithout  success.  Her  complaints  only  aroused  my  suspicions,  and,besides,  I could  not  bring  myself  to  draw  back.  If these  letters  arestill  in existence,  and  should  one  day see  the  light,  it will  be knownhow I have  loved.The  pain  which  Madame  d’Houdetot’s  coldness  caused  me,  andthe certainty  that  I had  not  deserved  it, caused  me  to  take  the  singu-lar  course  of complaining  about  it to  Saint-Lambert  himself.  Whilewaiting  to  see the  result  of my  letter  on  the  subject,  I plunged  intothe  distractions  to  which  I ought  to  have  had  recourse  sooner.  Somefestivities  took  place  at  La  Chevrette,  for  which  I composed  themusic.  The  pleasure  of distinguishing  myself  in the  eyes  of Madamed’Houdetot,  by the  display  of  a  talent  which  she  admired,  spurredmy  energies;  and  another  circumstance  contributed  to  arouse  them,namely,  the  desire  of showing  that  the  author  of the  Devin  du  Vil-lage  understood  music;  for  I had  long  since  perceived  that  someonewas  secretly  working  to  make  this  seem  doubtful,  at  least  in regardto  composition.  My first  appearance  in Paris,  the tests  to  which  I hadthere  been  subjected  on  different  occasions,  at  M. Dupin’s  and  M. dela Popliniére’s;  the quantity  of music  which  I had  composed  during480THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUfourteen  years  in  the  midst  of  the  most  famous  artists,  under  theirvery  eyes;  and  lastly,  the  opera  of the  Muses  Galantes,  even  that  ofthe  Devin,  a  motet  which  I had  written  for  Mademoiselle  Fel,  andwhich  she  had  sung  at  the  “spiritual  concert,”  the  numerous  dis-cussions  on  this  beautiful  art  which  had  taken  place between  myselfand  its  greatest  masters—all  these  proofs  should  have  prevented  ordissipated  any  such  doubt.  It existed,  however,  even  at La Chevrette,and  I saw  that  M.  d’Epinay  was  not  free  from  it. Without  appearingto  be  aware  of it,  I undertook  to  compose  a  motet  for  him  for  thededication  of the  chapel  of La  Chevrette,  and  I asked  him  to  supplyme  with  words  chosen  by himself.  He  commissioned  de Linant,  hisson’s  tutor,  to  write  them.  De  Linant  composed  some  words  suitableto  the  occasion,  and,  a  week  after  they  were  given  to  me,  the  motetwas  finished.  This  time,  spite  was  my  Apollo,  and  never  did  richermusic  leave  my  hands.  The  words  began  with:  “Ecce  sedes  hicTonantis.”  13  The  pomp  of  the  opening  was  in  keeping  with  thewords,  and  the  whole  motet  was  so  beautiful  that  everyone  wasstruck  with  admiration.  I had  written  for a large orchestra.  D’Epinaygot  together  the  best  instrumentalists.  Madame  Bruna,  an  Italiansinger,  sang  the  motet,  and  was  excellently  accompanied.  The  motetwas  so  successful  that  it was  afterwards  given  at  the  “spiritual  con-cert,”  at  which,  in  spite  of the  secret  intrigues  and  the  poorness  ofthe  execution,  it  was  twice  heartily  applauded.  For  M.  d’Epinay’sbirthday,  I supplied  the  idea  of  a  kind  of  piece,  half  drama,  halfpantomime,  which  Madame  d’Epinay  composed,  and  for  which  Ialso  wrote  the  music.  Grimm,  on  his  arrival,  heard  of  my  musicalsuccesses;  an  hour  later,  nothing  more  was  said  about  them;  but,  atany  rate,  as  far  as  I know,  there  was  no  longer  any  question  of myknowledge  of  composition.No  sooner  was  Grimm  at  La  Chevrette,  where  already  I was  notvery  comfortable,  than  he  made  my  stay  completely  unendurableby putting  on  airs,  which  I had  never  seen  exhibited  by anyone  be-fore,  and of which  I had not  even  an  idea.  The  day before  his arrival,I was  turned  out  of the  best  visitor’s-room,  which  I was  occupying,next  to  Madame  d’Epinay’s;  it was  got  ready  for  Grimm,  and  an-T  have  since  heard  that  these  words  were  by  de  Santeuil,  and  that  M.  deLinant  had  quietly  appropriated  them.GRIMM  AND  MADAME  D’EPINAY481other,  in a  more  remote  part of the  house,  was  given  to  me.  “See,”said  I to  Madame  d’Epinay  with  a  laugh,  “see  how  the  new-comersturn  out  the  old.”  She  appeared  embarrassed;  and  I understood  thereason  for  this  better  in  the  evening,  when  J learned  that,  betweenher  room  and  that  which  I was  leaving,  there  was  a  secret  door  ofcommunication,  which  she  had  not  thought  it worth  while  to  showme.  Her  relations  with  Grimm  were  no  secret  to  anybody,  neitherin her  own  house  nor  in public,  nor  even  to  her  husband;  however,far  from  admitting  it to  me,  her  confidant  in  secrets  of far  greaterimportance,  and  which  she  knew  were  perfectly  safe  with  me,  shestoutly  denied  it.  I understood  that  this  reserve  was  due  to  Grimm,who, although  he was  the  depositary  of all my  secrets,  was  unwillingthat  I should  have  any  of his  own  in my  keeping.However  much  my  former  feelings,  which  were  not  yet  extinguished,  and  the  man’s  real  merits,  prejudiced  me  in  his  favour,these  feelings  were  not  proof  against  the  efforts  he  took  to  destroythem.  He  received  me  in  the  style  of  the  Comte  de  Tufhére;'*  hehardly  condescended  to  return  my  greeting;  he  never  addressed  asingle  word  to  me,  and  soon  cured  me  of addressing  any  to  him,  bynever  answering  me  at all. He  took  precedence  everywhere,  and  heldfirst  place,  without  ever  paying  any  attention  to  me.  I could  have  letthat  pass,  if he  had  not  displayed  an  offensive  affectation.  A  singleincident  out  of a  thousand  will  explain  what  I mean.  One  evening,Madame  d’Epinay,  feeling  slightly  unwell,  told  the  servants  to  bringher  something  to  eat  upstairs  to  her  room,  where  she  intended  tohave  her  supper  by the  side  of the  fire.  She  asked  me  to  go  upstairswith  her,  which  I did.  Grimm  came  up  afterwards.  The  little  tablewas  already  laid,  but only for two.  Supper  was  brought  in; Madamed’Epinay  took  her  seat  on  one  side  of  the  fire.  M.  Grimm  took  aneasy  chair,  settled  himself  in  the  other  corner,  drew  up  the  littletable  between  them,  unfolded  his  napkin,  and  proceeded  to  eat,without  saying  a single word  to me.  Madame  d’Epinay  blushed,  and,to  induce  him  to  apologise  for  his  rudeness,  offered  me  her  ownplace.  He  said  nothing,  and  did  not  even  look  at  me.  As  I was  un-able  to  get  near  the  fire,  I decided  to  walk  up  and  down  the  room,until  they  brought  me a plate.  At  last,  he  allowed  me  to  sup  at  the14 One  of  the  characters  in  Le  Glorieux,  a comedy  by Destouches  (1732).482THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUend  of the  table,  away  from  the  fire,  without  making  the  slightestapology  to  me,  his  senior,  in ill-health,  an  older  acquaintance  of thefamily,  who  had  introduced  him  to  the house,  the  honours  of whichhe ought  even  to  have  shown  to  me,  as  the  favourite  of the  lady  ofthe  house.  All  his  behaviour  to  me  was  very  much  after  the  samepattern.  He  did  not  treat  me  exactly  as  his  inferior;  he looked  uponme  as  a  perfect  nonentity.  I found  it hard  to  recognise  the  formercuistre  who,  in  the  Prince  of  Saxe-Gotha’s  establishment,  felt  him-self  honoured  by a  look  from  me.  I found  it still  harder  to  reconcilethis profound  silence,  and  this  insulting  haughtiness,  with  the tenderfriendship  which  he  boasted  he  entertained  for  me,  in  the  presenceof these  who  he  knew  entertained  it for  me  themselves.  It  is truethat  he  rarely  gave  any  signs  of  it, except  to  sympathise  with  mypecuniary  position,  of which  I never  complained,  or  to  compassion-ate  my  melancholy  lot, with  which  I was  quite  content,  or  to  lamentthat  I so  harshly  rejected  the beneficent  attentions  which  he declaredhe was  eager  to  show  me.  It was  by artifices  like  this  that  he causedhis  tender  generosity  to  be  admired,  my  ungrateful  misanthropy  tobe  censured,  and  imperceptibly  accustomed  everyone  to  imagine,that  the  relations  between a protector  like  himself  and  an  unfortu-nate  creature  like  me  could  only  be, on  the  one  side,  benefits,  and,on  the  other,  obligations,  without  supposing,  even  as  a  remote  pos-sibility,  a friendship  between  two  equals.  As for myself,  I have  vainlytried  to  discover  in  what  respect  I could  be  under  an  obligation  tothis  new  patron.  I had  lent  him  money,  he  had  never  lent  me  any;I had  nursed  him  during  his  illness,  he hardly  ever  came  to  see  meduring  mine;  I had  introduced  him  to  all  my  friends,  he had  neverintroduced  me  to  one  of  his;  I had  sung  his  praises  with  all  mymight,  he  ..  if he  sang  my  praises,  it was  less  publicly,  and  inquite  a  different  manner.  He  has  never  rendered  or  even  offered  torender  me  any  service  of any  kind.  How  then  was  he my  Maecenas?how  was I his protégé?  This  was  beyond  my  powers  of comprehen-sion,  and  it still  remains  so..It is true  that,  more  or  less,  he was  arrogant  with  everybody,  butwith  no  one  so  brutally  as  with  myself.  I remember  that,  on  oneoccasion,  Saint-Lambert  was  on  the  point  of throwing  his  plate  athis  head,  when  he ventured  to  give him  the  lie publicly  at  table,  byxGRIMM’S  ARROGANCE483saying  rudely,  “That  is nof true.”  To his naturally  sarcastic  tone,  heunited  the  conceit  of  an  upstart,  and  his  continual  impertinenceeven  made  him ridiculous.  Intercourse  with great  people had led himto  assume  airs  which  one  only  sees  in  the  least  sensible  amongst  'them.  He  never  summoned  his  lackey  except  with  an  “Eh!”—as  ifmy  fine  gentleman  did  not  know  which  of his numerous  attendantswas  on  duty.  When  he gave  him  a  commission  to  execute,  he threwthe  money  on  the  ground,  instead  of  putting  it into  his  hand.  Atlast,  forgetting  altogether  that  he  was  a  man,  he  treated  him  withsuch  disgusting  contempt  and  cruel  disdain  on  every  occasion  thatthe poor  lad, who  was  a  very  good  fellow,  whom  Madame  d’Epinayhad  given  him,  left  his service,  without  any  other  cause  of complaintthan  the  impossibility  of  enduring  such  treatment.  He  was  the  LaFleur  of this  new  Glorieux.  As foppish  as  he was  vain, with  his large,dull  eyes  and  his flabby  face, he pretended  to  have  great  success  withthe  ladies;  and,  after  his  farce  with  Mademoiselle  Fel,  he  was  con-sidered  by numbers  of the  fair  sex  to  be a  man  of deep feeling.  Thishad  made  him  the  fashion  and  had  given  him a taste  for  feminineneatness.  He  began  to  play  the  dandy:  his  toilet  became  a seriousmatter.  Everybody  knew  that  he  made  up,  and  I, who  at  first  re-fused  to  believe  it, began  to  be convinced,  not  only  by his  beautifulcomplexion  and  by the  fact  of finding  some  pots  of cosmetic  on  hisdressing-table,  but  because  one  morning,  on  entering  his  rooms,  Ifound  him  brushing  his  nails  with  a  little  brush  made  for  the  pur-pose,  an  occupation  which  he  proudly  continued  in  my  presence.  Iargued  that  a  man  who  could  spend  two  hours  every  morning  inbrushing  his  nails  might  very  well  employ  a  few  minutes  in  fillingup  the  wrinkles  in his  skin  with  cosmetic.  The  worthy  Gauffecourt,who  was  no  fool, had  humorously  nicknamed  him  “Tiran  le Blanc.”All  this  was  merely  ridiculous,  but  very  antipathetic  to  my  char-acter,  and  at  last  made  me  suspicious  of his.  I could  scarcely  believethat  a man,  whose  head  was  so  turned,  could  have  his  heart  in  theright  place.  He  prided  himself,  more  than  anything  else,  upon  hissensibility  of  soul  and  vigorous  energy  of  feeling.  How  did  thatagree  with  those  defects,  which  are  peculiar  to  little  minds  only?How  could  the  lively  and  continuous  flights,  which  a  feeling  hearttakes  in pursuit  of things  outside  it, allow  him  time  to  busy himselfTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU434with  such  petty  cares  for  his  little  person?  Why,  good  heavens!  onewho  feels  his  heart  inflamed.  by this  heavenly  fire  seeks  to  pour  itforth,  and  to  display  his  inner  self.  He  would  be  eager  to  show  hisheart  upon  his  face;  he  will  never  think  of  any  other  cosmetics.I remembered  the  compendium  of his  morality,  which  Madamed’Epinay  had  told  me  of, and  which  she  had  adopted.  This  consistedof one  single  article,  namely,  that  the  sole  duty  of man  is, to  followin  everything  the  inclinations  of  his  heart.  This  code  of  morality,when  I heard  of  it, afforded  me  terrible  material  for  thought,  al-_  though  at  that  time  I only  looked  upon  it as  a  witticism.  But  I soonsaw  that  this  principle  was  really  his  rule  of  conduct,  and,  in  thesequel,  I had  only  too  convincing  proof  of it at  my  own  expense.  Itis the  inner  doctrine,  of  which  Diderot  has  so  often  spoken  to  me,but  of  which  he  has  never  given  me  any  explanation.I remembered  the  frequent  warnings  that  I had  received,  severalyears  before,  that  the  man  was  false,  that  he  was  only  playing  atsentiment,  and  that,  above  all, he had  no  affection  for  me.  I recollectseveral  little  incidents,  which  M.  de  Francueil  and  Madame  deChenonceaux  had  related  to  me  on  that  point;  neither  of them  hadany  esteem  for  him,  and  both  ought  to  have  known  him  well,  sinceMadame  de  Chenonceaux  was  the  daughter  of Madame  de  Roche-chouart,  the  intimate  friend  of the  late  Comte  de Friese,  and  M.  deFrancueil,  who  was  at  that  time  very  intimate  with  the  Vicomte  dePolignac,  had  lived  much  in  the  Palais-Royal  just at  the  time  whenGrimm  began  to  secure  a  footing  there.  All  Paris  heard  of  his  de-spair  after  the  death  of  the  Comte  de  Friese.  It was  a  question  ofkeeping  up  the  reputation  which  he had  gained  after  the  cruel  treat-ment  he  had  experienced  from  Mademoiselle  Fel,  the  humbug  ofwhich  I should  have  seen  through  better  than  anyone  else,  if I hadnot  been  so  blind.  He had  to be dragged  to  the Hôtel  Castries,  where,abandoning  himself  to  the  most  deadly  affliction,  he played  his partworthily.  Every  morning  he  went  into  the  garden  to  weep  at  hisease,  holding  before  his  eyes  his  handkerchief  drenched  with  tears,as  long as  he was  in sight of the hôtel;  but as  soon  as  he turned  roundinto  a  certain  narrow  street,  persons  of whom  he  had  no  suspicionaw  him  immediately  put  his  handkerchief  in  his  pocket  and  pullvut  a  book.  He  was  seen  to  do  this  more  than  once,  and  the  fact~HYPOCRITICAL  BEHAVIOR  OF  GRIMM  :485soon  became  public  property  in  Paris,  and  was  almost  as  soon  for-gotten.  I had  forgotten  it myself;  a  fact,  which  concerned  myself,reminded  me  of  it.  I was  in  bed,  at  death’s  door,  in  the  Rue  deGrenelle;  he  was  in  the  country.  One  morning  he  came  to  see  me,quite  out  of  breath,  and  declared  that  he  had  only  just  arrived.  Aminute  afterwards,  I learned  that  he  had  arrived  the  day  before,and  that  he had  been  seen  in the  theatre  the  same  day.A  thousand  little  incidents  of  this  kind  came  back  to  me;  butsomething  which  I was  surprised  that  I had  not  observed  sooner,struck  me  most  of  all.  I had  introduced  Grimm  to  all  my  friendswithout  exception;  they  had  all  become  his.  I was  so  inseparablefrom  him,  that  I should  hardly  have  cared  to  continue  visiting  at  ahouse  to  which  he  had  not  the  entry.  Only  Madame  de  Créqui  re-fused  to  admit  him,  and  from  that  time  I also  almost  entirely  dis-continued  my  visits  to  her.  Grimm,  on  his  part,  made  other  friends,both  on  his own  initiative  and  also  through  the  Comte  de Friese.  Ofall  those  friends,  not  a  single  one  ever  became  mine.  He  never  saida  word  to  me,  to  induce  me  at  least  to  make  their  acquaintance;and,  of all  those  whom  I sometimes  met  at  his  rooms,  not  one  evershowed  me  the  least  goodwill,  not  even  the  Comte  de  Friese,  withwhom  he  lived,  and  with  whom  it would  consequently  have  beenvery  pleasant  to  me  to  form  a  connection,  nor  the  Comte  de Schom-berg, his relation,  with  whom  Grimm  was  even  more  intimate.More  than  this:  my  own  friends,  whom  I made  his own,  and  whohad  all  been  devotedly  attached  to  me  before  they  made  his  ac-quaintance,  showed a sensible  alteration  in  their  feelings  and  be-haviour  towards  me,  after  they  had  made  it.  He  never  introducedone  of his friends  to  me.  I introduced  him  to  all mine,  and  he endedby depriving  me  of  them  all.  If  such  are  the  results  of  friendship,what  will  be  the  results  of hatred?Diderot  himself,  at  the  outset,  warned  me  several  times  thatGrimm,  upon  whom I bestowed  such  confidence,  was  not  my  friend.Subsequently,  he altered  his  tone,  when  he himself  had  ceased  to  bea  friend.The manner  in which  I had  disposed  of my  children  had  requiredno  one’s  assistance.  However,  I informed  my  friends  of  it, simplyfor  the  sake  of informing  them,  in  order  not  to  appear  better  in486THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUtheir  eyes  than  I really  was.  These  friends  were  three  in  number:Diderot,  Grimm,  and  Madame  d’Epinay.  Duclos,  who  was  the mostworthy  of my  confidence,  was  the  only one  whom  I did  not  inform.However,  he  knew  it.  From  whom?  I do  not  know.  It  is  hardlyprobable  that  Madame  d’Epinay  was  guilty  of this  breach  of confi-dence,  for  she  well  knew  that,  by imitating  it, if  I had  been  capableof  doing  so,  I could  have  cruelly  avenged  myself.  There  remainGrimm  and  Diderot,  at  that  time  so  closely  united  in many  things—especially  against  myself—that  it  is  more  than  probable  that  theywere  both  guilty.  I would  wager  that  Duclos,  to  whom  I did  notreveal  my  secret,  and  who  was  consequently  in  no  way  bound  tosilence,  was  the  only  one  who  faithfully  kept  it.Grimm  and  Diderot,  in  their  scheme  of getting  the  women-folkaway  from  me,  had  done  their  utmost  to  induce  him  to  enter  intotheir  plans;  but  he  always  scornfully  refused.  It was  not  until  laterthat  I learned  from  him  all  that  had  taken  place  between  them  inthe  matter;  but  I learned  enough  at  the  time  from  Thérése  to  seethat,  in the  whole  affair,  there  was  some  secret  design,  and  that  theywere  anxious  to  dispose  of me,  if not  against  my  will,  at  least  with-out  my  knowledge;  or  that  they  certainly  wished  to  make  use  ofthese  two  persons  as  their  tools  in some  secret  design.  In all this  therewas  certainly  something  very  dishonourable.  The  opposition  ofDuclos  proves  it beyond  contradiction.  Let  him  who  pleases  believethat  it  was  friendship.This  pretended  friendship  was  as  disastrous  to  me  at  home  asoutside.  The  long and  frequent  conversations  with  Madame  le Vas-seur,  for  several  years  past,  had  perceptibly  altered  her  feelingstowards  me,  and  this  alteration  was  most  certainly  not  favourableto  me,  What,  then,  was  the  subject  of discussion  during  these  singu-lar  téte-d-tétes?  Why  this  deep  mystery?  Was  the  conversation  ofthis  old  woman  sufficiently  agreeable  for  it to  be considered  such  apiece  of good  fortune,  or  sufficiently  important  to  make  such  a  mys-tery  about  it?  During  the  three  or  four  years  that  these  conferenceslasted,  they had  appeared  to  me  ridiculous;  but, when  I reconsideredthem,  I began  to  wonder  at  them.  This  feeling  of  wonder  wouldhave  ended  in  uneasiness,  if  I had  known  at  the  time  what  this.woman  was  plotting  against  me.MADAME  D'EPINAY  DEFENDS  GRIMM487<In  spite  of Grimm’s  prétended  zeal  for  me,  of which  he  boastedso  loudly  outside,  and  which  was  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  tonewhich  he assumed  towards  me  in my  presence,  I gained  nothing  byit, from  any  point  of view,  and  the  pity  which  he pretended  to  feelfor  me  served  less  to  benefit  than  to  humiliate  me.  He  even,  as  faras  lay his power,  deprived  me  of the benefits  of the  profession  whichI had  chosen  for  myself,  by depreciating  my  abilities  as  a  copyist.  Iadmit  that  in  that  he  spoke  the  truth,  but  it was  not  his  place  to  doso.  He  clearly  showed  that  he did  not  intend  it as  a  joke,  by employ-ing another  copyist  himself,  and  taking  away  from’  me  all  the  cus-tomers  he could.  One  would  have  said  that  his  object  was  to  makeme  dependent  upon  him  and  his  interest  for  my  subsistence,  and  toexhaust  my  resources  until  I should  be reduced  to  such  a  condition.All  things  being  taken  into  consideration,  my  reason  at  last  im-posed  silence  upon  my  former  prejudice  in  his  favour,  which  stillmade  itself  heard.  I came  to  the  conclusion  that  his  character  was,at  least,  very  suspicious;  and,  as  for  his  friendship,  I decided  that  itwas  false.  Accordingly,  having  made  up  my  mind  not  to  see  himagain,  I informed  Madame  d’Epinay  of  my  determination,  whichI justified  by several  unanswerable  reasons,  which  I have  now  for-gotten.She  strongly  opposed  this  determination,  without  exactly  know-ing what  reply  to  make  to  the  reasons  which  had.  decided  me.  Shehad  not  yet come  to  an  understanding  with  him;  but, on  the  follow-ing day,  instead  of entering  into  a  verbal  explanation  with  me,  shesent  me  a  very  cleverly-worded  letter,  which  they  had  drawn  up  to-gether,  in  which,  without  entering  into  details,  she  excused  him  onthe  ground  of his  reserved  disposition,  and  imputing  it as  a  crimeto  me  that  I had  suspected  him  of treachery  towards  his  friend,  ex-horted  me  to  become  reconciled  to  him.  This  letter  shook  my  deter-mination.  In a  conversation  which  subsequently  took  place  betweenus,  when  I found  her  better  prepared  than  she  had  been  the  firsttime,  I allowed  myself  to  be  completely  vanquished;  I persuadedmyself  that  I might  have  judged  wrongly,  and  that,  in  this  case,  Ihad  really  committed  a  grave  wrong  towards a friend,  which  it wasmy  duty  to  repair.  In  short,  as  I had  several  times  already  done  inthe  case  of  Diderot  and  the  Baron  d’Holbach,  partly  of  my  own488THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUaccord  and  partly  through  weakness,  I made  all  those  advanceswhich  I had  a  right  to  demand:  I went  to  see  Grimm,  like  a  secondGeorge  Dandin,!  to  apologise  for  offences  of  which  he had  beenguilty  against  myself;  always  under  the  mistaken  conviction,  whichall my  life  long has  caused  me  to  abase  myself  before  my  pretendedfriends,  that  there  is no  hatred  so  strong  that  it cannot  be  disarmedby gentleness  and  good  behaviour;  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  thehatred  of  the  wicked  is  only  strengthened  by the  impossibility  offinding  anything  to  justify  it, and  the  consciousness  of  their  owninjustice  is  only  an  additional  grievance  against  him  who  is  thevictim  of  it.  Without  going  further  than  my  own  history,  I havea strong  proof of this  axiom  in the conduct  of Grimm  and  Tronchin,who  became  my  two  most  implacable  enemies,  of their  own  inclina-tion,  for  their  own  pleasure,  out  of sheer  caprice,  without  being  ableto  quote  a  single  instance  of any  kind  in which  I had  done  either  ofthem  wrong,!  and  whose  rage  increases  daily,  like  that  of the  tiger,from  the  ease  with  which  they  are  able  to  glut it.I expected  that  Grimm,  confused  by my  condescension  and  ad-vances,  would  receive  me  with  open  arms  and  the  tenderest  affec-tion.  As  a  fact,  he received  me  like  a Roman  Emperor,  with  an  un-paralleled  haughtiness.  I was  utterly  unprepared  for  this  reception.Embarrassed  at  having  to  play  a  part  so  ill-suited  to  me,  in  a  fewwords  I timidly  explained  the  object  of  my  visit.  Before  taking  meback  into  favour,  he  delivered,  with  great  dignity,  a  long  haranguewhich  he  had  prepared,  containing  a  list  of  his  numerous  and  rarevirtues,  especially  in matters  of friendship.  He  dwelt  for  some  timeupon  a  circumstance,  which  at  first  struck  me  considerably—thathe  always  kept  the  same  friends.  While  he  was  speaking,  I said  tomyself  that  it would  be  cruel  on  my  part  to  make  myself  the  onlyA character  in  Molitre’s  comedy  of  the  same  name,  also  called  Le  mari  con-fondu.  George  Dandin  is  a  peasant,  who  marries  a  woman  of  distinguishedfamily.“It  was  not  until  later  that  I nicknamed  the  latter  “Jongleur”  (juggler),  longafter  his  declaration  of  hostility  and  the  cruel  persecution  which  he  stirred  upagainst  me  at  Geneva  and  elsewhere.  I even  soon  suppressed  the  name  when  Isaw  that  I was  entirely  his  victim.  I consider  mean  and  paltry  vengeance  un-worthy  of my  heart,  and  hatred  never  sets  foot  in it.VISIT  TO  GRIMM48gexception  to  this  rule.  He%returned  to  this  so  frequently  and  withsuch  affectation,  that he at last made  me  think  that, if in this he onlylistened  to  the  feelings  of  his  heart,  he  would  show  himself  lessstruck  by this  sentiment  which  he so  freely  expressed,  and  that  hewas  making  use  of  it as  a  trick  which  might  serve  his  purpose  ofself-advancement.  Hitherto  I had  been  in  the  same  case:  I had  al-ways  kept all my  friends;  since  my  earliest  childhood  I had  not  losta  single  one,  except  by death,  and  yet  I had  never  made  it a  subjectof reflection;  it was  not  a  principle  which  I had  laid  down  for  my-self.  Since  we  both  had  this  advantage  in common,  what  right  hadhe  to  boast  of it as  peculiar  to  himself,  unless  he  already  designedto  deprive  me  of it?  He  devoted  himself  to  the  task  of humiliatingme  by proving  that  our  mutual  friends  preferred  him  to  me.  I wasas  well  aware  as  he  was  of  this  preference;  the  question  was,  howhe had  obtained  it.  By superior  merits  or  address,  by exalting  him-self,  or  by endeavouring  to  humiliate  me?  At  last,  when  he had  putbetween  us,  to his heart’s  content,  all the distance  which  could  attachvalue  to  the  favour  which  he  intended  to  grant  me,  he  bestowedupon  me  the  kiss  of peace  in a  slight  embrace,  which  resembled  theaccolade  which  the  King  bestows  upon  newly-created  knights.  I fellfrom  the clouds;  I was  amazed;  I did  not  know  what  to  say;  I couldnot  utter  a  single  word.  The  whole  scene  had  the  appearance  of areprimand  given  by a  master  to  a  pupil,  when  he  lets  him  off  aflogging.  I never  think  of  it  without  feeling  how  deceptive  arejudgments  founded  upon  appearances,  to  which  the  vulgar  attachsuch  weight,  and  how  frequently  audacity  and  pride  are  on  the  sideof the  guilty,  shame  and  embarrassment  on  the  side  of the  innocent.We  were  reconciled;  this  was  at  least  a  relief  to  my  heart,  whichis always  mortally  distressed  by a  quarrel.  It may  be  imagined  thatsuch  a  reconciliation  produced  no  alteration  in  his  manners;  itsimply  deprived  me  of  the  right  of  complaining  of  them.  Accord-ingly,  I resolved  to  endure  everything,  and  to  say  nothing.So  many  annoyances,  one  after  another,  threw  me  into a state  ofdepression,  which  scarcely  left me strength  to  regain  command  ofmyself.  Without  any  reply  from  Saint-Lambert,  neglected  by Ma-dame  d’Houdetot,  no  longer  venturing  to  open  my  heart  to  anyone,I began to  fear  that, in making  friendship  the idol  of my  heart,  I had490THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUwasted  my  life  in sacrificing  to  chimeras.  In proof  of this,  out  of allmy  friendships,  there  only remained  two  men,  who  had  retained  myfull  esteem,  and  whom  my  heart  could  trust:  Duclos,  whom  I hadlost  sight of since  my  retirement  to  the  Hermitage,  and  Saint-Lam-bert.  I believed  that  I could  only  repair  my  injustice  towards  thelatter  by opening  my  heart  to  him  unreservedly;  and  I resolved  to:make  a  full  and  complete  confession  to  him,  in  everything  whichdid  not  compromise  his  mistress.  I have  no  doubt  that  this  resolu-sion  was  another  snare  set  by my  passion,  in order  to  keep  me  closerto  it; but  it is certain  that  I should  have  thrown  myself  unreservedlyinto  her  lover’s  arms,  that  I should  have  submitted  myself  com-pletely  to  his guidance,  and  that  I should  have  pushed  my  franknessas  far  as  it could  go.  I was  ready  to  write  a  second  letter  to  him,  towhich I felt  sure  that  he would  reply, when  I learned  the melancholyreason  of his  silence  in  regard  to  the  first.  He  had  been  unable  toendure  the  fatigues  of the  campaign  to  the  end.  Madame  d’Epinayinformed  me  that he had  just had  a  stroke  of paralysis;  and  Madamed’Houdetot,  whose  affliction  at  last  made  her  ill  herself,  and  who:was  not  in a fit  state  to  write  to  me  immediately,  sent  me  word,two  or  three  days later,  from  Paris,  where  she  was  at  that  time,  thathe intended  to  be removed  to  Aix-la-Chapelle,  to  take  the baths.  I donot  say  that  this  melancholy  news  afflicted  me  as  much  as  her;  butI doubt  whether  the  sorrow  which  it  caused  me  was  less  painfulthan  her  grief  and  tears.  Sorrow  at  knowing  him  to  be  in  such  acondition,  aggravated  by  the  apprehension  that  uneasiness  mighthave  contributed  to  it, touched  me  more  than  all  that  hitherto  hap-pened  to  me;  and I felt, to  my  cruel  sorrow,  that  I could  not  find,  inmy  own  self-esteem,  the  strength  which  I needed  in order  to  supportsuch  grief.  Happily,  this  generous  friend  did  not  long  leave  me  insuch a state  of depression;  in  spite  of  his  illness,  he  did  not  forgetme,  and  I soon  learned  from  himself  that  I had  illjudged  his  feel-ings and  condition.  But  it is time  to  proceed  to  the  great  and  suddenchange  in my  destiny,  the catastrophe  which  has divided  my life intotwo  parts,  so  different  from  each  other,  and  which,  from  a  verytrifling  cause,  has  drawn  such  terrible  effects.One  day, when  I least  expected  it, Madame  d’Epinay  sent  for  me..When I entered  the  room,  I observed,  in  her  eyes  and  manner,  anMADAME  D’EPINAY’S  ILLNESS.491appearance  of embarrassment,  which  was  the  more  striking  to  meas  it was  unusual,  since  no  one  in  the  world  knew  better  than  shehow  to  control  her  features  and  movements.  “My  friend,”  said  she,“I  am  leaving  for  Geneva;  my  chest  is in  a  bad  state,  my  health  isbreaking  up  so  rapidly  that  I must  go and  consult  Tronchin,  even  ifI have  to neglect everything  else.”  This  resolution,  so  abruptly  taken,at  the  commencement  of bad  weather,  astonished  me  the  more,  as,when I left  her  thirty-six  hours  before,  not  a  word  had  been  saidabout  it.  I asked  her  whom  she  intended  to  take  with  her.  She  toldme  that  she meant  to  take  her  son  and  M.  de Linant,  and then  added,in  an  indifferent  tone,  “And  won’t  you  come  too,  my  dear  bear?”As  I did  not  believe  that  she  spoke  seriously,  since  she  knew  that,in the  time  of year  upon  which  we  were  just entering,  I was  hardlyin a  fit state  to  leave  my  room,  I spoke  jestingly  of the  advantage  ofone  sick  person  being  accompanied  by another:  She  herself  did  notseem  to  have  meant  the proposition  seriously,  and  nothing  more  wassaid  about  it.  During  the  rest  of my  visit,  we  spoke  of nothing  butthe  preparations  for  her  journey,  into  which  she  threw  herself  withgreat  energy,  as  she  had  made  up  her  mind  to  start  in a  fortnight.I did  not  need  much  penetration  to  understand  that  there  wassome  secret  reason  for  this  journey  which  was  concealed  from  me.This  secret,  which  was  a  secret  to  me  alone  in  the  house,  was  dis-covered  the  very  next  day by Thérése,  to  whom  Teissier,  the  maitred'hôtel,  who  had heard  it from  the lady’s-maid,  revealed  it. AlthoughI am  under  no  obligation  to  Madame  d’Epinay  to  keep  the  secret,since  I did not  learn  it from  her, it is too  closely  connected  with  thosewhich  she  did  confide  to  me,  for  me  to  be able  to  make  any  distinc-tion.  On  this  point,  therefore,  I will  say  nothing.  But  these  samesecrets,  which  never  have  been,  and  never  will  be  revealed  by me,either  by word  of  mouth  or  the  pen,  have  become  known  to  toomany,  for it to  be possible  that  they can  have  remained  unknown  toany  of  Madame  d’Epinay’s  associates.When  I was  informed  of the  true  motive  of this  journey,  I shouldhave  recognised  the  secret  instigation  of the  hand  of  an  enemy,  inthe  attempt  to  make  me  the  chaperon  of Madame  d’Epinay;  but,  asshe had  not  pressed  me  at  all to  accompany  her, I persisted  in regard-ing  the  attempt  as  not  seriously  intended,  and  I merely  laughed  at492THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthe  fine  figure  that  I should  have  cut,  if I had  been  foolish  enoughto  undertake  the  charge.  Besides,  she  gained  considerably  by myrefusal,  for  she  succeeded  in  persuading  her  husband  himself  toaccompany  her.;A few  days  afterwards  I received  the  following  letter  from  Dide-rot.  This  letter,  merely  folded  in  two,  so  that  anyone  could  easilyread  its contents,  was  addressed  to  me,  “Care  of Madame  d’Epinay,”and  intrusted  to  M. de Linant,  the tutor  of the  son  and  the  confidantof the  mother.LETTER  FRoM  Diprrot  (Packet  A, No.  52).“I  am  born  to  love  you  and  to  cause  you  annoyance.  I hear  thatMadame  d’Epinay  is going  to  Geneva,  and  I do not  hear  it said  thatyou  accompany  her.  My  friend,  if you  are  satisfied  with  MadamedEpinay,  you  must  go  with  her;  if you  are  dissatisfied,  you  mustgo  all  the  more  readily.  Are  you  over-burdened  with  the  weight  ofthe  obligations  under  which  she has laid  you?  here  is an  opportunityof partly  discharging  them  and  of lightening  your  burden.  Will  youfind  another  opportunity  in  your  life  of  showing  your  gratitude  toher?  She  is  going  into  a  country  where  she  will  be  as  if  she  hadfallen  from  the  clouds.  She  is ill; she  will  need  amusement  and  dis-traction.  Winter,  too!  Consider,  my  friend.  The  objection  on  thescore  of your  health  may  be  far  stronger  than  I think  it is; but,  areyou  worse  to-day  than  you  were  a  month  ago,  and  than  you  will  beat  the  beginning  of  spring?  Will  you  make  the  journey,  threemonths  hence,  more  comfortably  than  now?  For  myself,  I declareto  you  that,  if I could  not  endure  the  carriage,  I would  take a stickand  follow  her.  Then,  are  you  not  afraid  that  your  behaviour  maybe  misinterpreted?  You  will  be  suspected  either  of  ingratitude  orof some  other  secret  motive.  I am  well  aware  that,  whatever  you  do,you  will  always  have  the  testimony  of your  conscience  on  your  side;but  is this  testimony  sufhcient  by itself,  and  is it allowed  to  neglect,up  to  a  certain  point,  that  of other  men?  Besides,  my  friend,  I writethis  letter  in  order  to  discharge  an  obligation  to  you  as  well  as  tomyself.  If it displeases  you,  throw  it in  the  fire,  and  think  no  moreof it than  if it had  never  been  written.  I salute,  love,  and  embraceyou.39)I trembled  with  rage,  and  felt  so  utterly  astounded  while  readingHE  REPLIES  TO  DIDEROT493this  letter,  that  I could  scarcely  finish  it; but  this  did  not  prevent  mefrom  observing  how  cleverly  Diderot  affected  a  gentler,  more  flat-tering,  and  more  polite tone  than  in any  of his other  letters,  in whichhe  at  most  addressed  me  as  “my  dear,”  without  condescending  tocall  me  “friend.”  I easily  perceived  the  indirect  means  by which  thisletter  had  reached  me:  the  address,  style,  and  the  way  in  which  itarrived,  betrayed  the  roundabout  manner  of  proceeding  clumsilyenough;  for  we  usually  corresponded  through  the  post  or  the  Mont-morency  messenger,  and  this  was  the  first  and  only  time  that  hemade  use  of  the  present  method  of  communication.When  my  first  transports  of  indignation  permitted  me  to  write,I hastily  threw  off  the  following  reply,  which  I immediately  tookfrom  the  Hermitage,  where  I was  at  the  time,  to  La  Chevrette,  toshow  it to  Madame  d’Epinay,  to  whom,  in  my  blind  passion,  I in-tended  to  read  it, as  well  as  Diderot’s  letter.“My  dear  friend,  you  cannot  know  either  the  extent  of my  obliga-tions  to  Madame  d’Epinay,  or  how  far  they are  binding,  or  whethershe has  really need  of me  on  her journey,  or  wishes  me  to  accompanyher,  or  whether  it is possible  for  me  to  do  so,  or  the  reasons  I mayhave  for refusing.  I do not  object to  discuss  all these  points  with  you;but,  in the  meantime,  you  must  admit  that  to  dictate  to  me  so  posi-tively what  I ought to  do, without  being in a  position  to judge,  is, mydear  philosopher,  to  talk  nonsense.  The  worst  thing about  it is, that  Isee  that  the  opinion  is not  your  own.  Not  to  mention  that  I am  littledisposed  to  allow  myself  to  be led  by a  third  or  fourth  person  underyour  name,  I find  in  these  indirect  acts  a  certain  amount  of  under-handedness,  which  ill  suits  your  frankness,  which,  for  both  oursakes,  you  will  do  well  to  avoid  for  the  future.“You  express  yourself  afraid  that  my  conduct  may  be  misinter-preted;  but  I defy  a  heart  like  yours  to  venture  to  think  ill of mine.Others  would  perhaps  speak  better  of me,  if  I were  more  like  them.Heaven  preserve  me  from  gaining  their  approval!  Let  the  wickedspy  upon  me  and  interpret  my  conduct  as  they  please.  Rousseauis not  a  man  to  fear  them,  or  Diderot  a  man  to  listen  to  them.“You  wish  me  to  throw  your  letter  in  the  fire  if it displeases  me,and  to  think  no  more  about  it.  Do  you  think  that  what  comes  fromyou  can  be  so  easily  forgotten?  My dear  friend,  you  hold  my  tears,in  the  pain  which  you  cause  me,  as  cheap  as  my  life  and  health,  in494THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthe care  which  you  exhort  me  to  take.  If you  could  correct  yourselfof  this,  your  friendship  would  be  so  much  sweeter  to  me,  and  Ishould  be  so  much  the  less  to  be  pitied.”On  entering  Madame  d’Epinay’s  room,  I found  Grimm  with  her,which  delighted  me.  I read  to  them,  in  a  loud  and  clear  voice,  mytwo  letters,  with  an  intrepidity  of which  I should  not  have  believedmyself  capable,  and,  when  I had  finished,  I added  a  few  remarkswhich  did  not  belie  it. I saw  that  this unexpected  audacity  on  the partof  a  man  usually  so  timid  astonished  and  astounded  them  both.They  did  not  answer  a  word.  Above  all,  I saw  that  arrogant  mancast  down  his  eyes,  not  venturing  to  meet  the  angry  flashes  frommy  own;  but, at  the  same  instant,  in the  bottom  of his heart,  he wasvowing  my  destruction,  and  I am  positive  that  they  agreed  upon  itbefore  they  parted.It  was  about  this  time  that  I at  last  received,  through  Madamed'Houdetot,  Saint-Lambert’s  letter  (Packet  A, No.  57), dated  fromWolfenbuttel,  a  few  days  after  his  accident,  written in answer  tomine,  which  had  been  greatly  delayed  on  the  road.  This  reply  af-forded  me  some  consolation,  which  I greatly  needed  at  that  moment,in  the  proofs  of  esteem  and  friendship  of  which  it  was  full,  andwhich  gave  me  the courage  and  strength  to  deserve  them.  From  thatmoment  I did  my  duty;  but  it is certain  that,  if Saint-Lambert  hadshown  himself  less  sensible,  less  generous,  less  a  man  of  honour,  Ishould  have  been  lost  beyond  recall.The  weather  became  bad, and  people  were  beginning  to  leave  thecountry.  Madame  d’Houdetot  informed  me  of  the  day  on  whichshe  intended  to  come  and  say  good-bye  to  our  valley,  and  made  anappointment  to meet  me  at  Eaubonne.  It so  happened  that  it was  theday  on  which  Madame  d’Epinay  was  leaving  La  Chevrette  forParis,  in  order  to  make  her  final  preparations  for  her  journey.  For-tunately,  she  set  out  in the  morning,  and I still  had  time,  after  leav-ing her, to  go  and  dine  with  her  sister-in-law.  I had  Saint-Lambert’sletter  in  my  pocket,  and  read  it several  times  as  I walked  along.  Itacted  as  a  shield  against  my  weakness.  I made  and  kept  the  resolu-tion  to  see  in  Madame  d’Houdetot  nothing  but  my  friend  and  myfriend’s  mistress;  and  I spent  four  or  five  hours  in her  company,VISITS  MADAME  D’HOUDETOT495téte-a-téte,  in a delightful  calm, infinitely  preferable,  even  in the mat-ter  of  enjoyment,  to  the  attacks  of  burning  fever  which  I  hadhitherto  felt in her presence.  As she knew  only too  well that my heartwas  unchanged,  she  was  grateful  for  the  efforts  I had  made  to  con-trol myself;  it increased  her esteem  for me,  and  I had  the pleasure  ofseeing  that  her  friendship  for  me  was  not  extinguished.  She  in-formed  me  of the  speedy  return  of Saint-Lambert,  who,  although  hehad  almost  recovered  from  his  attack,  was  no  longer  in a  conditionto  endure  the fatigues  of war,  and  was  leaving  the service  in order  tolive  quietly  with  her.  We  formed  the  charming  plan  of an  intimatecompanionship  between  us  three,  and  we  had  reason  to  hope thatthe  execution  of this  plan  would  be lasting in  its  results,  seeing  thatall the  feelings  which  can  unite  upright and  feeling  hearts  were  thefoundation  of  it,  and  we  combined,  in  our  three  selves,  sufficienttalents  and  knowledge  to  render  any  foreign  elements  unnecessary.Alas!  while  abandoning  myself  to  the prospect  of so  charming a life,I little  thought  of  that  which  awaited  me.We  afterwards  spoke  of my  relations  with  Madame  d’Epinay.  Ishowed  her  Diderot’s  letter,  together  with  my  answer;  I told  herall  the  circumstances  connected  with  it, and  informed  her  of  myresolution  to  leave  the  Hermitage.  She  vigorously  opposed  it, andwith  arguments  which  were  all-powerful  with  my  heart.  She  de-clared  that  she  would  have  much  liked  me  to  go  with  her  to  Geneva,as  she  foresaw  that  she  would  inevitably  be  compromised  by myrefusal;  indeed,  Diderot’s  letter  seemed  to  announce  it beforehand.However,  as  she  knew  my  reasons  as  well  as  myself,  she  did  notinsist  upon  this  point;  but  she  begged  me  at  any  price  to  avoidscandal,  and  to  palliate  my  refusal  by reasons  sufficiently  plausibleto  remove  the  unjust  suspicion  that  she  had  anything  to  do  with  it.I told  her  that  it was  no  easy  task  that  she  was  imposing  upon  me;but  that,  being  resolved  to  atone  for  my  offences,  even  at  the  cost  ofmy  reputation,  I desired  to  give  the  preference  to  hers,  as  far  as’honour  would  allow  me  to  go.  It will  soon  be  seen  whether  I knewhow  to  keep  my  promise.I can  swear  that, far from  my  unfortunate  passion  having  lost anyof  its  force,  I never  loved  my  Sophie  so  fondly,  so  tenderly,  as  onthat  day. But  Saint-Lambert’s  letter,  my  sense  of duty,  and  horror  of496THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUtreachery,  made  such  an  impression  upon  me  that,  during  the wholeof the  interview,  my  senses  left  me  completely  at  peace  in her  com-pany,  and  I was  not  even  tempted  to  kiss  her  hand.  At  parting,  shekissed  me  before  her  servants.  This  kiss,  so  different  from  thosewhich  I had  sometimes  stolen  from  her  beneath  the  trees,  was  aguarantee  to  me  that  I had  regained  command  over  myself.  I amnearly  certain  that,  if my  heart  had  had  time  to  strengthen  itselfwithout  interruption,  three  months  would  have  been  more  thanenough  to  cure  me  completely.Here  end  my  personal  relations  with  Madame  d’Houdetot:  rela-tions,  of  which  every  man  has  been  able  to  judge  by appearancesaccording  to  the  nature  of  his  own  heart,  but  in  which  the  passionwith  which  this  amiable  woman  inspired  me,  the  liveliest  passionthat  a  man  has  perhaps  ever  felt,  will  always  be honoured  in  Heav-en’s  sight  and  our  own,  by the  rare  and  painful  sacrifices  which  weboth  made  to  duty,  honour,  love  and  friendship.  We  had  too  highan  opinion  of each  other  to  be  able  to  degrade  ourselves  easily.  Wemust  have  been  utterly  unworthy  of esteem  to  make  up  our  mindsto  lose  a  mutual  regard  of such  great  value;  and  the  energy  of ourfeelings,  which  might have  made  us  guilty, was  the very  thing whichprevented  us  from  becoming  so.Thus,  after  a  long  friendship  for  the  one  of  these  two  women,and  a  deep  affection  for  the  other,  I took  farewell  of  both  on  thesame  day: of one,  never  to  see  her  again in my  life; of the other,  onlyto  see  her  twice  more,  upon  occasions  of  which I shall  afterwardsspeak.After  their  departure,  I found  myself  greatly  embarrassed  hewto  fulfil  so  many  urgent  and  contradictory  obligations,  the  result  ofmy  follies.  If  I had  been  in  my  natural  position,  after  the  proposalof  the  journey  to  Geneva  had  been  made  and  I had  declined  it, Ineed  only have  remained  quiet,  and  there  would  have  been  nothingmore  to  be said.  But  I had  foolishly  made  of it  a matter  which  couldnot  remain  where  it was,  and  I could  only avoid  further  explanationby  leaving  the  Hermitage,  which  I  had  just  promised  Madamed'Houdetot  not  to  do, at  least  for the present.  Besides,  she  had  askedme  to  make  my  excuses  for  my  refusal  to  my  so-called  friends,  toprevent  it being  laid  to  her  charge.  And  yet  I could  not  declare  theJUSTIFIES  HIMSELF  TO  GRIMM497real  reason  without  insultigg  Madame  d’Epinay,  to  whom I cer-tainly  owed  some  gratitude,  after  all that  she had  done  for me.  Aftercarefully  considering  everything,  I found  myself  confronted  by thecruel  but  unavoidable  alternatives,  of showing  disrespect  to  Madamed’Epinay,  Madame  d’Houdetot,  or  myself:  I chose  the  last.  I choseit  boldly,  unreservedly,  without  shuffling,  and  with  a  generositywhich  surely  deserved  to  expiate  the  offences  which  had  reduced  meto  such  an  extremity.  This  sacrifice,  which  my  enemies  perhaps  ex-pected,  and  by which  they  have  known  how  to  profit,  has  causedthe  ruin  of  my  reputation,  and,  thanks  to  their  efforts,  has  robbedme  of the  esteem  of the  public;  but  it has  restored  to  me  my  own,and  has  consoled  me  in my  misfortunes.  This  is not  the  last  time,  aswill  be  seen,  that  I have  made  similar  sacrifices,  nor  the  last  timethat  they have  been  taken  advantage  of to  overwhelm  me.Grimm  was  the  only  one  who  appeared  to  have  taken  no  part  inthis  affair;  and  it  was  to  him  that  I resolved  to  address  myself.  Iwrote  a long letter  to  him,  in which  I exposed  the  absurdity  of wish-ing me  to  look  upon  it as  my  duty  to  take  the  journey  to  Geneva,the  uselessness  of it, even  the  embarrassment  I should  have  been  toMadame  d’Epinay,  and  the  inconveniences  which  would  have  re-sulted  to  myself.  In this  letter,  I could  not  resist  the temptation  of let-ting him  see  that  I was  well  informed,  and  that  it seemed  to  me  sin-gular  that  anyone  should  expect  me  to  undertake  the journey,  whilehe himself  was  considered  exempt,  and  his  name  was  not  even  men-tioned.  This  letter,  in  which,  owing  to  its  being  impossible  for  meto  state  my  reasons  outright,  I was  often  obliged  to  wander  fromthe  point,  might  have  presented  the  appearance  of guilt  to  the  gen-eral  public;  but  it was  a  model  of prudence  and  discretion  for  thosewho,  like  Grimm,  were  well  acquainted  with  the  facts,  which  I didnot  mention  in  it, and  which  fully  justified  my  conduct.  I did  noteven  shrink  from  exciting  a  further  prejudice  against  myself,  byfoisting  Diderot’s  advice  upon  my  other  friends,  in  order  to  hintthat  Madame  d’Houdetot  had  thought  the  same,  as  in fact  was  thecase,  and  by avoiding  to  mention  that,  in consequence  of my  argu-ments,  she  had  changed  her  opinion.  There  was  no  better  way  ofclearing  her  from  the  suspicion  of connivance  on  her  part,  than  byseeming  to  be  dissatisfied  with  her  conduct  in  this  respect.498THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUThis  letter  concluded  with  an  exhibition  of confidence  by whichany  other  man  would  have  been  touched.  While  I exhorted  Grimmto  consider  my  reasons  well,  and  afterwards  to  inform  me  of  hisopinion,  I gave  him  to  understand  that  his advice,  whatever  it mightbe, would  be followed.  Such  was  really  my  intention,  even  if he haddeclared  himself  in favour  of my  going.  As  M.  d’Epinay  had  under-taken  to  be his wife’s  escort  on  the journey,  my  company  would  haveassumed  quite  a  different  aspect:  whereas,  at  first,  it was  I who  wasasked  to  undertake  this  duty,  and  there  was  no  question  of  M.d’Epinay  until  I had  refused.Grimm  did  not  reply  for  some  time.  His  answer  was  curious.  Iwill  here  give  a  copy  of it (See Packet  A, No.  59):“Madame  d’Epinay’s  departure  is put  off;  her  son  is ill, and  sheis  obliged  to  wait  until  he  has  recovered.  I will  think  over  yourletter.  Stay  quietly  at  your  Hermitage.  I will  let you  know  my  opin-ion  in time.  As  she  will  certainly  not  leave  for  some  days, there  is nohurry.  Meanwhile,  if you  think  fit, you  can  make  your  offers  to  her,although  that  appears  to  me  a  matter  of indifference.  For, as  I knowyour  position  as  well  as  you  know  it yourself,  I have  no  doubt  thatshe  will  reply  to  them  as  she  ought.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  onlything  to  be gained  by it is, that  you  will  be able  to  say  to  those  whourge  you,  that,  if you  do  not  go,  it will  not  be for  want  of  havingoffered  your  services.  Besides,  I do  not  see  why  you  think  it abso-lutely necessary  that  the philosopher  should  be the  speaking-trumpetof all the  world;  and  why  do you  imagine,  because  his advice  is thatyou  should  go,  that  all  your  friends  are  of the  same  opinion?  If youwrite  to  Madame  d’Epinay,  her  answer  may  serve  as  a reply  to  allthose  friends,  since  you  set  such  great  store  upon  replying  to  them.Adieu.  I salute  Madame  le Vasseur  and  the  ‘Criminal.’  ”  17Greatly  astonished  by the  perusal  of  this  letter,  I anxiously  en-deavoured  to  find  out  what  it might  mean,  but  in  vain.  What!  in-stead  of sending  me  a  simple  answer  to  my  letter,  he  takes  time  tothink  over  it, as  if  the  time  he  had  already  taken  had  not  been“M.  le  Vasseur  was  in  the  habit  of  calling  his  wife,  who  ruled  him  ratherstrictly,  the  “Criminal-Lieutenant.”  Grimm,  in  jest,  gave  the  same  name  to  thedaughter,  and,  for  shortness,  afterwards  omitted  the  second  word.GRIMM  RENOUNCES  ROUSSEAU499:enough!  He  even  informs  rñe  of the  state  of  suspense  in  which  hedesires  to  keep  me,  as  if  it were  a  question  of  a  difficult  problemwhich  had  to  be  solved,  or  as  if it was  important  to  him  to  depriveme  of  every  means  of  clearly  understanding  his  feelings,  until  themoment  when  he  should  be  pleased  to  declare  them  to  me!  Whatcould  be  the  meaning  of  all  these  precautions,  this  delay,  this  se-crecy?  Is this  the  way  to  respond  to  confidence?  Does  this  look  likehonourable  and  upright  behaviour?  I sought  in  vain  for  some  fa-vourable  interpretation  of his  conduct;  I found  none.  Whatever  hisintention  might  be,  his  position  made  it  easy  for  him  to  carry  itout,  if it was  hostile  to  myself,  while  my  own  made  it impossible  forme  to  put  any  obstacle  in  his  way.  A  favourite  in  the  house  of  agreat  Prince,  with  many  acquaintances  in  the  world,  a  man  whogave  the  tone  to  the  society,  in  which  we  moved,  whose  oracle  hewas,  he was  able,  with  the  help of his  usual  cleverness,  to  arrange  allhis  machinery  as  he pleased;  whereas  I, alone  in  my  Hermitage,  farfrom  all,  without  anyone  to  advise  me,  without  communicationwith  the outside  world,  could  do nothing  but  wait  and  remain  quiet.All  I did  was  to  write  to  Madame  d’Epinay,  about  her  son’s  illness,as  polite  a  letter  as  could  possibly  be, but  in  which  I did  not  walk‘into  the  snare  of  offering  to  accompany  her  on  her  journey..After  long  waiting,  in  a  state  of  cruel  anxiety,  into  which  this:barbarous  man  had  plunged  me,  I heard,  eight  or  ten  days  later,that  Madame  d’Epinay  had  set  out,  and I received  a  second  letterfrom  him.  It  contained  only  seven  or  eight  lines,  which  I did  not.  It  proclaimed  a  rupture,  but  in  terms  such  as.read  through.  .only  the  most  infernal  hate  can  dictate,  and  which,  from  his  eager-ness  to  make  them  offensive,  seemed  almost  silly.  He  forbade  me  toenter  his  presence  as  he  might  have  warned  me  off  his  estates.  Hisletter,  to  make  it  appear  ridiculous,  only  needed  to  be  read  withgreater  calmness.  Without  copying  it, without  even  reading  it to  theend,  I sent  it back  to  him  immediately  with  the  following  note:“T  refused  to  listen  to  my  just  suspicions.  Too  late  I understandyour  character.“This,  then,  is  the  letter  which  you  wanted  time  to  think  over.I send  it back  to  you;  it is not  for me.  You  can  show  mine  to  all the500THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUworld,  and  hate  me  without  concealment:  that  will  be one  falsehoodless  on  your  part.”The  permission  which  I gave  him  to  show  my  preceding  letterreferred  to  a  passage  in  his  own,  from  which  the  reader  will  beenabled  to  judge  of  the  profound  adroitness  with  which  he  actedthroughout  the  whole  affair.I have  said  that,  in the opinion  of the  uninitiated,  my  letter  mighthave  afforded  many  opportunities  for  attacking  me.  He  was  de-lighted  to  see  it;  but  how  was  he  to  take  advantage  of  it  withoutcompromising  himself?  If he  showed  the  letter,  he exposed  himselfto  the  reproach  of abusing  his  friend’s  confidence.To  relieve  himself  from  this  embarrassment,  he  determined  tobreak  off his relations  with  me  in the  most  cutting  manner  possible,and  to  make  me  feel,  in  his  letter,  the  favour  which  he  did  me  bynot  showing  mine.  He  felt quite certain  that, in my  indignant  anger,I should  reject  his  pretended  discretion,  and  allow  him  to  show  myletter  to  everybody.  This  was  exactly  what  he  wanted,  and  every-thing  turned  out  as  he  had  planned.  He  sent  my  letter  all  roundParis,  together  with  remarks  of  his  own,  which,  however,  did  notprove  so  successful  as  he  had  expected.  It  was  not  considered  thatthe  permission  to  show  my  letter,  which  he  had  known  how  to  ex-tort  from  mie,  exempted  him  from  reproach,  for  having  so  lightlytaken  me  at  my  word  in order  to  injure  me.  People  kept asking  whatpersonal  wrong  I had  done  to  him  that  could  justify  so  violent  ahatred.  At  last  they  came  to  the  conclusion  that,  even  if they  hadbeen  of such  a  nature  as  to  oblige  him  to  break  with  me,  friendship,even  though  extinguished,  still  had  rights  which  he  ought  to  haverespected.  But,  unfortunately,  Paris  is frivolous.  Impressions  of themoment  are  soon  forgotten.  The  unfortunate  man  who  is absent  isneglected;  the  prosperous  man  inspires  respect  by his  presence.  Thegame  of intrigue  and  wickedness  continues,  and  is renewed;  and  itseffects,  unceasingly  reviving,  soon  efface  the  past.This  was  the  way  in  which  this  man,  after  having  so  long  de-ceived  me,  at  last  threw  off the  mask,  convinced  that,  in the  state  towhich  he  had  brought  matters,  he  no  longer  needed  it,  RelievedWRITES  TO  MADAME  D’EPINAY501from  all  apprehension  of  being  unjust  towards  this  wretch,  I lefthim  to  his  own  reflections, gnd ceased  to  think  of  him.  Eight  daysafter  the  receipt  of  his  letter,  I received  from  Geneva  an  answerfrom  Madame  d’Epinay  to  my  former  letter  (Packet  B, No.  10).I saw,  from  the tone  which  she  assumed  for  the first  time  in her life,that  both,  reckoning  upon  the  success  of their  plans,  were  acting  inconcert,  and  that, looking  upon  me  as  a  man  lost  beyond  all hope ofsafety,  they  intended  to  devote  themselves  from  that  time  forth,without  any  risk,  to  the  pleasure  of completely  crushing  me.In  fact,  my  condition  was  most  deplorable.  I saw  all  my  friendsleaving  me,  without  my  knowing  how  or  why.  Diderot,  whoboasted  of alone  remaining  faithful  to  me,  and  who  had,  for  threemonths  past,  promised  to  pay  me a visit,  never  came  at  all. The  win-ter  now  began  to  make  itself  felt,  and,  with  it, attacks  of my  usualcomplaints.  My constitution,  although  vigorous,  had  been  unable  tosustain  the  conflicts  of  so  many  contradictory  passions.  I was  in  astate  of  exhaustion,  which  left  me  neither  strength  nor  courage  toresist  anything.  Even  if my  promises,  even  if the  continued  remon-strances  of  Diderot  and  Madame  d’Houdetot  had  allowed  me  toleave  the  Hermitage  at  this  moment,  I did  not  know  either  whereto  go  or  how  to  drag  myself  there.  I remained  stupid  and  motion-less,  without  power  to  think  or  act.  The  mere  idea  of taking  a  step,of writing  a  letter,  of saying  a  word,  made  me  shudder.  However,  Icould  not  leave  Madame  d’Epinay’s  letter  unanswered,  without  con-fessing  that  I deserved  the  treatment  with  which  she  and  her  friendoverwhelmed  me.  I decided  to  communicate  my  feelings  and  resolu-tions  to  her, not  doubting  for  a moment  that  the  feelings  of human-ity, generosity,  propriety,  and  the  good  qualities  which  I believed  Ihad  recognised  in her,  in  spite  of those  that  were  bad,  would  makeher  hasten  to  agree  with  me.  My letter  was  as  follows:.“THe  Hermirace,  November  23rd,  1757.“If  one  could  die  of grief,  I should  not  be  alive  now.  But  at  lastI have  made  up my  mind.  All  friendship  between  us  is over,  madam;but  that  which  no  longer  exists  still  preserves  its  rights,  which  Iknow  how  to  respect.  I have  by no  means  forgotten  your  kindness/502THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUtowards  me,  and  you  can  reckon  upon  all the gratitude  which  a mancan  feel  for one  whom  he can  no  longer love.  All further  explanationwould  be useless:  I keep  my  own  conscience,  and  refer  you  to  yourown.“I  wanted  to  leave  the  Hermitage,  and  I ought  to  have  done  so.But  it is declared  that  I must  remain  here  until  spring;  and  sincemy  friends  desire  it, I will  remain  until  then,  if you  consent  to  it.”After  this  letter  had  been  written  and  despatched,  my  onlythought  was  to  remain  quiet  at  the  Hermitage,  take  care  of  myhealth,  endeavour  to  recover  my  strength,  and  make  arrangementsto  leave  in  the  spring,  without  creating  any  disturbance  or  openlyproclaiming  the  rupture.  But  this  was  not  what  M.  Grimm  andMadame  d’Epinay  reckoned  upon,  as  will  be  seen  directly.A  few  days  later,  I at  last  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  fromDiderot  the visit  which  he had  so  often  promised,  and  as  often  failedto  keep  his  word.  It could  not  have  occurred  at  a  more  opportunemoment;  he  was  my  oldest  friend;  he  was  almost  the  only  friend  Ihad  left;  under  these  circumstances,  my  delight  at  seeing  him  maybe imagined.  My heart  was  full;  I poured  its contents  into  his.  I en-lightened  him  upon  many  facts  which  had  been  kept  from  him,  orhad  been  disguised  or  invented.  I told  him  what I felt  justified  intelling  him  of all  that  had  taken  place.  I made  no  pretence  of con-cealing  from  him  what  he  knew  only  too  well—that  a  love,  as  un-fortunate  as  it was  foolish,  had  been  the  instrument  of my  destruc-tion;  but  I never  admitted  that  Madame  d’Houdetot  knew  of it, or,at  least,  that  I  had  declared  it  to  her.  I  told  him  of  Madamed’Epinay’s  unworthy  artifices  to  intercept  the  very  innocent  letterswritten  to  me  by her  sister-in-law.  I desired  that  he  should  learnthese  details  from  the  lips of the  persons  whom  she  had  attemptedto  seduce.  Thérése  gave  him  an  exact  account  of everything;  but myfeelings  may  be imagined,  when  it came  to  the  mother’s  turn,  and  Iheard  her  declare  and  maintain  that  she  knew  nothing  at  all  aboutit!  This  was  her  statement,  in  which  she  never  wavered.  Not  fourdays  since,  she  had  repeated  all  the  details  to  me,  and  then,  in  myfriend’s  presence,  she  flatly  contradicted  me.  This  attitude  appearedto  me  decisive;  and  I then  keenly  felt  my  imprudence  in having  soDISMISSED  FROM  HERMITAGE503long kept such  a woman  near  me.  I did not  break  out  into  invectives;I hardly  condescended  to  say  a  few  contemptuous  words  to  her.  Ifelt  how  much  I owed  to  the  daughter,  whose  unassailable  upright-ness  contrasted  strongly  With  her  mother’s  contemptible  cowardice.But,  from  that  moment,  my  mind  was  made  up  in  regard  to  theold  woman,  and I only  waited  for  a  suitable  Sppe  to  carryout  my  ETEENThis  opportunity  came  sooner  than  I had  expected.  On  the  rothof December  I received  an  answer  from  Madame  d’Epinay.  Its  con-tents  were  as  follows  (Packet  B, No.  rr):“GENEVA,  December  1st,  1757.“After  having  given  you,  for  several  years,  every  possible  proofof friendship  and  sympathy,  I can  now  only pity  you.  You  are  veryunhappy.  I wish  your  conscience  may  be as  clear  as  mine.  That  maybe  necessary  for  your  future  tranquillity.“Since  you  wanted  to  leave  the  Hermitage,  and  ought  to  havedone  so,  I am  astonished  that  your  friends  have  prevented  you.  As formyself,  I do  not  consult  my  friends  as  to  my  duties,  and  I havenothing  more  to  say  to  you  concerning  yours.”A dismissal  so  unexpected,  but  so  clearly  expressed,  did  not  leaveme  a  moment  to  hesitate.  I was  bound  to  leave  the  Hermitage  atonce,  whatever  the  weather  or  the  state  of my  health  might  be, evenif I had  to  sleep in the  woods  or  on  the snow,  with  which  the groundwas  covered,  and  in  spite  of  anything  Madame  d’Houdetot  mightsay  or  do;  for,  although  I was  ready  to  humour  her  in  everything,I was  not  prepared  to  disgrace  myself.I found  myself  in the  most  terrible  embarrassment  of my  life;  butmy  mind  was  made  up:  I swore  that,  whatever  might  happen,  Iwould  not  sleep in the Hermitage  after  a  week.  I set  about  removingmy  effects,  having  determined  to  leave  them  in the  open  field  ratherthan  keep  the  key  longer  than  the  week;  for  I was  anxious,  aboveall,  that  everything  should  be  settled  before  anyone  could  write  toGeneva  and  receive  an  answer.  I was  filled  with  a  courage  which  Ihad  never  felt  before:  all  my  vigour  had  returned  to  me.  Honour504THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUand  indignation,  upon  which  Madame  d’Epinay  had  not  reckoned,restored  it to  me.  Fortune  assisted  my  boldness.  M.  Mathas,  procur-eur  fiscal'®  of  M.  le Prince  de  Condé,  heard  of  my  difficulties.  Heoffered  me a little  house  which  stood  in  his  garden  at  Mont-Louis,in Montmorency.  I accepted  his  offer  with  eagerness  and  gratitude.The  bargain  was  soon  concluded.  I hastily  bought  some  furniture,in  addition  to  what  I had  already,  that  Thérése  and  myself  mighthave  a  bed  to  sleep  on.  With  great  trouble,  and  at great  expense,  Imanaged  to  get  my  goods  removed  in a cart.  In  spite  of the  ice  andsnow,  my  removal  was  effected  in  two  days,  and,  on  the  15th  ofDecember,  I gave  up  the  keys  of  the  Hermitage,  after  having  paidthe  gardener’s  wages,  as  I could  not  pay  my  rent.I told  Madame  le  Vasseur  that  we  must  separate;  her  daughtertried  to  shake  my  resolution,  but  I was  inflexible.  I saw  her  off  toParis  in  the  messenger’s  cart,  with  all  the  furniture  and  effects  be:longing  to  her and  her  daughter  in common.  I gave  her  some  money,and  undertook  to  pay  fer her lodging  with  her children  or  elsewhere,to  provide  for  her  as  long  as  it was  in  my  power,  and  never  to  lether  want  for  bread  as  long as  I had  any  myself.  Lastly,  the  day aftermy  arrival  at  Mont-Louis,  I wrote  the  following  letter  to  Madamed’Epinay:“Montmorency,  December  17th,  1757.“Madam,—Nothing is  so  simple  or  so  necessary  as  to  leave  yourhouse,  since  you  do  not  approve  of my  remaining  there.  As  you  re-fused  to  allow  me  to  spend  the  rest  of the  winter  at  the  Hermitage,I left  it on  the  15th  of  December.  I was  fated  to  enter  and  to  leaveit in spite  of myself.  I thank  you  for  the  stay  which  you  invited  meto  make  there,  and  I would  thank  you  still  more  if I had  paid  lessdearly  for it. You  are  right in thinking  that  I am  unhappy:  no  one  inthe world  knows  better  than yourself  the  extent  of that  unhappiness.If it is  a misfortune  to  be deceived  in the  choice  of one’s  friends,  it isequally  cruel  to  be  disabused  of  so  pleasant  a  mistake.”18  The  attorney  who  prosecutes  in all  cases  in which  the  lord  paramount  or  thepublic  are  concerned.LEAVES  THE  HERMITAGE505Such  is  the  true  story  of  my  Stay  at  the  Hermitage,  and  of  thereasons  which  caused  me  to  leave  it.  I have  been  unable  to  interruptthis  narrative,  and  it  was  important  to  give  the  most  exact  details,since  this  period  of  my  life  has  exercised  an  influence  upon  thefuture,  the  effects  of whick  will  last  to  my  dying  day.BOOK  X[1758]Tue  extraordinary  energy  with  which  a  temporary  irritation  hadenabled  me  to  leave  the  Hermitage,  left  me  as  soon  as  I was  out  ofit.  I was  no  sooner  settled  in my  new  abode  than  severe  and  frequentattacks  of  retention  of  urine  were  complicated  by the  fresh  incon-venience  of a  rupture,  which  had  for  some  time  tortured  me,  with-out  my  knowing  that  it was  one.  I soon  became  subject  to  the  mostpainful  attacks.  My old  friend  Thierry  came  to  see  me,  and  enlight-ened  me  as  to  my  condition.  Probes,  bougies,  bandages,  and  all  thepreparations  for  the  infirmities  of age  which  were  collected  aroundme,  made  me  feel  rudely,  that  one  can  no  longer  have  a  youngheart  without  suffering  for it, when  the body has ceased  to be young.The  fine  weather  did  not  restore  my  strength,  and  I passed  thewhole  of  1758  in  a  state  of weakness  which  made  me  believe  that  Iwas  near  the  end  of  my  career.  I saw  it  approaching  almost  witheagerness.  Cured  of idle  dreams  of friendship,  separated  from  every-thing  which  had  made  me  fond  of  life,  I no  longer  saw  anythingin  it which  could  make  it agreeable;  I saw  nothing  but  misery  andsuffering,  which  prevented  me  from  all  self-enjoyment.  I yearnedfor  the  moment  when I should  be  free  and  beyond  the  reach  of myenemies.  But  let us  take  up  the thread  of events  again.It appears  that  my  retirement  to  Montmorency  disconcerted  Ma-dame  d’Epinay;  probably  she  had  not  expected  it.  My  melancholycondition,  the  severity  of  the  weather,  and  my  general  loneliness,made  her  and  Grimm  believe  that,  by driving  me  to  the  last  ex-tremity,  they  would  compel  me  to  cry  for  mercy,  and  to  degrademyself  to  the  depths  of  meanness,  in  order  to  be  left  in  the  refugewhich  honour  ordered  me  to  leave.  I  changed  my  quarters  soabruptly  that  they had  not  time  to  anticipate  the step;  no  alternative506LETTER  FROM  MADAME  D’EPINAY507was  left  to  them  except  to  go  double  or  quits  and  ruin  me  com-pletely,  or  to  endeavour  to  get  me  back.  Grimm  was  in  favour  ofthe  former;  but  I believe  that  Madame  d’Epinay  would  have  pre-ferred  the latter.  I am  incliged  to  believe  this  from  her  answer  to  mylast  letter,  in  which  she  adopted  a  much  milder  tone,  and  seemedto  open  the  door  to  reconciliation.  The  time  she  made  me  wait  foran  answer—a  whole  month—is  a sufficient  indication  of  the  diff-culty which  she found  in giving  it a  suitable  turn,  and  of the anxiousthought  which  she  devoted  to  it.  She  could  not  go  further  withoutcommitting  herself;  but,  after  her  previous  letters,  and  my  abruptdeparture  from  her  house,  one  cannot  but  be  struck  by the  painsshe has  taken  in this  letter  not  to  allow  a  single  uncivil  word  to  creepin.  In  order  that  the  reader  may  judge  for  himself,  I will  give  it infull  (Packet  B, No.  23):“GENEVA,  January  17th,  1758.“Sir,—I  did  not  receive  your  letter  of the  17th  of December  untilyesterday.  It  was  sent  to  me  in  a  box  filled  with  different  things,which  has  been  all  this  time  on  its  way.  I will  only  answer  the  post-script;  as  for the  letter  itself,  I do not  clearly  understand  it; and,  if itwere  possible  for  us  to  come  to  an  explanation,  I would  gladly  setdown  all  that  has  passed  to  a  misunderstanding.  To  return  to  thepostscript.  You  may  remember  that  we  agreed  that  the  gardener’swages  should  be  paid  through  you,  to  make  him  feel  that  he  wasdependent  upon  you,  and  to  spare  you  the  laughable  and  unseemlyscenes  which  his  predecessor  had  caused.  A proof  of this  is, that  hisfirst  quarter’s  wages  was  handed  to  you,  and,  a  few  days  before  Ileft  I arranged  with  you  to  repay  what  you  advanced.  I know  that  atfirst  you  made  a  difficulty  about  it;  but  I had  asked  you  to  makethese  advances;  J had  merely  to  discharge  my  obligations,  and  thiswe  agreed  upon.  Cahouet  has  told  me  that  you  refused  to  accept  thismoney.  There  must  be  some  mistake  about  the  matter.  I  haveordered  it to  be  offered  to  you  again;  I do  not  see  why  you  shouldwant  to  pay  my  gardener,  in  spite  of  our  agreement,  even  beyondthe  time  of your  stay  at  the  Hermitage.  Therefore,  sir,  I feel  surethat,  remembering  all  that  I have  the  henour  to  tell  you,  you  willnot  refuse  to take  back  the money  which  you  have  been  kind  enoughto  advance.”508THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUAfter  all  that  passed,  being  no  longer  able  to  trust  Madame@’Epinay,  I did  not  desire  to  renew  my  connection  with  her.  I didnot  answer  the  letter  at  all, and  our  correspondence  ended  with  it.Seeing  that  I had  made  up  my  mind,  she  did  the  same;  and  enter-ing  into  all  the  plans  of  Grimm  and  the  Holbachian  clique,  sheunited  her  efforts  with  theirs  in order  to  ruin  me.  While  they  wereworking  at  Paris,  she  was  working  at  Geneva.  Grimm,  who  after-wards  went  to  join  her,  finished  what  she  had  begun.  Tronchin,whom  they easily  gained  over,  vigorously  assisted  them,  and  becamemy  most  violent  persecutor,  without  having  the  least  cause  of com-plaint  against  me,  any  more  than  Grimm.  All  three,  acting  together,secretly  sowed  in Geneva  the  seed  which,  four  years  later,  was  seento  spring  up.They  found  more  difficulty  in  Paris,  where  I was  better  known,and  where  people’s  hearts,  less  disposed  to  hatred,  did  not  receive  itsimpressions  so  easily.  In order  to  deal  their  blows  more  adroitly,  theybegan  by spreading  the  report  that  it was  I who  had  left  them.  (SeeDeleyre’s  letter,  Packet  B, No.  30.)  Starting  with  that,  and  pretend-ing  to  be  still  my  friends,  they  cleverly  sowed  the  seeds  of  theirmalicious  accusations,  in the form  of complaints  against  the injusticeof their  friend.  The  result  of this  was  that  their  hearers,  thrown  offtheir  guard,  were  more  inclined  to  listen  to  them  and  to  blame  me.The  secret  accusations  of  treachery  and  ingratitude’  were  spreadwith  greater  precaution,  and  for  that  very  reason  with  greater  effect.I knew  that  they  accused  me  of the  most  heinous  crimes,  withoutever  being  able  to  learn  in  what,  according  to  them,  they consisted.All  that  I could  infer  from  public  report  was,  that  they  were  re-duced  to  these  four  capital  offences:  my  retirement  to  the  country,my  love  for  Madame  d’Houdetot,  my  refusal  to  accompany  Madamed’Epinay  to  Geneva,  my  departure  from  the  Hermitage.  If  theyadded  other  grievances,  they  took  their  measures  so  admirably,that  it has  been  absolutely  impossible  for me  ever  to  learn  what  wasthe nature  of them.From  this  time,  therefore,  I think  that  I can  date  the  establish-ment  of a  system,  subsequently  adopted  by those  who  have  the  dis-posal  of my  destiny,  which  has  met  with  such  rapid  success,  that  itMORE  CONSPIRACIES  AGAINST  HIM509would  seem  almost  marvellous  to  anyone  who  does  not  know  howeasy  it is  for  everything  which  assists  men’s  malice  to  secure  approval.  I must  now  endeavour  to  explain,  as  briefly  as  possible,  whatis visible  to  my  eyes  in this  secret  and  deeply-laid  system.With  a  name  already  famous  and  known  throughout  Europe,  Ihad  preserved  the  simplicity  of my  early  tastes.  My deadly  aversionto  all  that  was  called  party,  faction,  or  cabal,  had  kept me  free  andindependent,  without  any  other  fetters  than  the  attachments  of myheart.  Alone,  a  stranger,  isolated,  without  support,  without  family,attached  to  nothing  but my  principles  and  duties,  I followed  withoutflinching  the  paths  of uprightness,  never  flattering,  never  favouringanyone  at  the expense  of justice  and  truth.  Besides,  during  two  yearsspent  in solitude  and  retirement,  without  hearing  any  news,  withoutany  connection  with  the  affairs  of  the  world,  without  being  in-formed  or  curious  about  anything,  I lived,  four  leagues  from  Paris,separated  from  it by my  carelessness  as  far  as  I should  have  beenby the  sea  from  the  island  of Tinian.On  the  other  hand,  Grimm,  Diderot,  and  d’Holbach,  in the  midstof  the  vortex,  lived  in  the  society  of  the  great  world,  and  dividedbetween  them  nearly  all  its  circles.  Great  men,  wits,  men  of letters,lawyers,  women,  all  listened  to  them  when  they  acted  in concert.  Itis easy  to  see  the  advantage  which  such a position  gives  to  three  menunited  against  a  fourth  in  a  position  like  my  own.  It  is  true  thatDiderot  and  d’Holbach  were  not—at  least,  I cannot  believe  it—themen:  to  form  very  black  designs;  the  one  was  not  wicked  enough,?the  other  was  not  sufficiently  clever;  but  for  that  very  reason  theyplayed  their  game  better  together.  Grimm  alone  formed  his  planin  his  head,  and  only  disclosed  so  much  of  it to  the  other  two  aswas  necessary  to  enable.them  to  assist  in  carrying  it  out.  His  as-cendency  over  them  made  this  co-operation  easy,  and  the  effect  ofthe  whole  corresponded  to  his  superior  abilities.With  these  superior  abilities,  sensible  of  the  advantage  he  couldderive  from  our  respective  positions,  he formed  the  design  of utterlydestroying  my  reputation,  and  changing  it into  one  totally  different,11 confess,  since  I wrote  this  work,  that  the  glimpses  which  I have  had  of  themysteries  which  surround  me,  make  me  afraid  that  I did  not  know  Diderot.510THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUwithout  compromising  himself,  by beginning  to  erect  around  me  anedifice  of  obscurity  which  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  penetrate,so  as  to  throw  light  upon  his  stratagems,  and  to  unmask  him.This  undertaking  was  difficult,  seeing  that  it  was  necessary  forhim  to  palliate  its injustice  in the  eyes  of those  who  were  to  assist  init.  It  was  necessary  to  deceive  those  who  were  honourable;  it wasnecessary  to  keep  everyone  away  from  me,  and  not  to  leave  me  asingle  friend,  either  great  or  small.  What  do I say?  it was  necessaryfor  him  not  to  allow  a  single  word  of  truth  to  penetrate  to  me.If a  single  generous  man  had  come  and  said  te  me,  “You  are  play-ing the  virtuous  man;  and  yet,  look  how  you  are  treated,  and  howyou  are  judged—what  have  you  to  say?” Truth  would  have  tri-umphed,  and  Grimm  would  have  been  lost.  He  knew it;  but  he hadsounded  his  own  heart,  and  estimated  men  at  their  true  value.  Iregret,  for  the  honour  of humanity,  that  he calculated  so  accurately.In  these  underground  paths,  his  steps,  to  be  sure,  were  obliged  tobe  slow.  He  has  for  twelve  years  pursued  his  plans,  and  the  mostdifficult  thing  still  remains  for  him  to  do—to  deceive  the  entire  pub-lic.  There  are  eyes  which  have  watched  him  more  closely  than  hethinks.  He  is afraid  of  this,  and  does  not  yet  venture  to  expose  hisplot to  the  light  of day.”  But  he has  found  the  least  difficult  way  ofaccompanying  it with  power,  and  this  power  disposes  of me.  Withthis  to  support  him,  he  proceeds  with  less  risk.  As  the  satellites ofpower  as  a  rule  think  but  little  of uprightness,  and  still  less  of frank-ness,  he need  not  fear  the indiscretion  of any  honourable  man.  Aboveall, it is necessary  for  him  that  I should  be  surrounded  by impene-trable  darkness,  and  that  his  plot  should  always  be  concealed  fromme,  since  he  well  knows  that,  however  skilfully  he  may  have  laidhis  plans,  they  would  never  be  able  to  resist  a  look  from  me.  Hisgreat  cleverness  consists  in  appearing  to  treat  me  indulgently,  whilein  reality  defaming  me,  and  in  giving  his  perfidity  the  appearanceof generosity.I felt  the  first  effects  of this  system  through  the  secret  accusationsof the  Holbachian  clique,  without  it being  possible  for  me  to  know,? Since  these  words  were  written,  he has  taken  the  plunge  with  the  most  com-plete  and  inconceivable  success.  I believe  that  it is Tronchin  who  has  suppliedhim  with  the  courage  and  the  means.COOLNESS  OF  MME.  D’HOUDETOT511or  even  to  conjecture,  what  formed  the  subject  of these  accusations.Deleyre,  in  his  letters,  told  me  that  I was  accused  of most  disgrace-ful  offences.  Diderot,  more  mysteriously,  told  me  the  same  thing;and  when I entered  upon_an  explanation  with  both,  the  whole  wasreduced  to  the  four  heads  already  mentioned.  I became  conscious  ofa  growing  coolness  in  Madame  d’Houdetot’s  letters.  I could  notattribute  this  coolness  to  Saint-Lambert,  who  continued  to  cor-respond  with  me  with  the  same  friendliness,  and  even  came  to  seeme  after  his  return.  Nor  could  I blame  myself  either,  since  we  hadparted  very  amicably,  and,  on  my  side,  I had  done  nothing  sincethen,  except  leaving  the  Hermitage,  a  step  which  she herself  had  felyto be necessary.  Consequently,  not  knowing  what  to  consider  respon-sible  for  this  coolness—which  she  did  not  admit,  although  my  heartcould  not  be deceived—I  felt  generally  uneasy.  I knew  that  she  wasextremely  cautious  in her behaviour  to  her  sister-in-law  and  Grimm,on  account  of  their  relation  to  Saint-Lambert;  I was  afraid  of theirschemes.  This  agitation  reopened  my  wounds,  and  made  our  cor-respondence  so  stormy,  that  she  became  quite  disgusted.  I caughta  glimpse  of  a  thousand  cruel  circumstances,  without  seeing  any-thing  distinctly.  My position  was  most  unbearable  for  a  man  whosefancy  is so  easily  inflamed.  If I had  been  altogether  isolated,  if I hadknown  nothing  at  all, I should  have  been  calmer;  but  my  heart  stillclung to  the attachments  which  gave  my  enemies  a  thousand  handlesagainst  me;  and  the  feeble  rays  which  penetrated  my  refuge  onlyserved  to  show  me  the  blackness  of the  mysteries  which  were  con:cealed  from  me.I have  no  doubt  that  I should  have  succumbed  to this cruel  torture,which  was  too  much  for  my  frank  and  open  disposition,  which,while  it makes  it utterly  impossible  for  me  to  conceal  my  own  feel-ings,  makes  me  fear  everything  from  those  which  are  concealedfrom  me;  but,  fortunately,  other  things  presented  themselves,  suf-ficiently  interesting  to  my  heart  to  create  a  healthy  diversion  fromthose  which,  in  spite  of myself,  engaged  my  attention.  During  thelast  visit  which  Diderot  had  paid  to  the  Hermitage,  he  had  spokento me  about  the article  on  “Geneva”  which  D’Alembert  had  insertedin the “Encyclopaedia;”  he  had  told  me  that  this  article,  which  hadbeen  agreed  upon  tegether  with  some  Genevese  of high  standing,512THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUhad  in view  the  establishment  of a  theatre  at  Geneva;  that  the neces-sary  steps  had  been  taken,  and  that  it would  soon  be carried  out.  AsDiderot  seemed  to  look  favourably  upon  the  scheme,  and  had  nodoubt  of its  success,  and  as  I had  too  many  other  things  to  discusswith  him  to  have  time  to  argue  further  upon  the  point,  I  saidnothing;  but,  feeling  indignant  at  all  these  intrigues  to  corrupt  mycountry,  I awaited  with  impatience  the  volume  of  the  “Encyclo-paedia”  which  contained  the  article,  that  I might  see  whether  Icould  not  find  some  means  of  answering it in  such  a  manneras  to  ward  off  the  blow.  I received  the  volume  soon  after  I was  set-tled  at  Mont-Louis,  and  I found  that  the  article  was  written  withconsiderable  skill  and  cleverness,  and  was  worthy  of  the  pen  fromwhich  it  had  proceeded.  However,  this  did  not  deter  me  from  myintention  of replying  to  it; and,  in spite  of my  low  spirits,  in spite  ofmy  grief  and  suffering,  the  severity  of  the  weather,  and  the  un-comfortableness  of my  new  abode,  in  which  I had  not  yet  had  timeto  settle  down,  I set  to  work  with  an  eagerness  which  overcame  all.During  a  somewhat  severe  winter,  in the  month  of February,  andin the  condition  I have  already  described,  I spent  two  hours,  morn-ing  and  afternoon,  in  an  open  turret  at  the  bottom  of  the  gardenin  which  my  house  stood.  This  turret,  which  stood  at  the  end  of  aterraced  walk,  looked  upon  the  valley  and  fish-pond  of  Mont-morency,  and  showed  me  in  the  distance,  as  far  as  I could  see,  thesimple  but  stately  château  of  Saint-Gratien,  the  retreat  of  the  vir-tuous  Catinat.  In  this  place,  which  at  that  time  was  bitterly  cold,unsheltered  from  the  wind  and  snow,  and  with  no  other  fire  exceptthat  in  my  heart,  I composed,  in three  weeks,  my  letter  to  D’Alem-bert  upon  Theatres.  This  was  the  first  of my  writings—for  “Julie”was  not  half  finished—in  which  I  have  found  delight  in  work.-Hitherto,  virtuous  indignation  had  been  my  Apollo;  on  this  occa-sion,  tenderness  and  gentleness  of  soul  supplied  his  place.  The  in-justices  of which  I had  only been a spectator  had  irritated  me:  thoseby which  I had  myself  been  attacked  saddened  me;  and  this  sad-ness,  free  from  all gail and bitterness,  was  nothing but the  sadness  ofa  too  loving  and  tender  heart,  which,  deceived  by those  whom  it be-lieved  to  be  of its  own  stamp,  had  been  forced  to  retire  into  itself.Full  of  all  that  had  just  happened  to  me,  still  shaken  by so  manyWRITES  TO  D'ALEMBERT  |513violent  emotions,  my  heart  mingled  the  feelings  of  its  sufferingswith  the ideas  with  which  meditation  upon  my  subject  had  inspiredme:  my  work  showed  evident  traces  of this  mingling.  Without  per-ceiving  it, I described  my-situation  at  that  time:  I portrayed  Grimm,Madame  d’Epinay,  Madame  d’Houdetot,  Saint-Lambert  and  my-self.  While  writing,  whit  delightful  tears  I shed!  Alas!  in  what  Iwrote  it is only  too  evident  that  love,  the  fatal  love  of which  I wasdoing  my  utmost  to  cure  myself,  was  not  yet  banished  from  myheart.  With  all  this  was  mingled a certain  feeling  of tenderness  inregard  to  myself,  as  I felt  that  I was  dying,  and  believed  that’I  wassaying  farewell  to  the  public  for  the  last  time.  Far  from  beingalarmed  at  death,  I beheld  its  approach  with  joy,  but  I felt  regret  atleaving  my  fellows  before  they  had  learned  to  appreciate  me  prop-erly, before  they knew  how  much I should  have  deserved  their  affec-tion  if they  had  known  me  better.  These  are  the  secret  reasons  ofthe  singular  tone  which  prevails  in  this  work,  and  which  offers  sostriking  a  contrast  to  that  which  preceded  it.3I revised  and  made a fair  copy  of  this  letter,  and  was  about  teget  it printed,  when,  after  a  long  silence,  I received  a  letter  fromMadame  d’Houdetot,  which  overwhelmed  me  with a fresh  afflic-tion,  the  most  painful  that  I had  as  yet  suffered.  She  told  me  in thisletter  (Packet  B,  No.  34),  that  my  passion  for  her  was  knownthroughout  Paris;  that  I had  spoken  of it to  persons  who  had  madeit public;  that  these  rumours  had  reached  the  ears  of her  lover,  andhad  nearly  cost  him  his  life;  that  at  last  he  did  her  justice,  and  thatthey had  become  reconciled;  but  that  she  owed  it to  him,  as  well  asto  herself  and  her  reputation,  to  break  off  all  intercourse  with  me;that,  in  the  meanwhile,  she  assured  me  that  they  would  never  ceaseto  take  an  interest  in  me,  that  they  would  defend  me  before  thepublic,  and  that  she  would  send  from  time  to  time  to  inquire  afterme.“And  you  too,  Diderot!”  I exclaimed.  Unworthy  friend!  Never-theless,  I could  not  make  up  my  mind  to  condemn  him  yet.  Myweakness  was  known  by other  persons  who  might  have  caused  itto  be  talked  about.  I wanted  to  doubt;  but  soon  I was  unable  to  coso  any  longer.  Soon  afterwards,  Saint-Lambert  behaved  in a  manner3 The  “Discours  sur  |’Inégalité  des  Conditions.”514THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUworthy  of  his  generosity.  Knowing  my  heart  tolerably  well,  heguessed  the  state  of mind  in  which  I must  be, betrayed  by one  sec-tion  of my  friends,  and  abandoned  by the  rest.  He  came  to  see  me.When  he came  first,  he had  very  little  time  to  spare.  He  came  again.Unfortunately,  as  I did  not  expect  him,  I was  not  at  home.  Thérèse,who  was,  had  a  conversation  with  him,  which  lasted  more  than  twohours,  in  the  course  of which  they  told  each  other  of several  thingswhich  it was  of great  importance  for  both  of us  to  know.  The  sur-prise with  which I learned  that  no  one  doubted  that  I had  lived  withMadame  d’Epinay,  as  Grimm  was  living  with  her  at  that  time,  wasonly  equalled  by his  own,  when  he  learned  that  the  report  was  ut-terly false.  Saint-Lambert,  to  the  lady’s  great  displeasure,  was  in thesame  case  as  myself;  and  all  the  explanations,  which  were  the  resultof  this  conversation,  utterly  stifled  any  regrets  I may  have  felt  athaving  irrevocably  broken  with  her.  As  for  Madame  d’Houdetot,  hegave  Thérèse  a  detailed  account  of many  circumstances  with  whichneither  she  nor  even  Madame  d’Houdetot  were  acquainted—thingswhich  I alone  knew,  which  I had  mentioned  to  Diderot  alone  underthe seal  of friendship;  and  it was  Saint-Lambert  himself  to  whom  hehad  chosen  to  confide  them.  This  finally  decided  me.  Resolved  tobreak  with  Diderot  once  and  for  all, I had  nothing  further  to  thinkabout,  except  the  manner  of doing  it; for  I had  perceived  that  secretruptures  always  proved  prejudicial  to  me,  since  they  left  a  mask  offriendship  to  my  most  cruel  enemies.The  rules  of  good  breeding  established  in  the  world  upon  thispoint  seem  to  be  dictated  by the  spirit  of  falsehood  and  treachery.To  appear  to  be  the  friend  of  a  man,  when  one  has  ceased  to  be  so,is  to  reserve  to  oneself  the  means  of  injuring  him  by  deceivinghonourable  men.  I recalled  to  mind  that  when  the  illustrious  Mon-tesquieu  broke  with  Father  de  Tournemine,  he  hastened  to  an-nounce  it openly,  and  said  to  everybody,  “Do  not  listen  either  teFather  de  Tournemine  or  myself,  when  one  speaks  of  the  other,for  we  are  no  longer  friends.”  His  conduct  was  highly  applauded,and  its  frankness  and  generosity  were  universally  praised.  I deter-mined  to  follow  his example  in dealing  with  Diderot;  but how  was  Ito  announce  the  rupture  authentically  from  my  retreat,  and, in addi-tion,  without  causing  a  scandal?  I decided  to  insert  in my  work,  inSAINT-LAMBERT’S  LETTER515the form  of a  note,  a  passage  from  Ecclesiasticus,  which  announcedit and  even  the attendant  circumstances,  in terms  sufficiently clear  toanyone  who  was  well  informed,  while it had no  meaning  for  others.I further  took  care  only  to  allude  to  the friend  whom  I was  renounc-ing in the  respectful  terms  which  are  always  due  to  friendship  evenwhen  it no  longer  exists.  All  this  may  be  seen  in the  work  itself.There  is nothing  in  this  world  but  good  and  bad  fortune;*  andit  appears  that  in  adversity  every  act  of  courage  is  a  crime.  Thevery  same  thing  which  had  been  admired  in  Montesquieu  onlybrought  upon  me  blame  and  reproach.  As  soon  as  my.  work  wasprinted  and I had  received  copies  of it, I sent  one  to  Saint-Lambert,who,  the  very  day before,  had  written  to  me,  in Madame  d’Houde-tots  name  and  his  own, a letter  full  of the  tenderest  expressions  offriendship  (Packet  B, No.  37).  He  returned  my  copy,  accompaniedby the following  letter  (Packet  B, No.  38):“EauBONNE,  October  roth,  1758.“Really,  sir,  I am  unable  to  accept  the  present  which  you  havejust  sent  me.  At  the  passage  in  your  Preface,  where,  mentioningDiderot,  you  quote  a  passage  from  Ecclesiastes”  (he is wrong,  it isEcclesiasticus),  “the  book  fell  from  my  hands.  After  our  conversa-tions  during  this  summer,  you  appeared  to  me  to  be convinced  thatDiderot  was  innocent  of the  pretended  indiscretions  which  you  laidto  his  charge.  He  may  have  treated  you  wrongly;  I do  not  know;but  I do  know  that  this  does  not  give  you  the  right  to  insult  himpublicly.  You  are  not  ignorant  of the  persecutions  to  which  he  hasto  submit,  and  now  you  unite  the  voice  of an  old  friend  to  the  criesof the  envious!  I cannot  conceal  from  you,  sir, how  greatly  this  out-rageous  conduct  shocks  me.  I do not  live  with  Diderot,  but  I honourhim, and  I feel  keenly  the pain which  you  cause  to  a man  whom  youhave  never  reproached,  at  least  in my  presence,  with  anything  morethan a little  weakness.  Sir, we  differ  too  much  in our  principles  everto  be able  to  agree.  Forget  my  existence;  this  ought not  to  be difficultfor  you.  I have  never  done  men  either  good  or  harm  which  theyremember  for  long.  I promise  you,  sir, to  forget  your  person,  and  toremember  your  talents  alone.”411  wy  a  qu’heur  et  malheur  dans  ce  monde:  a  proverbial  expression,  mean-ing,  “In  this  world  everything  depends  upon  luck.”516THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUI felt  no  less  afflicted  than  indignant,  when I read  this  letter,  and,in the  excess  of my  wretchedness,  finding  my  pride  again,  I repliedto  him  as  follows:“MontMorEncy,  October  11th,  1758.“Sir——When  I read  your  letter,  I did  you  the  honour  of  beingsurprised  at  it, and  I was  foolish  enough  to  be affected  by it; but nowI find  that  it is unworthy  of an  answer.“I  have  no  wish  to  continue  the  copies  for  Madame  d’Houdetot.If it is  not  agreeable  to  her  to  keep  what  she  has,  she  can  send  itback  to  me;  I will  return  her  money.  If she  keeps  it, she  must  stillsend  for  the  rest  of her  paper  and  money.  I beg,  at  the  same  time,that  she  will  return  me  the  prospectus  which  she  has  in her  keeping.Farewell,  sir.”Courage  in misfortune  irritates  cowardly  hearts,  but  pleases  thosethat  are  generous.  It  appears  that  this  letter  caused  Saint-Lambertto  reflect,  and  that  he  was  sorry  for  what  he  had  done;  but,  beingtoo  proud  on  his  side  to  admit  it  openly,  he  seized,  perhaps  pre-pared,  the  means  of deadening  the  force  of  the  blow  which  he haddealt  me.  A  fortnight  later,  I  received  the  following  letter  fromM.  d’Epinay  (Packet  B, No.  10):“Thursday,  26th.“Sir,—I  have  received  the book  which  you  have  been  kind  enoughto  send  me;  I read  it with  great  pleasure.  This  is always  the  feelingwith  which  I have  read  all  the  works  which  have  proceeded  fromyour  pen.  Accept  my  best  thanks  for  it.  I would  have  offered  themto  you  in  person,  if my  affairs  had  allowed  me  to  stay  any  time  inyour  neighbourhood;  but  I have  lived  very  little  this  year  at  LaChevrette.  M.  and  Madame  Dupin  are  coming  to  dine  with  me  nextSunday.  I expect  that  MM.  de  Francueil  and  Saint-Lambert,  andMadame  d’Houdetot  will  be  of  the  party.  You  would  do  me a realfavour  by consenting  to  join  us.  All  those  who  will  be  my  guestsare  anxious  for  your  company,  and  will  be  delighted  to  share  withme  the  pleasure  of  spending  a  portion  of  the  day  with  you.  I havethe  honour  to  be,  with  the  most  perfect  esteem,  etc.”THE  DINNER-PARTY517This  letter  made  my  heart  beat  terribly.  After  having  been  fora  year  the  talk  of Paris,  the  idea  of going  to  exhibit  myself  beforeMadame  d’Houdetot  made  me  tremble,  and  I could  scarcely  musterup  sufficient  courage  to  sustain  this  ordeal.  However,  since  she  andSaint-Lambert  desired  it, since  D’Epinay  spoke  in  the  name  of  allthose  who  had  been  invited,  and  mentioned  no  one  whom  I shouldnot  be  glad  to  see,  I came  to  the  conclusion  that,  after  all,  I was  notcompromising  myself  by accepting  an  invitation  to  dinner  whichwas  sent  me,  as  it were,  by all  the  guests.  I“attordingly  promised  togo.  On  Sunday,  the  weather  was  bad:  M.  d’Epinay  sent  his carriagefor  me,  and  I went.My  arrival  created  a  sensation.  I have  never  met  with  a  morecordial  reception.  One  would  have  said  that  the  whole  companyfelt  how  greatly  I needed  cheering.  Only  French  hearts  know  howto  show  tenderness  of  this  kind.  However,  I found  more  peoplethere  than  I had  expected;  amongst  others,  the  Comte  d’Houde-tot,  whom  I did  not  know  at  all,  and  his  sister,  Madame  de  Blain-ville,  whose  company  I could  very  well  have  dispensed  with.  Shehad  visited  Eaubonne  several  times  during  the  preceding  year;  andher  sister-in-law,  during  our  solitary  walks,  had  often  made  herdance  attendance  until  she  was  tired  out.  She  cherished  a  resent-ment  against  me  which  she gratified  during  this  dinner  to  her  heart’scontent;  for  it  may  be  guessed  that  the  presence  of  the  Comted’Houdetot  and  Saint-Lambert  did  not  give  me  the  laugh  on  myside,  and  that  a  man  who  found  himself  at  a  loss  during  the  mostordinary  conversations  did  not  shine  very  much  on  that  occasion.I have  never  suffered  so  much,  never  cut  such  a  bad  figure,  or  beensubjected  to  more  unexpected  attacks.  When  at  length  we  left  thetable,  I escaped  from  this  vixen;  I had  the  pleasure  of seeing  Saint-Lambert  and  Madame  d’Houdetot  come  up  to  me,  and  we  talkedtogether  during  part of the afternoon,  concerning  matters  which  it istrue  were  of no  importance,  but  with  the  same  familiarity  as  beforemy  fit of madness.  This  friendliness  did  not  escape  my  heart;  and  ifSaint-Lambert  had  been  able  to  read  therein,  he  would  certainlyhave  been  satisfied.  I can  swear  that,  although,  on  my  arrival,  thesight  of  Madame  d’Houdetot  caused  my  heart  to  beat  so  violently518THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthat  I almost  fainted,  when  I took  my  leave  I scarcely  thought  ofher  at  all, my  mind  being  entirely  occupied  with  Saint-Lambert.Notwithstanding  Madame  de  Blainville’s  spiteful  sarcasms,  thisdinner  did  me  a  great  deal  of good,  and  I heartily  congratulated  my-self  upon  not  having  refused  the  invitation.  It showed  me  not  onlythat  the intrigues  of Grimm  and  the  Holbachians  had  not  separatedmy  old  friends  from  me,°  but,  what  was  still  more  flattering  to  me,that  the  feelings  of  Madame  d’Houdetot  and  Saint-Lambert  wereless  changed  than  I had  expected;  and  I  at  last  understood  thatjealousy  had  more  to  do  with  his  keeping  her  away  from  me  thandisesteem.  This  consoled  and  calmed  me.  Sure  of not  being  an  ob-ject  of  contempt  to  those  whom  I esteemed,  I  worked  upon  myown  heart  with  greater  courage  and  success.  If I did  not  succeed  incompletely  extinguishing  in  it  a  guilty  and  unfortunate  passion,T at  least  kept its  remains  so  well  in order,  that  since  that  time  theyhave  not  caused  me  to  commit  a  single  error.  Madame  d’Houdetot’scopying,  which  she  persuaded  me  to  resume;  my  works,  which  Icontinued  to  send  her  when  they  appeared,  still  brought  me,  fromtime  to  time,  messages  and  notes  from  her,  of no  great  importance,'  but  couched  in  polite  terms.  She  even  did  more,  as  will  be  subse-quently  seen;  and  the  reciprocal  conduct  of  all  the  three,  after  ourintercourse  had  ceased,  may  serve  as  an  example  of  the  way  inwhich  honourable  persons  separate,  when  it is no  longer  agreeableto  them  to  associate.Another  advantage  resulting  from  this  dinner  was,  that  it  wasspoken  of  in  Paris,  and  served  to  refute  unanswerably  the  reportwhich  was  everywhere  circulated  by my  enemies,  that  I was  at  dag-gers-drawn  with  all  those  who  had  been  present,  especially  with  M.d’Epinay.  On  leaving  the  Hermitage,  I had  written  to  him  a  verypolite  letter  of  thanks,  to  which  he  replied  with  equal  politeness;and  this  mutual  interchange  of  civilities  continued  between  our-selves  and  his  brother,  M.  de  Lalive,  who  even  came  to  see  meat  Montmorency,  and  sent  me  his  engravings.  With  the  exceptionof  Madame  d’Houdetot’s  two  sisters-in-law,  I have  never  been  onbad terms  with  any  member  of his family.5 This  was  what,  in  the  simplicity  of  my  heart,  I still  believed  when  I wrotemy  “Confessions.”M.  MARMONTEL5ivMy  letter  to  D’Alembert  met  with  great  success.  All  my  workshad  done  the  same,  bue this  was  even  more  profitable  to  me.  Ittaught  the public  to  mistrust  the  Holbachian  clique.  When  I went  tothe  Hermitage,  they predicted,  with  their  usual  self-assurance,  that  Ishould  not  stop  there  for  three  months.  When  they  saw  that  I.stopped  twenty,  and  that,  when  obliged  to  leave  it, I still  remainedin  the  country,  they  declared  that  it was  pure  obstinacy:  that  I waswearying  myself  to  death  in my  retirement;  but  that,  eaten  up  withpride,  I preferred  to  die  there,  the  victim  of  my  own  obstinacy,rather  than  to  give  in  and  return  to  Paris.  The  letter  to  D’Alem-bert  breathed  a  gentleness  of soul  which  it was  easy  to  see  was  notpretended.  If  I had  been  devoured  by ill-humour  in  my  retreat,  itwould  have  made  itself  felt  in the  style of the  letter.  It showed  itselfin  all  the  writings  which  I had  written  at  Paris:  it ceased  to  showitself  in  the  first  work  which  I  had  written  in  the  country.  Forthose  who  are  capable  of  observing,  this  indication  was  decisive.They  saw  that  I had  returned  to  my  proper  element.Nevertheless,  this  same  work,  full  of  gentleness  though  it  was,owing  to  my  awkwardness  and  my  usual  ill-luck,  made  me  anotherenemy  in  the  literary  world.  At  M.  de  la  Popliniére’s  I had  madethe  acquaintance  of  Marmontel,  and  this  acquaintance  had  beenkept  up  at  the  Baron’s.  At  that  time  Marmontel  was  editor  of  theMercure  de France.  As  I was  too  proud  to  send  my  works  to  thosewho  wrote  for  the  newspapers,  and  yet  wanted  to  send  him  this,without  letting  him  think  that  it was  meant  for  him  in his  editorialcapacity,  or  that  I desired  a notice  of it in the Mercure,  I wrote  uponthe  copy,  which  I sent  him,  that  it was  not  intended  for  the  writerof the Mercure,  but  for  M.  Marmontel.  I thought  that  I was  payinghim  a  very  graceful  compliment;  but  he  appeared  to  see  in  it  adeadly  insult,  and  became  my  irreconcilable  enemy.  He  wrote  apolite  article  against  my  letter,  but  with  evident  bitterness;  andfrom  that  time,  he  missed  no  opportunity  of injuring  me  in  societyand  of  indirectly  attacking  me  in  his  works.  So  difficult  is  it  tomanage  the  irritable  amour-propre  of literary  men,  and  such  greatcare  is  necessary,  in  paying  them  compliments,  to  leave  nothingwhich  can  even  be suspected  of a  double  meaning.[1759.]—Thus  freed  from  all anxiety,  I employed  my  leisure  and520THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUindependence  in  resuming  my  literary  occupations  with  greaterregularity.  I finished  “Julie”  in  the  winter,  and  sent  it to  Rey,  whohad  it printed  in the  following  year.  However,  my  work  was  againinterrupted  by a trifling,  but  rather  unpleasant  incident.  I heard  thatarrangements  were  being  made  at  the  Opera  for  a  reproduction  ofthe Devin  du  Village.  Highly  indignant  at  the idea  of these  people soarrogantly  claiming  the  right  to  dispose  of  my  property,  I againtook  up  the  memorial  which  I had  sent  to  M.  d’Argenson,  to  whichI had  received  no  reply;  and  having  revised  it, I sent  it by M.  Sellon,together  with  a  letter  which  he  was  kind  enough  to  take  charge  of,to  M.  le Comte  de  Saint-Florentin,  who  had  succeeded  M.  d’Argen-son  in  the  management  of the  Opera.  Duclos,  whom  I informed  ofwhat  I had  done,  spoke  of it  to  the  “little  violins,”  who  offered  togive me  back,  not  my  Opera,  but  my  free  pass,  which  was  no  longerof any  use  to  me.  Seeing  that  I could  not  hope  for  justice  from  anyquarter,  I gave  up  the  affair;  and  the directors  of the  Opera,  withouteither  replying  or  listening  to  my  arguments,  continued  to  makewhat  use  they  pleased  of  the  Devin,  which  incontestably  belongsto  me  alone,®  as  if it had  been  their  own  property,  and to  draw  profitsfrom  it.Since  I had  shaken  off  the  yoke  of  my  tyrants,  I led  a  tolerablyeven  and  peaceful  life;  deprived  of the  charm  of two  strong  attach-ments,  I was  also  free  from  the  weight  of  their  chains.  Disgustedwith  patronising  friends,  who  wanted  to  have  the  absolute  disposalof my  destiny  and  to  make  me  the  slave  of their  pretended  benefitsin  spite  of  myself,  I was  resolved  for  the  future  to  keep  to  connec-tions  formed  by  simple  goodwill,  which,  without  putting  any  re-straint  upon  perfect  freedom,  constitute  the  enjoyment  of life,  andare  founded  upon  a footing  of  complete  equality.  I had  sufficientconnections  of this  kind  to  be  able  to  taste  the  pleasures  of  society,without  being obliged  to  submit  to  dependence  upon  it; and, as  soonas  I had  tried  this  manner  of  life,  I felt  that  it  was  most  suitableto  my  age,  to  end  my  days  in  peace,  far  beyond  the  reach  of  thestorms,  quarrels,  and  annoyances  by  which  I  had  recently  beenalmost  swamped.  .° It now  belongs  to  them  by virtue  of a  fresh  agreement  made  between  us  quiterecently.HIS  NEW  ACQUAINTANCES521During  my  stay  at  the  Hermitage,  and  since  my  settlement  atMontmorency,  I have  fhade  some  agreeable  acquaintances  in  theneighbourhood,  to  whom I felt  under  no  obligations.  At  the  head  ofthese  was  young  Loyseau  de  Mauléon,  who  was  just  beginning  hiscareer  at  the  Bar,  but  did  not  know  what  position  he  would  take.I had  no  such  doubts  as  he  had.  I soon  marked  out  for  him a bril-liant  career,  which  has  culminated  in  his  present  position.  I pre-dicted  to  him  that,  if he  was  rigidly  careful  in  his  choice  of cases,and  always  defended  the  cause  of  justice  and  virtue,  his  talents,elevated  by these  lofty sentiments,  would  make  him  the equal  of thegreatest  orators.  He  has  followed  my  advice,  and  has  felt  the  benefitof  it.  His  defence  of  M.  de  Portes  is  worthy  of  Demosthenes.  Hewas  in  the  habit  of  coming  every  year  to  spend  his  vacations  atSaint-Brice,  a  quarter  of  a  league  from  the  Hermitage,  in  the  fiefof  Mauléon,  which  belonged  to  his  mother,  and  where  the  greatBossuet  had  formerly  lived.  It  is  a  fief,  in  which  a  succession  ofsuch  proprietors  would  render  it difficult  to  keep up the  old  nobility.Another  of my  friends,  in  the  same  village,  was  Guérin  the  book-seller,  a  man  of  wit,  learning,  and  amiable  character,  and  in  thefirst  rank  of his  business.  Through  him  J made  the  acquaintance  ofJean  Néaulme,  an  Amsterdam  bookseller,  his  friend  and  corre-spondent,  who  afterwards  printed  “Emile.”  Nearer  than  Saint-Brice,I had  M.  Maltor,  curé  of Grosley,  more  fitted  to  be  a  minister  andstatesman  than a village  curé,  who  should  at  least  have  had  the  ad-ministration  of a  diocese,  if places  were  bestowed  according  to  abil-ity.  He  had  been  secretary  to  the  Comte  du  Luc,  and  had  knownJean  Baptiste  Rousseau  intimately.  As  full  of esteem  for  the  memoryof that  illustrious  exile  as  of  loathing  for  that  of  the  rascal  Saurinwho  had  ruined  him,  he  knew  a  number  of  curious  anecdotesabout  both,  which  Seguy  had  not  inserted  in the as  yet unprinted  lifeof the  former;  and  he  assured  me  that  the  Comte  du  Luc,  far  fromever  having  had  reason  to complain  of him, had  preserved  the warm-est  friendship  for  him  to  the  end  of his  life.  M.  Maltor,  upon  whomM.  de  Vintimille  had  bestowed  this  comfortable  retreat  after  thedeath  of his  patron,  had  been  formerly  employed  in  several  affairs,of which,  in  spite  of his  years,  he  still  had  a  vivid  recollection,  andwhich  he  discussed  very  sensibly.  His  conversation,  as  instructive522THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUas  it was  amusing,  in no  way  reminded  one  of a village curé:  he com-bined  the  air  of a  man  of the  world  with  the  learning  of a  student.Of all my  permanent  neighbours,  he was  the  one  whose  society  wasthe  most  agreeable  to  me,  and  whom I left  with  the  greatest  regret.At  Montmorency  I had  the  members  of  the  Oratory;  amongstothers  Father  Berthier,  professor  of  physics,  to  whom  I  becameattached,  owing  to  a  certain  air  of  geniality  which  I discovered  inhim,  in  spite  of a  slight  dash  of pedantry.  I found  it difficult,  how-ever,  to  reconcile  this  excessive  simplicity  with  his  eagerness  andadroitness  in  thrusting  himself  everywhere;  amongst  the  great,  theladies,  the  devotees,  and  the  philosophers.  He  knew  how  to  be  allthings  to  all  men.  I found  great  pleasure  in  his  society.  I spoke  ofhim to  everybody;  and  what I said  apparently  went  back  to him.  Oneday he  thanked  me,  with  a  grin,  for  having  found  him a good  fel-low.  There  appeared  to  me  something  sardonic  in  his  smile,  whichtotally  altered  his  features  in  my  eyes,  and  which  I  have  oftenthought  of since  then.  This  smile  may  be most  fitly compared  to  thatof Panurge,  when  buying  Dindenaut’s  sheep.  Our  acquaintance  hadcommenced  soon  after  my  arrival  at  the  Hermitage,  where  he  fre-quently  came  to  see  me.  I was  already  settled  at  Montmorency,  whenhe  left  to  return  to  Paris.  He  often  saw  Madame  le Vasseur  there.One  day,  when  nothing  was  further  from  my  thoughts,  he  wroteme a letter  on  her  behalf,  to  inform  me  that  Grimm  had  offered  tosupport  her,  and  to  ask  my  permission  to  accept  the  offer.  I heardthat  he  offered  her  an  allowance  of  300  livres,  on  condition  thatshe  went  to  live  at  Deuil,  between  La  Chevrette  and  Montmorency.I will  not  describe  the  impression  which  this  information  producedupon  me:  it would  have  been  less  surprising  if Grimm  had  had  anincome  of  10,000  livres,  or  any  more  intelligible  connection  withthis  woman,  and  if it had  not  been  considered  such  a  crime  on  mypart  to  have  taken  her  into  the  country,  to  which  he  was  now  in-clined  to  take  her  back,  as  if  she  had  grown  younger  since  then.I understood  that  the  good  old  lady  only  asked  this  permission,which  she  could  easily  have  dispensed  with  if  I had  refused  it, inorder  not  to  run  the  risk  of  losing  what  she  received  from  me.Although  this  exhibition  of charity  on  the  part  of Grimm  appearedto  me  very  extraordinary,  it did  not  strike  me  so  much  at  the  timeZ i ¢2MM.  FERRAND  AND  MINARD523as  it did  afterwards.  But; even  if I had  known  all  that  I have  sincefound  out,  I should  have  given  my  consent  just  the  same  as  I did,and  was  obliged  to  do, tfnless  I had  been  prepared  to  outbid  Grimm.From  that  time,  Father  Berthier  somewhat  cured  me  of  the  beliefin  his  geniality,  which  had  seemed  to  him  so  amusing,  and  ofwhich  I had  so  thoughtlessly  accused  him.This  same  Father  Berthier  enjoyed  the  acquaintance  of two  per-sons,  who,  for  some  unknown  reason,  also  sought  mine:  for  therewas  certainly  very  little  sympathy  between  their  tastes  and  my  own.They  were  children  of Melchisedec,”  whose  country  and  family  noone  knew—probably,  not  even  their  real  names.  They  were  Jan-senists,  and  passed  for  priests  in  disguise—perhaps  in  consequenceof  their  absurd  fashion  of  wearing  long  swords,  by which  they  setgreat  store.  The  prodigious  secrecy  which  marked  all  their  pro-ceedings  gave  them  the  appearance  of party-chiefs,  and  I have  alwaysfelt convinced  that  they managed  the  Gazette  Ecclésiastique.  One  ofthem,  tall,  benevolent,  and  wheedling,  was  named  M.  Ferrand;  theother,  short,  dumpy,  sneering,  and  punctilious,  was  named  M.Minard.  They  called  each  other  cousin.  They  lived  at  Paris  with  -D’Alembert  in  his  nurse’s  house;  and  had  taken  a  small  house  atMontmorency,  where  they  spent  their  summers.  They  managed  forthemselves,  without  servant  or  messenger.  They  took  it in turns  eachweek  to  go  to  market,  do  the  cooking,  and  sweep  the  house.  Theywere  pretty  comfortable,  and  we  sometimes  had  our  meals  together.I do  not  know  what  made  them  care  about  me:  the  only  thing  Icared  about  in  them  was,  that  they  played  chess;  and,  for  the  sakeof  a  poor  little  game,  I endured  four  hours  of  weariness.  As  theywanted  to  poke  their  noses  in everywhere,  Thérèse  called  them ‘ ‘thegossips,” and  this  name  stuck  to  them  at  Montmorency.Such,  together  with  my  landlord,  M.  Mathas,  who  was  a  worthyfellow,  were  my  chief  country  acquaintances.  I still  had  a  sufficientnumber  at  Paris  to  make  it pleasant  for  me  to  live  there,  whenever  Imight  wish,  outside  the  circle  of  literary  men,  amongst  whom  Icould  reckon  no  friend  except  Duclos.  Deleyre  was  too  young:  and7 Enfants  de  Melchisédech:  i.e.,  persons  about  whom  nothing  is  known.8 An  alternative  rendering  is:  “to  which  they  were  fastened,”  i.e.,  from  whichthey  seemed  inseparable.524THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUalthough,  upon  a  closer  acquaintance  with  the  intrigues  of  thephilosophical  clique  against  me,  he  had  detached  himself  from  italtogether—or,  at  least,  I thought  so—I  was  not  yet  able  to  forgetthe readiness  he had  shown  in making  himself  the  speaking-trumpetof  the  whole  tribe.In  the  first  place,  I had  my  old  and  worthy  friend,  M.  Roguin.He  was  a friend  of the  good  old  times,  whose  friendship  I did  notowe  to  my  writings,  but  to  my  own  merits;  and  for  this reason  I havealways  preserved  that  friendship.  I had  the  worthy  Lenieps,  myfellow-countryman,  and  his  daughter,  Madame  Lambert,  who  wasalive  at  the  time.  I had  a  young  Genevese  named  Coindet,  whoseemed  to  me  a  good  fellow,  careful,  obliging,  and  zealous,  but  ig-norant,  credulous,  gluttonous,  and  presuming;  he  came  to  see  meimmediately  after  I had  gone  to  live at the Hermitage,  and, acting  ashis  own  introducer,  soon  established  himself  on  a  firm  footing,  inspite  of  me.  He  had  some  taste  for  drawing,  and  was  acquaintedwith  several  artists.  I found  him  useful  for  the  illustrations  of“Julie”;  he  undertook  to  see  after  the  drawings  and  plates,  andexecuted  his commission  very  successfully.M.  Dupin’s  house  was  open  to  me;  and  although  the  society  to  bemet  there  was  less  brilliant  than  in  Madame  Dupin’s  best  days,  itwas  still  one  of the  best  houses  in Paris,  owing  to  the  distinguishedqualities  of  its  heads,  and  the  select  company  which  assembledthere.  As  I had  always  preferred  them  to  all  others,  and  had  onlyleft them  in order  to  be independent,  they had  never  ceased  to  regardme  with  friendship,  and  I  was  always  sure  of  a  welcome  fromMadame  Dupin.  I could  even  reckon  her  as  one  of  my  countryneighbours,  since  they had  set  up  an  establishment  at  Clichy,  where[ sometimes  spent  a  day  or  two;  and  I  should  have  gone  thereoftener,  if Madame  Dupin  and  Madame  Chenonceaux  had  been  onmore  friendly  terms.  But  the  difficulty  of dividing  my  attentions  inthe  same  house  between  two  women  who  had  no  sympathy  witheach  other,  made  my  position  at  Clichy  too  constrained.  Being  onmore  equal  and  familiar  terms  with  Madame  Chenonceaux,  I hadthe pleasure  of enjoying  her  society  with  less  restraint  at  Deuil,  closeto  my  doors,  where  she  had  taken a little  house,  and  even  at  myown  place,  where  she came  to  see  me  pretty  frequently.THE  CHEVALIER  DE  CARRION525Another  of  my  friends  was  Madame  de  Créqui,  who  had  de:voted  herself  to  a  religipus  life,  and  had  given  up  the  society  ofD’Alembert,  Marmontel,  and  most  literary  men,  with  the exception,I believe,  of the  Abbé  Trublet,  who  at  that  time  was a sort  of cant-ing  hypocrite,  of  whom  she  herself  was  tolerably  weary.  I, whosesociety  she  had  sought,  did  not  lose  her  goodwill,  and  always  keptup  a  correspondence  with  her.  She  sent  me  some  fat  pullets  fromLe  Mans  as  a  new  year’s  present;  and  she  had  made  up her  mind  tocome  and  see  me  in the  following  year,  when  a  journey  undertakenby Madame  de  Luxembourg  at  the  same  time  interfered  with  herplans.  I owe  her a  place by herself;  she  will  always  hold  a prominentplace  in my  recollections.I also  had  a  friend  who  deserves  the  next  place  after  Roguin;  myold  colleague  De  Carrio,  formerly  nominal  secretary  to  the  Spanishembassy  at  Venice,  afterwards  in  Sweden,  where  his  Court  ap-pointed  him  chargé  d’affaires,  who  had  since  become  the  actualsecretary  to  the  embassy  in Paris.  He  surprised  me  at  Montmorencywhen  I least  expected  it.  He  was  decorated  with  some  Spanishorder,  the  name  of  which  I forget,  and  wore  a  splendid  cross  ofprecious  stones.  He  had  been  obliged,  in  his  proofs  of  ancestry,  toadd  another  letter  to  his name,  and  now  called  himself  the  Chevalierde  Carrion.  I found  him  just  the  same—the  same  excellent  heart,and  a  mind  that  developed  greater  amiability  day by day.  I shouldhave  resumed  my  former  intimacy  with  him,  had  not  Coindet,thrusting  himself  between  us  in  his  usual  fashion,  taken  advantageof my  distance  from  Paris  to  worm  himself  into  my  place,  and,  inmy name,  into  his confidence,  and  to  supplant  me,  from  his excessiveeagerness  to  serve  me.The  recollection  of  Carrion  reminds  me  of  one  of  my  countryneighbours,  whom  it would  be the  more  unpardonable  on  my  partto  omit  to  mention,  as  I have  to  confess  myself  guilty  of an  inexcus-able  wrong  towards  him.  This  was  the  worthy  M.  le  Blond,  whohad  rendered  me  considerable  services  at  Venice;  and  who,  aftermaking  a  journey  in  France  with  his  family,  had  taken  a  countryhouse  at  La  Briche,  not  far  from  Montmorency.®  As  soon  as  I heard® When  writing  this,  full  of  my  usual  blind  confidence,  I was  far  from  surpecting  the  real  reason  and  result  of this  journey  to  Paris.526THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthat he was  my neighbour,  in the joy of my heart  I went  to call  uponhim,  more  as  a  pleasure  than  a  duty.  I set  out  the  very  next  day.I met  some  people  who  were  coming  to  see  me,  and  I was  obliged  toturn  back  with  them.  Two  days  afterwards  I set  out  again;  he  hadgone  to  dine  in Paris  with  all his  family.  The  third  time I called,  hewas  at  home:  I heard  women’s  voices,  and  saw  at  the  door a car-riage  which  alarmed  me.  I wished  to  see  him,  at  any  rate  for  thefirst  time,  without  interruption,  and  to  talk  over  our  old  acquaint-ance.  In  short,  I put  off  my  visit  from  one  day  to  another,  until  atlast  my  shame  at  deferring  so  long  the  fulfilment  of  such  a  dutyprevented  me  from  fulfilling  it at  all:  having  dared  to  wait  so  long,I no  longer  dared  to  show  myself.  This  neglect,  at  which  M.  leBlond  was  justly  indignant,  made  my  idleness  appear  ingratitude;and  yet,  in  my  heart,  I felt  myself  so  little  to  blame,  that,  if I hadbeen  able  to  afford  him  any  real  pleasure,  even  unknown  to  him,  Iam  sure  that  he  would  not  have  found  me  slow  in  doing  so.  Butindolence,  carelessness,  and  delay  in  the  performance  of  triflingduties,  have  always  been  more  prejudicial  to  me  than  great  vices.My  worst  faults  have  been  those  of  omission;  I have  seldom  donewhat  I ought  not  to  have  done,  but,  unfortunately,  I have  still  lessoften  done  what  I ought to  have  done.Since  I have  returned  to  the  acquaintances  I made  at  Venice,  Iought not  to  forget one  which  is connected  with  them,  and which  haslasted  rnuch  longer  than  the  rest.  I refer  to  M.  de Jonville,  who,  sincehis  return  from  Genoa,  had  continued  to  show  his  friendship  forme  in  many  ways.  He  was  very  fond  of  my  society,  and  liked  totalk  about  Italian  affairs  and  the  mad  folly of M.  de  Montaigu,  con-cernir.g  whom  he had  heard  several  characteristic  anecdotes  throughhis  connection  with  the  Foreign  Office.  I was  also  glad  to  meet  athis house  my  old  comrade  Dupont,  who  had  bought  a  commissionin  his  province,  and  was  sometimes  obliged  to  visit  Paris  on  busi-ness.  M.  de Jonville  gradually  showed  such  fondness  for  my  society,that it  became  somewhat  irksome;  and, although  we  lived  at  a greatdistance  from  each  other, it na a  disturbance,  if I let a week  passwithout  going  to  dine  with  him.  When  he  went  to  Jonville,  healways  wanted  to  take  me  with  him;  but  after  I had  once  spenta  week  there,  which  seemed  interminably  long,  I had  no  desire=M.  DE  JONVILLE527to  go  there  again.  He  was  certainly  an  honourable  man  and  anagreeable  companion,  even  amiable  in  certain  respects,  but  he  hadlittle  intellectual  capacit¥;  he was  handsome,  somewhat  proud  of hispersonal  appearance,  and  tolerably  wearisome.  He  had a singularcollection,  perhaps  unique  of its  kind,  to  which  he  devoted  a  greatdeal  of his  attention,  and  in  which  he  also  endeavoured  to  interest’his  friends,  who  sometimes  found  less  amusement  in  it  than  hedid.  This  was  a  very  complete  collection  of all  the  Court  and  Pari-sian  vaudevilles  of  the  last  fifty  years,  in  which  many  anecdoteswere  to  be found,  which  it would  have  been  useless  to  look  for  else-where.  There  is a  collection  of Memoirs  for  the  History  of France,which  would  scarcely  be  thought  of  in  any  other  nation.One  day, while  we  were  on  the  best  of terms,  he gave  me  so  coldand  freezing  a  reception,  so  little  after  his  usual  manner,  that,  afterI had  given  him  an  opportunity  of  explanation,  and  even  beggedhim  to  give me  one, I left  his  house,  resolved  never  to  set  foot  in itagain,  and  I kept  my  resolution;  for  I am  rarely  seen  again  where  Ihave  once  been  ill received,  and  here  there  was  no  Diderot  to  pleadfor  M.  de  Jonville.  In  vain  I puzzled  my  brains  to  discover  how  Ihad  offended  him;  I could  think  of nothing.  I felt certain  that  I hadnever  spoken  of him  or  his  except  in  terms  of the  greatest  respect,for  I was  sincerely  attached  to  him;  and,  besides  that  I had  nothingbut  good  to  say  of him,  it has  always  been  my  inviolable  principle,never  to  speak  of  the  houses  at  which I visited  in  other  than  re-spectful  terms.At  length,  after  long  pondering,  I arrived  at  the  following  con-jecture.  The  last  time  that  we  had  seen  each  other,  he  had  invitedme  to  supper  at  the  rooms  of  some  girls  with  whom  he  was  ac-quainted,  together  with  two  or  three  Foreign  Office  clerks,  veryworthy  fellows,  who  had  neither  the  manner  nor  the  appearanceof libertines;  and  I can  swear  that,  for  my  part,  I spent  the  eveningin  melancholy  reflections  upon  the  unhappy  lot  of  these  poor  crea-tures.  I did  not  contribute  towards  the  expenses,  because  M.  deJonville  gave  the  supper;  and  I gave  the  girls  nothing,  because  Idid  not  give  them  the  chance  of earning  the  present  which  I mighthave  been  able  to  offer  them.  We  left  together,  in  high  spirits  andon  the  best  of terms.  Without  having  paid another  visit  to  the girls,528THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthree  or  four  days  afterwards,  I went  to  dine  with  M.  de  Jonville,whom  I had  not  seen  since.  It was  on  this  occasion  that  he  receivedme  in  the  manner  I have  mentioned.  As  I could  not  attribute  it toanything  else but some  misunderstanding  in reference  to  the  supper,and  as  I saw  that  he was  not  disposed  to  offer  an  explanation,  I madeup my  mind  and  gave  up visiting  him.  I continued,  however,  to  sendhim  my  works,  and  he often  sent  me  his compliments.  One  evening,when  I met  him  in the foyer  of the  Comedy,  he politely  reproachedme  for  not  going  to  see  him;  but  this  did  not  make  me  return  tohim.  Thus  the  whole  affair  had  the  appearance  of a  fit of sulkinessrather  than  a  regular  rupture.  However,  as  I never  saw  him  again,and  never  heard  anything  more  of  him  since  that  time,  it  wouldhave  been  too  late,  after  our  intercourse  had  been  broken  off  forseveral  years,  to  renew  the  acquaintance.  This  is  the  reason  why  Ido  not  here  mention  M.  de  Jonville  in  my  list,  although  I had  fora long time  been a visitor  at  his  house.I will  not  swell  this  same  list  with  the  names  of  other  less  inti-mate  acquaintances,  or  of those  with  whom,  in  consequence  of myabsence,  I  had  gradually  become  less  intimate,  although  I stillsometimes  saw  them  in the  country,  either  at  my  own  or  my  neigh-bours’  houses,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  Abbés  de  Condillac  and  deMably,  MM.  de  Mairan,  de  Lalive,  de  Boisgelou,  Watelet,  Ancelet,and  others  whom  it would  be  tedious  to  mention.  I will  just  men-tion,  in passing,  M.  de Margency,  the  King’s  chamberlain,  a  formermember  of  the  Holbachian  clique,  which,  like  myself,  he  had  left,and  an  old  friend  of  Madame  d’Epinay,  whom,  in  this  also  likemyself,  he had  given  up;  lastly, his friend  Desmahis,  the famous  butsoon-forgotten  author  of the  comedy  called  L’Impertinent.  The  for-mer  was  my  country  neighbour,  his  estate  at  Margency  being  closeto  Montmorency.  We  were  old  acquaintances;  but  our  nearness  toeach  other  and a certain  similarity  in  our  experiences  brought  usstill  closer  together.  The  latter  died  shortly  afterwards.  He  was  aman  of wit  and  ability;  but  he in some  respects  resembled  the  origi-nal  of  his  comedy,  being  a  bit  of  a  coxcomb  with  the  ladies,by whom  his  loss  was  not  particularly  regretted.I cannot,  however,  leave  unnoticed  a  fresh  correspondence,  whichbegan  at  that  time,  and  which  has  had  too  much  influence  uponM.  DE  LAMOIGNON  DE  MALESHERBES529the  remainder  of my  life  for  me  to  omit  to  indicate  its  origin.  I amspeaking  of  M.  de  Largoignon  de  Malesherbes,  first  President  ofthe  Excise  Office,  who‘at  that  time  was  censor  of published  books,an  office  which  he  filled  with.  equal  intelligence  and  mildness,  tothe  complete  satisfaction  of  literary  men.  I had  not  eyen  visited.him  in  Paris;  but  I had  always  met  with  the  most  courteous  civilityfrom  him,  in  matters  connected  with  the  censorship;  and  I knewthat, on  more  than  one  occasion,  he had  severely  rebuked  those  whewere  in  the  habit  of writing  against  me.  In  reference  to  the  print-ing of “Julie,”  he  gave  me  fresh  proofs  of his  kindness:  the  cost  ofpostage  from  Amsterdam  of  the  proof  sheets  of  a  work  of  suchsize  was  considerable;  and,  as  all  communications  were  sent  to  himpost  free, he allowed  them  to  be addressed  to  him,  and  he forwardedthem  on  to  me,  franked  by  his  father  the  Chancellor.  When  thework  was  printed,  he did  not  allow  it to be sold  in the kingdom  untilan  edition  had  been  sold,  the  profits  of  which  he  insisted  that  Ishould  take,  notwithstanding  my  opposition.  As  acceptance  on  mypart  would  have  been  a  fraud  upon  Rey,  to  whom  I had  sold  mymanuscript,  I not  only  refused  to  accept  the  present,  which  was  in-tended  for me,  without  his  consent,  which  he  very  generously  gave,but  I  wanted  to  share  with  him  the  roo  pistoles  to  which  itamounted;  but  he  refused  to  accept  anything.  These  100  pistolescaused  me  the annoyance,  for which  M. de Malesherbes  had  not  pre-pared  me,  of seeing  my  work  fearfully  mutilated,  and  prevented  thesale  of the good  edition  until  the bad  was  exhausted.I have  always  considered  M+ de Malesherbes  as  a  man  of unassail-able uprightness.  Nothing  that has  ever  occurred  has made  me  doubthis  honesty  for  a moment;  but  since  his  weakness  is as  great  as  hishonour,  he  sometimes  injures  those,  in  whom  he  takes  an  interest,by his efforts  to  protect  them.  He  not  only ordered  more  than  a  hun-dred  pages  of the  Paris  edition  to  be  cut  out,  but  he  mutilated  thecopy  of the  good  edition  which  he  sent  to  Madame  de Pompadour,in a manner  which  deserved  to  be called  a breach  of faith.  I have  saidsomewhere  in this  work,  that  a  coal-heaver’s  wife  is more  worthy  ofrespect  than  the  mistress  of a  Prince.  This  phrase  had  occurred  tome  in  the  fervour  of  composition,  and  I swear  that  no  personalallusion  was  intended.  On  reading  the  work  over  again,  I saw  that530THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUothers  would  certainly  see  one.  However,  I would  not  strike  outthe phrase,  in accordance  with  my  very  injudicious  principle  of leav-ing  nothing  out,  because  it  might  be  considered  to  contain  somepersonal  allusion,  provided  my  conscience  assured  me  that  nothingof  the  kind  had  been  intended  when  I wrote  it;  and  I contentedmyself with  substituting  the word  “Prince”  for “King,”  which  I hadat first  written.  This  alteration  did  not  satisfy  M.  de Malesherbes;  hesuppressed  the whole  sentence  in a fresh  sheet,  which  he had  printedon  purpose  and  glued  in  as  neatly  as  possible  in  Madame  de  Pom-padour’s  copy.  She  did  not  remain  in  ignorance  of  this  piece  ofjugglery:  some  worthy  souls  were  kind  enough  to  inform  her  of it.I myself  did not  hear  of it until  some  time  afterwards,  when  I beganto  feel the consequences.Is not  this  also  the  origin  of the  secret  but  implacable  hatred  ofanother  lady whose  case  was  similar,  without  my  knowing  anythingof it, and  with  whom  I was  not  even  acquainted  when  I wrote  thepassage?  When  the  book  was  published,  the  acquaintance  wasmade,  and I felt  very  uneasy.  I told  the  Chevalier  de  Lorenzi,  wholaughed  at  me,  and  said  that  the  lady  in  question  felt  so  little  of-fended,  that  she had  not  even  taken  any  notice  of it. I believed  it, per-haps  rather  too  readily,  and  regained  my  calmness  at  a  very  inop-portune  moment.At  the  beginning  of  winter,  I received  a  further  mark  of M.  deMalesherbes’  kindness,  which  I greatly  appreciated,  although  I didnot  consider  it advisable  to  take  advantage  of it. There  was  a  placevacant  on  the  Journal  des  Savants;  Margency  wrote  to  offer  it tome,  as  if on  his  own  initiative.  But  it was  easy  for  me  to  see,  fromthe  style  of his  letter  (Packet  C, No.  33),  that  he  was  acting  underinstructions  and  authority;  and  he  himself  in  a  subsequent  letter(Packet  C, No.  47)  gave  me  to  understand  that  he  had  been  com-missioned  to  make  the  offer.  The  work  was  trifling;  it consisted  oftwo  extracts  a  month,  to  be  made  from  books  which  were  to  bebrought  to  me,  so  that  there  would  never  be  any  need  for  me-to  goto Paris,  not  even  to  pay  a visit  of thanks  to the magistrate.  This  gaveme  admission  into  the  society  of literary  men  of the  first  rank,  MM.de  Mairan,  Clairaut,  de  Guignes,  and  the  Abbé  Barthélemy.  I wasalready  acquainted  with  the  first  twe,  and  I looked  forward  withne  is=KINDNESS  OF  M.  DE  MALESHERBES531pleasure  to  making  the’  acquaintance  of  the  last  two.  Lastly,  forthis  by no  means  laborious  work,  which  I could  easily  perform,I was  to  receive  a  honorarium  of  800  francs.  I deliberated  a  fewhours  before  deciding,  and  I can  swear  that  the  only  reason  for  myhesitation  was  the  fear  of  annoying  Margency  and  displeasing  M.de Malesherbes.  But,  at  length,  the insupportable  restraint  of not  be-ing able  to  work  when I pleased,  and  of being  tied  to  time,  and, stillmore,  the  certainty  of  inefficiently  performing  the  duties  which  Ishould  have  been  obliged  to  undertake,  prevailed  over  all, and  mademe  decide  to  refuse  a  post  for  which  I was  not  adapted.  I knew  thatmy  talent  consisted  entirely  in a  certain  lively  interest  in the  subjectswhich  I had  to  treat,  and  that  nothing  but  the  love  of the  great,  thetrue,  and  the  beautiful,  could  enliven  my  genius.  What  would  thecontents  of  the  different  books,  from  which  I should  have  had  tomake  extracts,  or  even  the  books  themselves,  have  mattered  to  me?My indifference  to  the  whole  thing  would  have  frozen  my  pen  anddeadened  my  mind.  It was  thought  that  I could  write  according  tothe rules  of a  trade,  like  all other  literary  men,  whereas  I have  neverbeen  able  to  write  except  from  inspiration.  That  was  certainly  notthe  kind  of thing  that  was  wanted  for  the Journal  des  Savants.  I ac-cordingly  wrote  a  letter  of thanks  to  Margency,  couched  in  the  po-litest  terms  possible,  in  which  I explained  my  reasons  so  fully,  thatneither  he nor  M.  de Malesherbes  can  possibly  have  believed  that  illtemper  or  pride  had  anything  to  do with  my  refusal.  They  both  ap-proved  of  it; it made  no  alteration  in  their  friendship  for  me,  andthe  secret  was  so  well  kept,  that  the  public  never  got  the  least  scentof it.The  proposal  was  not  made  at  a  favourable  moment  for  me  to  ac-cept  it; for  I had  for  some  time  intended  to  abandon  literature  alto-gether,  especially  the  profession  of an  author.  All  that  had  just  oc-curred  had  completely  disgusted  me  with  literary  men,  and  I hadcause  to  feel  that  it was  impossible  for me  to  pursue  the  same  career,without  coming  into  contact  with  them.  I was  equally  disgustedwith  men  of the  world,  and,  in general,  with  the  mixed  life  which  Ihad  recently  led, half  by myself,  and  half  in  society  for  which  I wasutterly  unfitted.  I felt more  than  ever,  from  constant  experience,  thatall association  on  unequal  terms  is always  prejudicial  to  the  weaker532.THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUparty.  Living  with  wealthy  people,  who  belonged  to  a  different  stateof life  from  that  which  I had  chosen,  without  keeping  house  as  theydid,  I was  nevertheless  obliged  to  imitate  them  in  many  respects;and  certain  petty  expenses,  which  were  mothing  to  them,  were  forme  as  ruinous  as  they  were  indispensable.  If  another  man  goes  tovisit  at  a  country-house,  he is waited  upon  by his  lackey,  at  table  aswell  as  in his  room;  he sends  him  to  fetch  whatever  he wants;  with-out  coming  directly  into  contact  with  the  servants  of the  house,  per-haps not  even  seeing  them,  he  only  gives  them  a  gratuity  wheneverand  as  it pleases  him;  whereas  I, alone,  without  a  servant  of my  own,was  at  the  mercy  of  the  people  of  the  house,  whose  good  graces  itwas  absolutely  necessary  to  gain,  if I did  not  want  to  suffer  manyannoyances;  and, being treated  as  their  master’s  equal,  I was  obligedto  treat  his  servants  accordingly,  and even  to  do more  for  them  thananyone  else,  because,  in fact,  I had  much  greater  need  of their  serv-ices.  Where  there  are  only  few  servants,  this  is not  a  matter  of suchimportance;  but,  in  the  houses  at  which  I visited,  they  were  verynumerous,  all  very  uppish,  great  rascals,  and  keenly  alive—to  theirown  interests;  and  the  rascals  knew  how  to  manage  so  that  I neededthe  services  of each  of them  in  turn.  The  women  of  Paris,  with  alltheir  ‘wit  and  intelligence,  are  entirely  wrong  in  their  ideas  uponthis  point;  and,  in their  anxiety  to  save  my  purse,  they ruined  me.  IfI went  out  to  supper a little  distance  from  home,  instead  of  lettingme  send for  a  coach,  the  lady  of the  house  ordered  her  horses  to  beput  to  to  drive  me  back;  she  was  delighted  to  spare  me  the  expenseof  the  carriage,  twenty-four  sous;  but  she  never  thought  of  thecrown  which  I gave  the  footman  and  coachman.  If a  lady  wrote  tome  from  Paris  to  the  Hermitage  or  Montmorency,  in order  to  spareme  the  four  sous  for  postage,  she  sent  the  letter  by one  of her  serv-ants,  who  made  the journey  on  foot  and  arrived  bathed  in perspira-tion,  and  I had  to  give him  a  crown  and  a  dinner,  which  he had  cer-tainly  well  earned.  If she  invited  me  to  stay  a  week  or  a fortnight  ather  country-house,  she  said  to  herself:  Anyhow,  it will  be  a  savingfor  the  poor  fellow;  he will  not  have  to  pay  for  his  food  while  he ishere.  She  forgot  that,  during  that  time,  I did  no  work;  that  my  rent,household  expenses,  washing,  and clothes,  still  had  to  be  paid  for;that  it cost  me  twice  as  much  for  my  barber,  and  that  it was  more$2PETTY  EXPENSES  OF  VISITING533expensive  for me  to  live in her  house  than  at  home.  Although  I lim.ited  my  trifling  gratuitigs  to  the  houses  in  which  I was  in the  habitof  staying,  they  were  none  the  less  ruinous  to  me.  I am  convincedthat  it cost  me  more  than  twenty-five  crowns  at  Madame  d’Houde-tot’s  house  at  Eaubonne,  where I only  slept  four  or  five  times,  andmore  than  a  hundred  pistoles  at  Epinay  and  La  Chevrette,  duringthe  five  or  six  years  in  which  I was  a  constant  visitor  there.  Theseexpenses  are  unavoidable  for  a  man  of my  disposition,  who  does  notknow  how  to  do  anything  for  himself  or  to  set  his  wits  to  workupon  anything,  who  cannot  endure  the  sight of a  lackey  who  grum-bles  and  performs  his  duties  sulkily.  Even  at  Madame  Dupin’s,where  I was  one  of the  family,  and  where  I rendered  many  servicesto  the  servants,  I never  received  any  from  them  unless  I paid  forthem  on  the  nail.1°  Subsequently  I was  obliged  altogether  to  discon-tinue  these  trifling  gratuities,  which  my  position  no  longer  allowedme  to  give;  and  then  it was  that  I felt  even  more  keenly  the  disad-vantage  of associating  with  persons  in  a  different  station  of  life  toone’s  own.Again,  if this  life  had  been  to  my  taste,  I should  have  felt  con-soled  for  the  heavy  expenditure  on  my  pleasures;  but  I could  not  en-dure  to ruin  myself,  simply  for the sake  of becoming  utterly  wearied;and  I had  feit  so  strongly  the burden  of this  manner  of life, that, tak-ing  advantage  of  the  interval  of  freedom  which  I then  enjoyed,  Idetermined  to  make  it lasting,  to  renounce  fashionable  and  literarysociety  altogether,  to  give  up  writing  books,  and  to  confine  myselffor  the  remainder  of my  days to  the  limited  and  peaceful  sphere  forwhich I felt  that  I was  born.The  profits  of the “Letter  to  D’Alembert”  and  the  “New  Héloïse”had  somewhat  improved  the  state  of my  finances,  which  had  beenalmost  exhausted  at  the  Hermitage.  I saw  about  1,000  crowns  inprospect.  “Emile,”  to  which  I seriously  began  to  devote  my  atten-tion  after  I had  finished  “Héloïse,”  was  well  advanced,  and  I ex-pected  that  its  profits  would  at  least  double  that  sum.  I formed  theresolution  of investing  this  fund  in such  a  manner  as  to  bring  me  ina  small  annuity,  which,  together  with  my  copying,  would  be  suffi-10  4 la  pointe  de  mon  argent:  lit.,  I never  received  any  from  them  except  atthe point of—my  money.534THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUcient  to  keep me  without  writing  any  more.  I still  had  two  works  inhand.  The  first  was  my  “Institutions  politiques.”  I examined  thestate  of this  work,  and  found  that  it would  still  require  several  yearsof labour.  I had  not  the  courage  to  continue  it and  to  wait  until  itwas  finished,  before  carrying  out  my  resolution.  I accordingly  aban-doned  it, and  decided  to  extract  what  was  possible,  and  to  burn  therest;  and,  pushing  on  this  work  vigorously,  without  discontinuing“Emile,”  in less than  two  years  I put the finishing  touch  to  the “Con-trat  Social.”There  still  remained  the  “Dictionnaire  de  Musique.”  This  was  apurely  mechanical  work  which  could  be  taken  up  at  any  time,  andwhich  I had  undertaken  merely  for the sake  of the money.  I reservedto  myself  the  right  of  abandoning  it, or  finishing  it  at  my  leisure,according  as  my  other  combined  resources  might  render  it necessaryor  superfluous.  In  regard  to  the  “Morale  sensitive,”  of which  I hadonly  made  an  outline,  I abandoned  it altogether.As  my  last  intention,  if I could  dispense  with  copying  altogether,was  to  remove  to  a  distance  from  Paris,  where  the  constant  streamof visitors  made  it expensive  for  me  to  live,  and  deprived  me  of thetime  to  make  provision  for  myself,  I kept in reserve,  in order  to  pre-vent  in my  retirement  the  feeling  of weariness  which  is said  to  comeupon  an  author  when  he  has  laid  down  his  pen,  an  occupationwhich  might  fill  up  the  void  in  my  solitude,  without  leading  meinto  the  temptation  of  publishing  anything  more  during  my  life-time.  I do not  know  what  whim  had  prompted  Rey,  for  a  long timepast,  to  urge  me  to  write  the  Memoirs  of my  life.  Although,  as  faras  incidents  were  concerned,  they  were  not  at  that  time  particularlyinteresting,  I felt  that  they  might  be  made  so  by the  candour  withwhich  I was  capable  of treating  the  subject;  and  I was  determinedto  make  it a  work  unique  of its  kind,  by an  unexampled  veracity,which,  for  once  at  least,  would  enable  the  outside  world  to  behold  aman  as  he  really  was  in  his  inmost  self.  I had  always  ridiculed  thefalse  ingenuousness  of Montaigne,  who,  while  pretending  to  confesshis  defects,  is most  careful  to  attribute  to  himself  only  such  as  areamiable;  whereas  I, who  have  always  believed,  and  still  believe,  my-self  to  be, all  things  considered,  the  best  of men,  felt  that  there  is nohuman  heart,  however  pure  it may  be, which  does  not  conceal  someDECIDES  TO  WRITE  CONFESSIONS5357=odious  vice.  I knew  that  L was  representéd  in  the  world  under  fea-tures  so  utterly  different  from  my  own,  and  sometimes  so  distorted,that,  in  spite  of  my  defeets,  none  of which  I had  the  least  desire  toconceal,  I could  not  help being  the  gainer  by showing  myself  in mytrue  character.  Besides,  this  was  impossible  without  also  showingothers  as  they  were,  and  consequently  this  work  could  not  be  pub-lished  until  after  my  own  death  and  that  of several  others.  This  fur-ther  emboldened  me  to  write  my  Confessions,  for  which  I shallnever  have  to  blush  before  anybody.  I accordingly  determined  to  de.vote  my  leisure  to  carrying  out  this  undertaking,  and  I commencedto  collect  the  letters  and  papers  which  might  guide  or  assist  mymemory,  greatly  regretting  all that  I had  torn  up,  burned,  or  lost, upto  this  time.This  project  of complete  retirement,  one  of the  most  sensible  tharI had  ever  formed,  made  a  very  strong  impression  on  my  mind,  andI had  already  commenced  to  carry  it out,  when  Heaven,  which  waspreparing  a  different  destiny  for  me,  flung  me  into  a  fresh  whirl  ofexcitement.Montmorency,  the  ancient  and  splendid  patrimony  of the  familyof  that  name,  has  been  confiscated,  and  no  longer  belongs  to  it.Through  the  sister  of  Duc  Henri,  it  has  passed  to  the  house  ofCondé,  which  has  changed  the  name  of Montmorency  to  Enghien;and  the  Duchy  has  no  other  chateau  except  an  old  tower,  in  whichthe archives  are  kept,  and  where  the vassals  come  to  render  homage.But  at  Montmorency,  or  Enghien,  may  be seen  a private  house,  builtby Croiset  (called  Je pauvre)  which,  equal  in  magnificence  to  themost  superb  chateau,  deserves  and  bears  the  name  of one.  The  im-posing  aspect  of this  fine  building,  the  terrace  upon  which  it stands,the  view  from  it, which  is perhaps  unequalled  in the  world,  its  spa-cious  salon,  painted  by a  master-hand,  its  garden,  laid  out  by thecelebrated  Le  Nostre—all  this  forms  a  whole,  the  striking  majestyof which  nevertheless  presents  a  certain  simplicity,  which  arouses  alasting  admiration.  M.  le  Maréchal,  Duc  de  Luxembourg,  who  atthat  time  occupied  the  house,  came  twice  every  year  into  the  districtwhere  his forefathers  had  formerly  been  masters,  to  spend  five  or  sixweeks  as  an  ordinary  inhabitant,  but in great  style,  which  in no  wayfell  short  of  the  old  magnificence  of  his  house.  The  first  time  he536THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUvisited  it, after  I had  settled  at  Montmorency,  M.  and  Madame  laMaréchale  sent  their  compliments  to  me  by a  footman,  and  an  invi-tation  to  sup  with  them  whenever  I pleased.  Each  time  that  theycame  again,  they never  failed  to  repeat  their  compliments  and  invi-tation.  This  reminded  me  of Madame  de  Beuvenzal  sending  me  todine  in  the  servants’  hall.  Times  were  changed,  but  I was  still  thesame.  I had  no  desire  to  be  sent  to  dine  in  the  servants’  hall,  and  Icared  but  little  for  the  tables  of  the  great.  I should  have  preferredthat  they  had  left  me  for  what  I was,  without  making  much  of orhumiliating  me.  I replied  to  M.  and  Madame  de  Luxembourg’s  ci-vilities  politely  and  respectfully,  but  I did  not  accept  their  invita-tions.  My ill-health,  as  much  as  a  natural  shyness  and  awkwardnessin  conversation,  made  me  shudder  at  the  mere  idea  of  presentingmyself  before  an  assembly  of Court  grandees;  and  I did  not  even  goto  the  chateau  to  pay  a  complimentary  visit  of  thanks,  although  Iunderstood  well  enough  that  this  was  what  they  wanted,  and  thatall their  eagerness  was  due  to  curiosity  more  than  goodwill.Nevertheless,  they  continued  to  make  advances,  and  even  withgreater  persistency.  Madame  la Comtesse  de Boufflers,  who  was  veryintimate  with  Madame  la  Maréchale,  had  come  to  Montmorency.She  sent  to  inquire  after  me,  and  asked  whether  she  might  pay  mea  visit.  I replied  politely,  but  did  not  stir.  During  the  Easter  visit  ofthe  following  year  (1759),  the  Chevalier  de Lorenzi,  who  belongedto  the  suite  of  M.  le Prince  de  Conti,  and  to  Madame  de  Luxem-bourg’s  circle,  came  to  visit  me  several  times.  We  became  ac-quainted;  he pressed  me  to  go  to  the  chateau.  I refused.  At  last,  oneafternoon,  when  I least  expected  it, I saw  M. le Maréchal  de Luxem-bourg  approaching,  attended  by five  or  six  persons.  There  no  longerremained  any  means  of escape;  and  I could  not,  without  being  con-sidered  arrogant  and  ill-bred,  avoid  returning  his  visit,  and  payingmy  respects  to  Madame  la Maréchale,  on  the  part  of whorn  he over-whelmed  me  with  polite  messages.  Thus  commenced,  under  fatalauspices,  a  connection  which  I could  no  longer  escape,  but  which  apresentiment,  only  too  well  founded,  made  me  dread,  until  I foundmyself  committed  to  it.I was  terribly  afraid  of Madame  de Luxembourg.  I knew  that  shewas  amiable.  I had  seen  her  several  times  at  the  theatre,  and  atMADAME  DE  LUXEMBOURG537Madame  Dupin’s  ten  or  twelve  years  ago,  when  she  was  Duchessede  Boufflers,  and  was  still  in  the  first  brilliancy  of her  beauty.  Butshe had  the reputation  of being spiteful;  and  this, in  so  great  a lady,made  me  tremble.  No  sooner  did  I see  her  than  I was  vanquished.  Ifound  her  charming,  with  that  charm  which  is proof  against  time,and  is most  calculated  to  act  upon  my  heart.  I expected  to find  herconversation  sarcastic  and  full  of epigrams.  This  was  not  the  case;it was  something  far  better.  Her  conversation  does  not  sparkle  withwit;  it  exhibits  no  flights  of  fancy,  or  even,  properly  speaking,finesse;  but  it is marked  by an  exquisite  refinement,  which  is neverstriking,  but  is always  pleasing.  Her  flatteries  are  the  more  intoxi-cating  in proportion  to  their  simplicity;  it seems  as  if they  fall  fromher lips without  thinking,  and  are  the overflowings  of a  heart  whichis too  full.  I fancied  that  I perceived,  at  my  first  visit,  that,  in  spiteof my  awkward  manner  and  clumsy  phrases,  she  found  my  societyagreeable.  All  Court  ladies  know  how  to  produce  this  impressionwhenever  they please,  whether  it be true  or  not;  but all do not  know,as  Madame  de Luxembourg  did,  how  to  produce  it in  so  charminga  manner,  that  one  no  longer  thinks  of  doubting  it.  From  the  firstday,  my  confidence  in  her  would  have  been  as  complete  as  it soonafterwards  became  had  not  Madame  la Duchesse  de  Montmorency,her  daughter-in-law,  a  somewhat  spiteful,  and,  as  I believe,  quarrel-some  young  fool,  taken  it into  her  head  to  attack  me,  and,  in  themidst  of all  her  mamma’s  civilities  and  her  own  coquetries,  mademe  suspect  that  they  were  only  laughing  at  me.I should,  perhaps,  have  found  it difficult  to  make  myself  easy  inregard  to  this  apprehension  in the case  of the two  ladies,  had  not  thevery  great  kindness  of M.  le Maréchal  convinced  me  that  theirs  alsowas  genuine.  Considering  my  timid  disposition,  nothing  is  moresurprising  than  the  readiness  with  which  I took  him  at  his  word  asto  the  footing  of equality  on  which  he  wanted  to  put  himself  withme,  except  perhaps  the  equal  readiness  with  which  he himself  tookmy  word  as  to  the complete  independence  in which  I wanted  to  live.Convinced  that  I was  right to  be satisfied  with  my  position  and  notto  desire  any  change  in it, neither  he nor  Madame  de Luxembourgappeared  for  a  moment  to  trouble  themselves  about  my  purse  or  mymeans.  Although  I could  not  doubt  the  warm  interest  which  they538THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUboth  took  in me,  they never  offered  to find  me  a place or  to  assist  mewith  their  influence,  except  once,  when  Madame  de  Luxembourgseemed  desirous  that  I should  enter  the Académie  Française.  I raisedthe objection  of my  religious  faith;  she  said  that  that  was  no  obstacle,or  that,  if it was  one,  she  would  undertake  to  remove  it.  I repliedthat, in spite of the great  honour  I should  consider  it, to be  a memberof  so  illustrious  a  body,  as  I had  refused  the  invitation  of  M.  deTressan,  and,  in  a  manner,  of  the  King  of  Poland,  to  enter  theAcadémie  of Nancy,  I could  not  with  propriety  become  a  memberof any  other.  Madame  de Luxembourg  did  not  press  the  matter  fur-ther,  and  nothing  more  was  said  about  it.  The  simplicity  of inter-course  with  such  great  people,  who  could  have  done  anything  forme,  since  M.  de Luxembourg  was,  and  deserved  to  be,  the  specialfriend  of the  King,  is in  singular  contrast  with  the  continual  fussi-ness,  as  troublesome  as  it was  officious,  of the  patronising  friends  Ihad just left, and  whose  object  was  rather  to  humiliate  than  to  serveme.When  M.  le  Maréchal  had  visited  me  at  Mont-Louis,  I had  re-ceived  hiin  and  his  suite  in my  own  room  with a feeling  of embar-rassment;  not  because  I was  obliged  to  ask  him  to  sit  down  in  themiddle  of  my  dirty  plates  and  broken  jugs,  but  because  my  floorwas  rotten  and  falling  to  pieces,  and  I was  afraid  that  the  weight  ofhis  suite  might  make  it give  way  altogether.  Thinking  less  of  myown  danger  than  of that  to  which  this  worthy  gentleman’s  affabil-ity exposed  him,  I hastened  to  get  him  out  of it, by taking  him,  inspite  of the  weather,  which  was  still  very  cold,  to  my  tower,  whichwas  completely  exposed  and  had  no  fireplace.  When  we  were  there,I told  him  the  reason  why  I had  brought  him;  he  repeated  it toMadame  la Maréchale,  and  both  pressed  me  to  stay  at  the  chateauuntil  the  floor  had  been  repaired;  or,  if I preferred,  at  a  detachedbuilding  in the  middle  of the park,  which  was  called  the  “little  châ-teau.”  This  enchanted  abode  deserves  special  mention.The  park or  garden  of Montmorency  is not  on a level, like  that  ofLa  Chevrette.  It is uneven,  hilly,  with  alternate  elevations  and  de-presstons,  which  the  clever  artist  has  taken  advantage  of to  give va-riety  to  the  groves,  waters,  decorations,  and  different  views,  and  tomultiply,  so  to  speak,  with  the  aid  of genius  and  art,  a  space  whichRESIDENT  AT  THE  CHATEAU5392KOE AN. |in  itself  is somewhat  confined.  This  park  is crowned  at  the  top  bythe  terrace  and  the  chateau;  at  the  bottom,  it forms  a  ravine,  whichopens  and  widens  in the  direction  of the valley, the angle of which  isfilled  by a  large  sheet  of@water.  Between  the  orangery,  which  occu-pies  this  enlarged  space,  and  this  sheet  of water  surrounded  by ele-vations  adorned  with  groves  and  trees,  is the  little  chateau  of whichI have  spoken.  This  building  and  the  ground  which  surrounds  itformerly  belonged  to  the  celebrated  Le  Brun,  who  amused  him-self  with  building  and  ornamenting  it  with  the  exquisite  taste  inarchitecture  and  decoration  which  this  great  painter  had  made  hisown.  Since  then,  this  chateau  has  been  rebuilt,  but  after  its  firstowner’s  designs.  It is small,  simple,  but  elegant.  As  it lies  betweenthe  basin  of the  orangery  and  the  large  sheet  of water,  and  is conse-quently  exposed  to  the  damp,  it has  been  pierced  in  the  middle  byan  open  peristyle  between  two  rows  of columns,  so  that  the air, blow-ing  through  the  whole  building,  keeps  it dry,  notwithstanding  itssituation.  On  looking  at  this  building  from  the  opposite  height  inperspective,  it appears  completely  surrounded  by water,  like  an  en-chanted  island,  or  the  most  beautiful  of  the  three  Borromean  Is-lands,  Isola  Bella,  in Lago  Maggiore.In  this  solitary  building,  I was  offered  the  choice  of  one  of  thefour  complete  apartments  which  it  contains,  in  addition  to  theground  floor,  which  consists  of  a  ball-room, a billiard-room,  and  akitchen.  I chose  the  smallest  and  simplest,  above  the  kitchen,  whichI had  as  well.  It was  delightfully  neat,  with  furniture  in  blue  andwhite,  In  this  profound  and  delightful  solitude,  in  the  midst  ofwoods  and  waters,  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  songs  of  birds  ofevery  kind,  surrounded  by the  perfumes  of orange  blossoms,  I com-posed,  in a  continued  state  of ecstasy,  the  fifth  book  of “Emile,”  thefresh  colouring  of which  is in great  part  due  to  the lively impression  |of the  locality  in which  I wrote.How  eagerly  I ran  every  morning  at  sunrise  to  breathe  the  per-fumed  air  of the  peristyle!  What  delicious  café  au  lait  I took  therewith  my  Thérése!  My  cat  and  dog kept  us  company.  This  retinuealone  would  have  been  enough  for  my  whole  life;  F should  never12  A  celebrated  French  painter  (1619-1690).540THE  CONFBSSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUhave  experienced  a  moment’s  weariness.  I was  in  an  earthly  para-dise;  I lived  there  in  the  same  state  of  innocence,  and  enjoyed  thesame  happiness.  `During  their  July visit,  M.  and  Madame  de Luxembourg  showedme  so  many  attentions,  and  treated  me  with-such  kindness,  that,  liv-ing in  their  house  and  overwhelmed  by their  civilities,  I could  notdo less  than  repay  it by visiting  them  frequently.  I hardly  left  themat  all:  in  the  morning,  I went  to  pay  my  respects  to  Madame  laMaréchale;  after  dining  there,  I took  a  walk  in  the  afternoon  withM.  le Maréchal;  but  I did  not  stay  to  supper,  at  which  a  number  ofgreat  persons  were  always  present;  besides,  they  supped  too  late  forme.  Up  to  this  time,  all  went  on  without  a  hitch,  and  no  harmwould  have  resulted,  if  I had  known  how  to  leave  things  alone.  Butl have  never  been  able  to  preserve  a  mean  in  my  friendships,  andsimply  to  fulfil  the  duties  of society.  I have  always  been  everythingor  nothing.  Soon  I was  everything:  and  finding  myself  made  muchof  and  spoiled  by  people  of  such  importance,  I  overstepped  theproper  limits,  and  conceived  for  them  a  friendship,  which  it is onlyallowable  to  feel  towards  one’s  equals.  I showed  it by the  familiaritywhich  I assumed  in  my  manners,  while  they,  on  their  part,  neverabandoned  the  politeness  to  which  they  had  accustomed  me.  Yet  Inever  felt  quite  at  my  ease  with  Madame  la  Maréchale.  Althoughnot  completely  reassured  as  to  her  character,  I feared  it less  than  herwit,  of which  I particularly  stood  in awe.  I knew  that  she  was  diffi-cult  to  satisfy  in conversation,  and  that  she  had  the  right  to  be  so.  Iknew  that  women,  especially  great  ladies,  must  be amused,  and  thatit is better  to  offend  them  than  to  bore  them;  and  I judged,  from  herremarks  upon  the  conversation  of  the  people  who  had  just  takenleave  of  her,  what  she  must  have  thought  of  my  silly  nonsense.  Ithought  of an  expedient  to  save  myself  from  the  embarrassment  oftalking  to her:  this  was,  to  read  to  her.  She  had  heard  “Julie”  spokenof; she  knew  that  it was  being  printed;  she  showed  an  eagerness  tosee  the  work; I offered  to  read  it to  her, and  she consented.  I went  toher  every  morning  at  ten  o'clock:  M. de Luxembourg  came,  and  thedoor  was  shut.  I read  by the  side  of her  bed,  and  portioned  out  myreadings  so  well,  that  they  would  have  lasted  throughout  her  stay,MME.  DE  LUXEMBOURG’S  LETTER541even  if it had  not  been  ipterrupted.!*  The  success  of this expedientsurpassed  my  expectations.  Madame  de Luxembourg  took  a  violentfancy  to  “Julie”  and  its  author;  she  spoke  of  nothing  but  me,thought  of nothing  but  me,  flattered  me  the  whole  of  the  day,  and  |embraced  me  ten  times  a  day.  She  insisted  that  I should  always  sitby her  at  table,  and  when  any  great  noblemen  wanted  to  take  thisplace,  she  told  them  that  it belonged  to  me,  and  made  them  sit some-where  else.  It is easy  to  imagine  the  impression  which  these  charm-ing manners  produced  upon  me,  who  am  subjugated  by the  slight-est  marks  of affection.  J became  sincerely  attached  to  her,  in propor-tion  to  the attachment  which  she  showed  for me.  My only fear, whenI perceived  this  infatuation,  was  that,  as  I felt  I was  not  sufficientlyagreeable  to  keep  it  alive,  it  might  change  to  disgust,  and,  unfor-tunately  for  me,  this  fear  was  only too  well  founded.There  must  have  been  a  natural  opposition  between  her  turn  ofmind  and  my  own,  since,  independently  of the  many  stupid  and  in-judicious  remarks  which  every  moment  escapedeme  in the  course  ofconversation,  and  even  in my  letters,  and  when  I was  on  the  best  ofterms  with  her,  there  were  certain  things  which  displeased  her,without  my  being  able  to  imagine  the  reason.  I will  only  mentionone  instance  out  of twenty.  She  knew  that  I was  making  a  copy  of“Héloïse”  for  Madame  d’Houdetot,  at  so  much  a  page;  she  wantedme  to make  one  for her on  the  same  terms.  I promised  to  do so;  and,consequently,  entering  her name  as  one  of my  customers,  I wrote  hera  few  lines  of polite  thanks,  or,  at  least,  I had  intended  them  as  such.I  received  the  following  answer,  which  utterly  astonished  me(Packet  C, No.  43):“VERSAILLES,  Tuesday.“T am  delighted,  I am  satisfied;  your  letter  has  given  me  infinitepleasure;  I hasten  to  inform  you  and  to  thank  you  for  it.“Here  are  the  exact  words  of  your  letter:  “Although  you  arecertainly  a  very  good  customer,  I feel  some  difficulty  about  takingyour  money;  properly  speaking,  I ought  to  pay  for  the  pleasure  of12 The  loss  of  a  great  battle,  which  greatly  afflicted  the  King,  obliged  M.  deLuxembourg  to  return  suddenly  to  Court.542THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUbeing  permitted  to  work  for  you.’  I will  not  mention  the  subjectagain.  I regret  that  you  do  not  tell  me  more  about  the  state  of yourhealth.  Nothing  ‘interests  me  more.  I love  you  with  all  my  heart;and,  I assure  you,  it is with  great  sorrow  that  I write  this  to  you  forit would  be a  great  pleasure  to  me  to  tell  it to  you  by word  of mouth.M.  de  Luxembourg  loves  you  and  embraces  you  in  all  sincerity.”On  receiving  this  letter,  I hastened  to  reply  to  it before  examiningit more  fully,  in order  to  protest  against  any  impolite  interpretation;and,  after  having  devoted  several  days  to  this  examination  with  afeeling  of uneasiness  which  may  be imagined,  without  being  able  tounderstand  what  was  the  matter,  I wrote  the  following  note  as  afinal  answer  on  the  subject:Montmorency,  December  8th,  1759.“Since  writing  my  letter,  I have  examined  the  passage  in questionhundreds  and  hundreds  of  times.  I have  considered  it  in  its  ownnatural  meaning,  I have  considered  it in  every  meaning  that  couldbe  put  upon  it, and  I confess,  Madame  la Maréchale,  that  I am  at  aloss  to  know  whether  it is  I who  owe  you  excuses  or  whether  it isnot  rather  yourself  who  owe  them  to  me.”It is now  ten  years  since  these  letters  were  written.  I have  oftenthought  of them  since  then:  and,  even  to  this  day, I am  so  stupid  onthis  point,  that I have  not  been  able  to  understand  what  she  couldfind  in the  passage  in question  that  was,  I will  not  say  offensive,  buteven  calculated  to  cause  her  displeasure.In  reference  to  this  manuscript  of  “Héloïse,”  which  Madame  deLuxembourg  wanted  to  have,  I ought  to  mention  here  what  I hadintended  to  do, in order  to  give it some  special  distinction  above  allthe  rest.  I had  written  the  adventures  of Lord  Edward  separately,and  I had  long been  undecided  whether  I should  insert  them,  eitherwholly  or  in  extracts,  in  this  work,  in  which  they  seemed  to  me  tobe out  of place.  I finally  decided  to  cut  them  out  altogether,  because,not  being  in  keeping  with  the  tone  of  the  remainder,  they  wouldhave  spoiled  its  touching  simplicity.  I had  a  weightier  reason,  whenI made  the  acquaintance  of Madame  de  Luxembourg.  In  these  ad-A  FOOLISH  GIFT543ventures  there  was  a Roman  Marchioness  of very  odious  character,some  features  of which,  Without  being  applicable  to  her, might  per-haps have  been  applied  to  her  by those  who  only knew  her  by repu-tation.  I therefore  congratulated  myself  upon  the  resolution  I hadtaken,  and  determined  to  keep  to  it.  But,  being  extremely  desirous  -of enriching  her  copy  with  something  which  was  not  contained  inany  others,  I was  misguided  enough  to  think  of  these  unfortunateadventures,  and  I formed  the plan of making  a  selection  of them  andAdding  it  to  the  work—a  mad  project,  the  extravagance  of  whichcan  only  be  explained  by the  blind  fatality  which  was  dragging  meto  my  destruction.  Quos  vult  perdere  Jupiter  dementat.I was  foolish  enough  to  make  this  extract  with  great  care  and  la-bour,  and  to  send  it to  her  as  if it had  been  the  most  beautiful  thingin the  world,  at  the  same  time  informing  her, as  was  true,  that  I hadburnt  the  original,  that  the  extract  was  intended  for  her  alone,  andwould  never  be  seen  by anybody,  unless  she  herself  showed  it; andthis  action  on  my  part,  far from  proving  to  her  my  prudence  and  dis-cretion,  as  I expected,  only  gave  her  an  idea  of the  opinion  which  ]myself  held  as  to  the  application  of  the  features  of  the  work,  bywhich  she might have  felt offended.  My imbecility  was  so  great,  thatI entertained  no  doubt  that  she  would  be  enchanted  by what  I haddone.  She  did  not  compliment  me  upon  it as  heartily  as  I expected,and,  to  my  very  great  surprise,  never  spoke-to  me  of the  manuscriptwhich  I had  sent  her.  I myself,  delighted  with  my  conduct  in  thematter,  did  not  suspect  till  long afterwards,  in consequence  of otherindications,  the  effect  which  it had  produced.In regard  to  her  manuscript,  I had  another  idea,  which  was  moresensible,  but  which,  in its  remoter  effects,  was  almost  equally  preju-dicial  to  me.  So  greatly  does  everything  assist  the  work  of  destiny,when  it summons  a  man  to  misfortune.  I thought  of  ornamentingthis  manuscript  with  the  drawings  of  the  engravings  of  “Julie,”which  were  of the  same  size  as  the  manuscript.  I asked  Coindet  forthe  drawings,  to  which  I had  every  possible  claim,  the  more  so  as  Ihad  allowed  him  the  profits  of  the  plates,  which  had a large  sale.Coindet  is as  cunning  as  I am  the  reverse.  My repeated  requests  forthem  at last  made  him  understand  for  what  purpose  I wanted  them,Then,  under  pretence  of improving  them,  he  induced  me  to  leave544THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthem  with  him,  and  finally  presented  them  himself.  Ego  versiculosfeci:  tulit  alter  honores.This  introduced  him  to  the  Hôtel  de Luxembourg  and  gave  hima  certain  footing  in it. After  my  removal  to  the  little  château,  he fre-quently  came  to  see  me,  and  always  in the  morning,  especially  whenM.  and  Madame  de  Luxembourg  were  at  Montmorency.  The  con-sequence  was  that,  in order  to  spend  the  day with  him,  I did  not  goto  the chateau  at all.  I was  reproached  for these  absences;  I explainedthe  reason.  I was  pressed  to  take  M.  Coindet  with  me;  I did  so.  This.was  just what  the  rascal  had  been  scheming  for.  Thus,  thanks  to  theextraordinary  kindness  with  which  I was  treated,  M.  Thélusson’sclerk,  who  was  sometimes  invited  to  dine  with  his master  when  therewere  no  other  guests,  suddenly  found  himself  admitted  to  the  tableof a  Marshal  of France,  and  the company  of Princes,  Duchesses,  andthe  highest  personages  of  the  Court.  I shall  never  forget  that,  oneday,  when  he  was  obliged  to  return  to  Paris  early,  M.  le  Maréchalsaid  to  the  company  after  dinner,  “Let  us  walk  along  the  road  toSaint-Denis,  then  we  can  give  M.  Coindet  our  company.”  The  poorfellow  could  not  stand  it:  he  lost  his  head  completely.  As  for  me,  Ifelt  so  affected  that  I could  not  utter  a  word.  I followed  behind,weeping  like  a  child,  and  longing  to  kiss  the  footprints  of this  goodMaréchal.  But  the continuation  of the  history  of this  manuscript  hasmade  me  anticipate  events.  Let me  now  take  them  up in their  properorder,  as  far  as  my  memory  will  allow  me.As  soon  as  the  little  house  at  Mont-Louis  was  ready,  I furnishedit neatly  and  simply,  and  returned  there  to  live,  being  unable  to  re-nounce  the  determination  to  which  I had  come  when  I left  theHermitage,  namely,  always  to  live  in a  place of my  own:  but  neithercould  I make  up  my  mind  to  give  up  my  apartment  in  the  littlechateau.  I kept  the  key of it, and  in  my  fondness  for  the  nice  littlebreakfasts  in the  peristyle,  I often  slept  there,  and  sometimes  spenttwo  or  three  days,  as  if it had  been  my  country-house.  I perhaps  hadmore  comfortable  and  agreeable  apartments  at  that  time  than  anyprivate  individual  in Europe.  My landlord,  M. Mathas,  who  was  thebest  fellow  in  the  world,  had  left  me  the  complete  control  of  therepairs  at  Mont-Louis,  and  insisted  that  I should  make  use  of  hisworkmen  as I pleased,  without  any  interference  on  his part.  I foundEiMONT-LOUIS545means  to  make  a  complete  suite  of apartments  out  of a  single  roomon  the  first  floor,  consisting  of  a  bedroom,  an  antechamber,  and  awardrobe.  On the  groune  floor were  the kitchen  and  Thérése’s  room.The  turret  served  as  a  study,  after  a  glazed  partition  and a fire-placehad  been  added.  When  I was  there,  I amused  myself with  decoratingthe  terrace,  which  was  already  shaded  by two  rows  of young  lime-.trees;  I planted  two  more  rows,  in order  to  make  a  regular  arbour;I had  a  table  and  some  stone  benches  put  there;  I surrounded  it withlilac,  syringa  and  honeysuckle;  I had  a  pretty  border  of flowers  laidout,  parallel  to  the  two  rows  of  trees;  and  this  terrace,  which  washigher  than  that  of  the  chateau,  from  which  the  view  was  at  leastas  fine, and  which  was  inhabitated  by a number  of birds  which  I hadtamed,  served  me  as a kind  of reception  room,  when  J had  company,such  as  M.  and  Madame  de Luxembourg,  M.  le Duc  de Villeroy,  M.le  Prince  de  Tingry,  M.  le  Marquis  de  Armentiéres,  Madame  laDuchesse  de Montmorency,  Madame  la Duchesse  de  Boufflers,  Ma-dame:la  Comtesse  de Valentinois,  Madame  la Comtesse  de Boufflers,and  other  persons  of similar  rank,  who  condescended  to  undertake,by a  very  fatiguing  climb,  the pilgrimage  from  the chateau  to  Mont-Louis.  I owed  the  compliment  of all  these  visits  to  M.  and  Madamede Luxembourg:  I was  sensible  of this,  and  my  heart  rendered  themthe  homage  of gratitude.  It was  in one  of my  transports  of emotionthat  I said  to  M. de Luxembourg,  “Ah!  M. le Maréchal,  I used  to  hatethe  great  before  I knew  you;  and  I hate  them  still  more,  since  youhave  made  me  feel  how  easy  it would  be  for  them  to  make  them-selves  adored.”  More  than  this,  I put  the  question  to  all  those  whoknew  me  during  this  period,  whether  they  have  ever  observed  thatthis  brilliancy  has  dazzled  me  for  a  single  moment,  that  the  fumesof this  incense  have  mounted  to  my  head;  whether  they have  seen  meless  uniform  in  my  conduct,  less  simple  in  my  manners,  less  affabletowards  the  people,  less  familiar  with  my  neighbours,  less  ready  toassist  everyone  when  I have  had  the  power,  without  ever  being  of-fended  by the  numberless  and  frequently  unreasonable  importuni-ties,  with  which  I was  incessantly  overwhelmed.  If my  heart  drewme  towards  the  chateau  of Montmorency,  owing  to  my  sincere  at-tachment  for  its  owners,  it brought  me  back  in  the  same  manner  tomy  own  neighbourhood,  to  taste  the  sweets  of that  even  and  simple546THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUlife, outside  which  there  is no  happiness  for me.  Thérése  had  formeda  friendship  with  the  daughter  of  one  of  my  neighbours,  a  brick-layer, named  Pilleu:  I did  the  same  with  the father,  and, after  havinglunched  at  the chateau  in the morning,  not  without  some  unwilling-ness,  in order  to  please  Madame  la Maréchale,  I eagerly  returned  inthe evening  to  sup  with  the  worthy  Pilleu  and  his family,  sometimesat  his house,  sometimes  at  mine.Besides  these  two  lodgings,  I soon  had a third  at  the  Hôtel  deLuxembourg,  the owners  of which  pressed  me  so  earnestly  to  go andsee  them  sometimes,  that  I agreed,  in  spite  of my  aversion  to  Paris,where  I had  only been  on  the  two  occasions  I have  mentioned,  aftermy  retirement  to  the  Hermitage;  even  then  I only  went  on  daysthat  had  been  agreed  upon  beforehand,  simply  to  supper,  and  re-turned  the  following  morning.  I entered  and  left  by the  garden  ad-joining  the boulevard;  so  that  I was  enabled  to  say,  with  strict  truth,that  I had  never  set  foot  upon  the  pavement  of Paris.In  the  midst  of this  temporary  prosperity,  the  catastrophe  whichwas  to  mark  the end  of it was  preparing  in the distance.  Shortly  aftermy  return  to  Mont-Louis,  I made,  in spite  of myself  as  usual,  a  newacquaintance,  which  also  marks  an  epoch  in  my  history:  whetherfor good  or  evil,  will  be  afterwards  seen.  I refer  to  my  neighbour,the  Marquise  de Verdelin,  whose  husband  had  just  bought  a  coun-try-house  at  Soisy,  near  Montmorency.  Mademoiselle  d’Ars,  daugh-ter  of  the  Comte  d’Ars,  a  man  of  position  but  poor,  had  marriedM.  de Verdelin,  old,  ugly,  deaf,  harsh,  brutal,  jealous,  covered  withsears,  and  one-eyed;  in other  respects  a good sort  of fellow,  when  oneknew  how  to  take  him,  and  possessed  of  an  income  of  15,000  to20,000  livres,  to  which  his  wife’s  parents  married  her.  This  paragonof  amiability,  who  swore,  shouted,  grumbled,  stormed,  and  madehis  wife  cry  all  day long,  always  ended  by doing  what  she  wanted,with  the  idea  of putting  her  in a  rage,  seeing  that  she  knew  how  tomake  him  believe  that  it was  he, and  not  she,  who  wanted  it done.M. de Margency,  of whom  I have  spoken,  was  Madame’s  friend,  andbecame  her husband’s.  Some  years  ago  he had  let to them  his chateauof  Margency,  near  Eaubonne  and  Ardilly,  where  they  were  livingjust at the time  of my  amour  with  Madame  d’Houdetot.  Madame  deVerdelin  and  the latter  had  made  each  other’s  acquaintance  through=MADAME  DE  VERDELIN547their  mutual  friend,  Madame  d’Aubeterre;  and  as  the  garden  ofMargency  was  on  the  road  which  Madame  d’Houdetot  had  to  taketo  get  to  Mont-Olympe,“her  favourite  walk,  Madame  de Verdelingave  her  a  key,  that  she  might  go  through  the  garden.  Thanks  tothis  key,  I often  went  with  her;  but  I was  not  fond  of unexpectedmeetings;  and  when  Madame  de  Verdelin  happened  to‘meet  us,  I-left  them  together  without  saying  a  word,  and  walked  on.  This  un-gallant  behaviour  on  my  part  could  not  have  given  her  a  veryfavourable  impression  of me.  However,  when  she  was  at  Soisy,  shenevertheless  sought  my  society.  She  came  to  see  me  several  times  atMont-Louis,  without  finding  me  at  home;  and  as  I did  not  returnher  visit,  she  bethought  herself  of sending  me  some  pots  of flowersfor my  terrace,  in order  to  force  me  to  do so.  I was  obliged  to  go andthank  her;  that  was  enough;  the  acquaintance  was  made.This  connection  was  stormy  at  first,  like  all  those  which  I madein  spite  of  myself.  It  was  never  even  really  peaceful;  Madame  deVerdelin’s  turn  of mind  was  too  antipathetic  to  my  own.  She  uttersspiteful  and  epigrammatic  remarks  with  such  an  air  of  simplicity,that  it requires  the  closest  attention,  which  is very  fatiguing  to  me,to  know  when  she  is laughing  at  anybody.  One  instance  of her  silli-ness  which  I remember  will  be  enough  to  give  an  idea  of her  man-ner.  Her  brother  had  just been  appointed  to  the command  of a frig-ate  which  was  starting  on  a  cruise  against  the  English.  I was  speak-ing  of  the  manner  in  which  this  frigate  had  was armed,  withoutany  injury  to  its  speed. “Yes,”  said  she,  without  changing  her  tone,“only  as  many  cannon  are  taken  as  are  wanted  for  fighting.”  I have_  rarely heard  her  say  anything  good of any  of her absent  friends  with-out  slipping  in something  against  them.  What  she  did  not  put a badconstruction  upon  she turned  into  ridicule;  her friend  Margency  wasnot  excepted.  Another  thing  which  I found  unendurable  was  thecontinual  nuisance  of her  little  messages,  presents,  and  notes,  whichI was  obliged  to  rack  my  brains  to  know  how  to  answer,  and  whichwere  always  a  source  of fresh  embarrassment,  whether  I had  to  writea letter  of thanks  or  a refusal.  However,  from  continually  seeing  her,I at  last  became  attached  to  her.  She,  like  myself,  had  her  sorrows;our  mutual  confidences  made  our  #éte-d-tétes  interesting.  Nothingunites  hearts  so  much  as  the pleasure  of shedding  tears  together.  We548THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsought  each  other’s  society  in  order  to  console  ourselves,  and  theneed  for  this  made  me  overlook  much.  I had  shown  such  roughnessin my  outspokenness  to  her,  and  had  sometimes  shown so little  re-spect  for  her  character,  that  I really  must  have  felt  a  great  deal,  tobelieve  that she could  sincerely  pardon  me.  The  following  is a  sampleof the  letters  which  I sometimes  wrote  to  her,  in regard  to  which  itis worthy  of notice  that  she  never,  in any  of her  answers,  showed  theleast  sign  of annoyance:Montmorency,  November  5th,  1760.“You  inform  me,  madame,  that  you  have  not  expressed  yourselfvery  well,  in  order  to  give  me  to  understand  that  I have  expressedmyself  very  badly.  You  speak  of your  pretended  stupidity, in orderto  make  me  sensible  of my  own.  You  boast  of being  nothing  n morethan  a  ‘good  woman,’  as  if you  were  afraid  of being  taken  at  yourword,  and  you  make  excuses  to  me  in  order  to  make  me  feel  that  Iowe  you  some  in  return.  Yes,  madame,  I know  it well;  it is  I whoam a fool,  a  ‘good  man,  and  worse  still,  if it is possible.  It is  I whodo not  choose  my  terms  sufficiently  well  to  please  a  fine  French  lady,who  pays  as  much  attention  to  phrases  and  speaks  as  well  as  you  do.But  you  must  consider  that  I take  them  in the  ordinary  meaning  ofthe  language,  without  being  familiar  with  the  polite  acceptationswhich  are  sometimes  attached  to  them in  the  virtuous  society  ofParis.  If my  expressions  are  sometimes  ambiguous,  I endeavour,  bymy  conduct,  to  give  them  a  definite  meaning,”  etc.The  remainder  of  the  letter  is after  the  same  style.  Her  answer(Packet  D, No.  41)  will  give  an  idea  of the  incredible  self-restraintof a  woman’s  heart,  who  can  feel  no  greater  resentment  against  sucha letter  than  is shown  in her  reply, and  than  she herself  has exhibitedtowards  me.  Coindet,  bold  and  daring  to  the  verge  of  effrontery,who  was  ever  lying in wait  for my  friends,  was  not  slow  to introducehimself  at  Madame  de Verdelin’s  in my  name,  and  soon  became,  un-known  to  me,  more  intimate  there  than  myself.  This  Coindet  was  aqueer  fellow,  He  introduced  himself  from  me  to  all  my  acquaint-ances,  made  himself  at  home,  and  took  his meals  with  them  withoutceremony.  In  his  devoted  zeal  for me,  he never  spoke  of me  exceptw'th  tears  in  his  eyes;  but,  when  he  came  to  see  me,  he  preservedThai =nEXCHANGE  “OF  PORTRAITS>549the  most  profound  silence  about  all  these  connections,  and  every-thing in which  he knew  I must  feel  interested.  Instead  of telling  mewhat  he  had  heard,  said,  or  seen,  which  was  of  interest  to  me,  helistened  to  me,  and  even  asked  me  questions.  He  never  knew  any-thing  about  Paris  except  what  I told  him;  in  short,  although  every-one  spoke  to  me  of him,  he never  spoke  to  me  of anybody.  He  wasonly  close  and  mysterious  with  his  friend.  But  let  us  leave  Coindetand  Madame  de  Verdelin  for  the  present;  we  will  return  to  themlater.Some  time  after  my  return  to  Mont-Louis,  Latour,  the  painter,came  to  see  me,  and  brought  me  my  portrait  in pastil,  which  he hadexhibited  some  years  before  at  the  Salon.  He  had  wanted  to  makeme  a  present  of it, but  I had  refused  it. Madame  d’Epinay,  who  hadgiven  me  hers  and  wanted  mine,  had  made  me  promise  to  ask  himfor it back.  He had  taken  some  time  to  touch  it up.  In the meantime,my  rupture  with  Madame  d’Epinay  occurred.  I gave  her  back  herportrait,  and,  as  I could  no  longer  think  of giving  her  mine,  I hungit up  in  my  room  in  the  little  chateau.  M.  de  Luxembourg  saw  itthere,  and  took  a  fancy  to  it. I offered  it to  him;  he  accepted  it, andI sent  it to  him.  He  and  Madame  la  Maréchale  understood  that  Ishould  be  very  pleased  to  have  theirs.  They  had  them  taken  inminiature  by a very  clever  artist,  and  set  in a  sweetmeat-box  of rock-crystal,  mounted  in gold, which  they presented  to me  in a most  hand-some  manner,  with  which  I was  delighted.  Madame  de  Luxem-bourg  would  never  consent  that  her  portrait  should  be on  the  upperpart  of  the  box.  She  had  several  times  reproached  me  with  beingfonder  of the  Marshal  than  of herself;  and  I had  not  denied  it, be-cause  it was  true.  She  proved  to  me  very  politely,  but  at  the  sametime  very  cleverly,  by this  manner  of placing  her  portrait,  that  shedid not  forget  my  preference.About  the  same  time,  I was  guilty  of  an  act  of  folly  which  didnot  help to  keep me  in her good graces.  Although  I had  no  acquaint-ance  with  M.  de  Silhouette,!?  and  was  little  inclined  to  like  him,  Ihad  a great  opinion  of his administrative  powers.  When  he began  tolay a  heavy  hand  upon  the  financiers,  I saw  that  he  was  not  com-mencing  the  operation  at  a  favourable  moment.  Nevertheless,  I38  Controller-general  of Finance  in  1757.550FHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUwished  him  all success;  and,  when  I heard  that  he had  been  removedfrom  office,  I was  so  thoughtless  as  to  write  the  following  letter  tohim,  which  assuredly  I do  not  attempt  to  justify:Monrmorency,  December  2nd,  1759.“Condescend,  sir,  to  accept  the  homage  of  a  recluse  who  is  un-known  to  you,  but  who  esteems  you  for  your  talents,  who  respectsyou  for  your  administration,  and  who  has  done  you  the  honour  ofbelieving  that  it  would  not  long  remain  in  your  hands.  Unable  tosave  the  State,  except  at  the  expense  of  the  capital  which  has  de-stroyed  it,  you  have  dared  to  brave  the  outcries  of  the  money-grubbers.  When  I saw  how  you  crushed  these  wretches,  I envied  youyour  office.  Now  that  I see  how  you  have  abandoned  it  withoutbelying  yourself,  I admire  you.  Be  satisfied  with  yourself,  sir;  youtake  with  you  from  it an  honour  which  you  will  long enjoy  withouta  rival.  The  execrations  of rascals  are  the  glory  of an  upright  man.”[1760.]—Madame  de Luxembourg,  who  knew  that  I had  writtenthis  letter,  spoke  to  me  about  it  when  she  came  out  at  Easter;  Ishowed  it to  her;  she  wished  for  a  copy,  and  I gave  her  one;  but  Idid  not  know,  when  I did  so,  that  she  herself  was  one  of  thosemoney-grubbers  who  had  an  interest  in  sub-leases  and  had  causedthe  removal  of  Silhouette.  To  judge  from  my  numerous  follies,  itseemed  as  if I purposely  wanted  to  arouse  the  hatred  of an  amiableand  influential  woman,  to  whom  I was  becoming  more  sincerely  at-tached  every  day,  and  whose  displeasure  I was  far  from  wishing  tobring  upon  myself,  although  by my  repeated  acts  of stupidity,  I wasdoing  everything  that  was  wanted  to  produce  such a result.  I thinkit is hardly  necessary  to  mention  that  it is to  her  that  the  story  of M.Tronchin’s  opiate,  of  which  I have  spoken  in  the  first  part  of  myConfessions,  refers;  the  other  lady  was  Madame  de  Mirepoix.  Nei-ther  of them  has  ever  mentioned  it to  me  again,  or  appeared  to  havethe  slightest  recollection  of it; but  I find  it difficult,  even  if one  didnot  know  anything  of  subsequent  events,  to  assume  that  Madamede  Luxembourg  can  have  really  forgotten  it.  For  my  own  part,  Itried  to  reassure  myself  as  to  the  effect  of my  follies  by the  evidencewhich  I produced  to  myself,  that  none  of them  had  been  committedah eg aLETTER  TO  MME.  DE  LUXEMBOURG551with  the intention  of offending  her;  as  if  a woman  could  ever  pardonsuch  follies,  even  though  she  is perfectly  certain  that  they  were  notthe  result  of deliberate  igtention.However,  although  she  seemed  to  see  and  feel  nothing,  althoughI found  no  abatement  in her  warmth,  and  no  alteration  in her  man-ner  towards  me,  a  continually  growing  presentiment,  which  wasonly  too  well  founded,  made  me  tremble  incessantly,  for  fear  herinfatuation  for  me  might  be  succeeded  by disgust.  Could  I expect,on  the  part  of  so  great  a  lady,  a  constancy  which  would  be  proofagainst  my  lack  of address  to  support  it?  I did  not  even  know  howto  conceal  from  her  this  dim  presentiment,  which  disquieted  meand  only  made  me  more  sullen  and  awkward.  This  may  be  seenfrom  the  following  letter,  which  contains  a  very  singular  prediction.N.B.—This  letter,  which  is  undated  in  my  rough  copy,  waswritten  in  October,  1760,  at  the  latest.“How  cruel  your  kindness  is!  Why  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  arecluse,  who  renounced  the  pleasures  of  life,  in  order  to  feel  theweariness  of them  no  longer?  I have  spent  my  life  in the vain  endeav-our  to  find  lasting  attachments:  I have  been  unable  to  form  any  inthe  ranks  which  were  accessible  to  me.  Am I to  look  for  them  inyours?  Neither  interest  nor  ambition  has  any  temptations  for  me;I have  little  vanity:  I am  rather  timid;  I can  resist  everything  exceptaffection.  Why do you  both  attack  me  in  a  weakness  which  I mustovercome,  since,  considering  the  distance  which  separates  us,  theoverflowings  of tender  hearts  cannot  bring  mine  near  to  you.  Willgratitude  be  sufficient  for  a  heart  which  knows  not  two  ways  ofbestowing  itself  and  only  feels  capable  of  friendship?  Friendship,Madame  la  Maréchale!  Ah!  therein  lies  my  misfortune.  It  is  veryhandsome  of you  and  Monsieur  le Maréchal  to  use  this  term;  but  I‘am a fool  to  take  you  at  your  word.  You  are  amusing  yourselves:  Iam  forming  an  attachment  to  you,  and  the  end  of  the  game  hasfresh  sorrows  in  store  for  me!  How  I hate  all  your  titles,  and  how  Ipity  you  for  having  them!  You  seem  to  me  so  worthy  to  taste  thecharms  of private  life.  Why  do you  not  live  at  Clarens?  I would  gothere in  search  of  the  happiness  of  my  life;  but—the  chateau  ofMontmorency,  the Hôtel  de Luxembourg!  Is that where  one  ought tosee  Jean Jacques?  Is that  where a friend  of equality,  who, in thus  pay-ing for  the  esteem  which  is  shown  for  him,  believes  that  he  is re-552  nTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUturning  as  much  as  he  receives,  ought  to  carry  the  affections  of  2tender  heart?  You  are  good,  and  also  feeling:  I know  it:  I have  seenit.  I regret  that  I have  not  been  able  to  believe  it  sooner;  but,  con-sidering  the  position  which  you  hold,  and  the  manner  in which  youlive, nothing  can  make a lasting  impression  upon  you;  and  so  manynew  interests  efface  each  other,  that  not  one  is permanent.  You  willforget  me,  madame,  after  you  have  made  it impossible  for  me  toimitate  you.  You  will  have  done  much  to  make  me  unhappy  andunable  to  justify  myself.”I coupled  M.  de Luxembourg’s  name  with  hers,  in  order  to  makethe  compliment  less  harsh  for  her;  besides,  I was  so  sure  of  him,that  I had  never  for  a moment  felt  any  anxiety  as  to  the  duration  ofhis  friendship.  None  of my  apprehensions  in regard  to  his wife  everextended  to  him.  I have  never  felt  the  least  mistrust  of his  character,which  I knew  was  weak,  but  trustworthy.  I had  no  more  fear  of  acoldness  on  his  part  than  expectation  of  a  heroic  attachment.  Thesimplicity  and  familiarity  of  our  intercourse  showed  how  each  ofus  depended  upon  the  other.  We  were  both  right:  as  long  as I liveI shall  honour  and  cherish  the  memory  of  this  worthy  gentleman;and,  whatever  attempts  may  have  been  made  to  part  him  from  me,I am  as  certain  that  he  died  my  friend,  as  if I had  received  his  lastsigh.During  their  second  stay  at  Montmorency,  in  1760,  having  cometo  the  end  of  “Julie,”  I had  recourse  to  “Émile,”  in  order  to  keepin with  Madame  de Luxembourg;  but  this  did  not  prove  so  success-ful,  either  because  the  subject  was  less  to  her  taste,  or  because  shewas  at  last  tired  of  so  much  reading.  However,  as  she  reproachedme  with  allowing  myself to  be cheated  by my  publishers,  she  wantedme  to  leave  the  printing  and  publication  of it to  her, that  she  mightmake a better  bargain.  I accepted  her  proposal,  expressly  stipulatingthat  the  work  should  not  be  printed  in  France.  We  had a long  dis-pute  upon  this  point:  I maintained  that  it was  impossible  to  obtain,and  even  imprudent  to  ask  for  tacit  permission,  and  I would  nothear  of its  being  printed  in the  kingdom  on  any  other  terms;  whileshe  insisted  that  there  would  not  be  the  least  difficulty  about  thecensorship,  under  the system  which  had been  adopted  by the Govern-ment.  She  found  the  means  of bringing  M.  de  Malesherbes  over  toMADEMOISELEE  DE  BOUFFLERS5537Caher  views;  he wrote  me  a  long letter  himself,  in order  to  prove  thatthe Profession  de foi du  vicaire  savoyard  was  just the  kind  of thingto meet  with  the approval  of the human  race  everywhere,  and, underthe  circumstances,  even f the  Court.  I was  surprised  to  find  thisofficial,  who  was  as  a  rule  so  timid,  so  easy-going  in  this  matter.  Ashis  mere  approval  was  enough  to  legalise  the  printing  of a  book,  Icould  make  no  further  objection.  However,  in  consequence  of  asingular  scruple,  I still  insisted  that  the  work  should  be  printed  inHolland,  and  by  Néaulme,  whom,  not  satisfied  with  mentioninghim,  I apprised  of  my  intention.  I agreed  that  the  profits  of  theedition  should  go toa  French  publisher,  and  that, when  it was  ready,it  should  be  sold  in  Paris  or  anywhere  else,  since  the  sale  did  notconcern  me.  These  were  the  exact  terms  of the  agreement  made  byMadame  de Luxembourg  and  myself,  after  which  I handed  over  themanuscript  to  her.She  had  brought  with  her  on  this  occasion  her  grand-daughter,Mademoiselle  de  Boufflers,  now  Madame  la  Duchesse  de  Lauzun.Her  name  was  Amélie.  She  was  a  charming  person.  Her  face,  gen-tleness,  and  timidity  were  truly  maidenly.  Nothing  could  have  beenmore  amiable  or  more  interesting  than  her features,  nothing  tendereror  more  chaste  than  the  feelings  which  they  inspired.  Besides,  shewas  a  mere  child,  not  yet eleven  years  of age.  Madame  la Maréchale,finding  her  too  shy, did  her  best  to  rouse  her.  She  several  times  al-lowed  me  to  kiss  her,  which  I did  with  my  usual  awkwardness.  In-stead  of the pretty  things  which  anyone  else  in my  place  would  havesaid,  I stood  mute  and  utterly  confused.  I do not  know  which  of uswas  the  more  bashful,  the  poor  little  one  or  myself.  One  day  I mether  alone  on  the  staircase  of  the  little  chateau;  she  was  coming  tosee  Thérése,  with  whom  her  governess  still  was.  Not  knowing  whatto  say  to  her,  I asked  her  to  give me  a kiss,  which,  in  the  innocenceof her heart,  she  did not  refuse,  as  she  had  already  given  me  one  thatvery  morning,  by her  grandmamma’s  orders,  and  in  her  presence.The  next  day,  while  reading  “Emile”  at  Madame  la  Maréchale’sbedside,  I came  upon a passage,  in which  I have  justly  censured  thevery  thing  that  I had  myself  done  the  day  before.  She  found  theobservation  very  just, and  made  some  sensible  remark  upon  it, whichcaused  me  to  blush.  How I curse  my  incredible  stupidity,  which  has554THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUoften  caused  me  to  appear  vile  and  guilty,  when  I have  only  beenfoolish  and  embarrassed—a  foolishness  which  is  regarded  as  onlya  false  excuse  in the  case  of a  man  who  is known  to  be not  wantingin intelligence!  I can  swear  that  in this  kiss,  which  was  so  blamable,as  in all  the  rest;  Mademoiselle  Amélie’s  heart  and  feelings  were  nopurer  than  my  own.  I can  even  swear  that, if at  that  moment  I couldhave  avoided  meeting  her, I would  have  done  so;  for, although  I wasvery  pleased  to  see  her,  I was  greatly  at  a  loss  to  find  somethingagreeable  to  say  to  her  in passing.  How  is it that  a  child  can  intimi-date  a man  whom  the  power  of kings  fails  to  alarm?  What  is  a manto  do?  How  is he  to  behave,  if he  is utterly  destitute  of presence  ofmind?  If I force  myself  to  speak  to  people  whom  I meet, I infalliblyutter  some  foolish  remark;  if I say nothing,  then  I am  a misanthrope,a wild  animal,  a  bear.  Complete  imbecility  would  have  been  far morefavourable  to  me;  but the  talents  which  I lacked  in society  have  madethose  which  I possessed  the  instruments  of  my  ruin.At  the  end  of her  stay  on  this  occasion,  Madame  de Luxembourgcarried  out  a  good  work,  in  which  I had  some  share.  Diderot  hadvery  rashly  offended  Madame  la  Princesse  de  Robeck,  a  daughterof  M.  de  Luxembourg.  Her  protégé  Palissot  avenged  her  by  thecomedy  of the  Philosophes,  in  which  I was  held  up  to  ridicule,  andDiderot  was  very  severely  handled.  The  author  was  more  mercifulto  me,  not  so  much, I believe,  on  account  of  the  obligations  underwhich  he was  to  me,  as  for  fear  of displeasing  his  patroness’s  father,who  he  knew  entertained  an  affection  for  me.  Duchesne,  the  book-seller,  with  whom  I was  not  acquainted  at  the  time,  sent  me  thepiece  when  it was  printed,  I suspect  by Palissot’s  instructions,  whoperhaps  thought  that  I should  be glad to  see  a  man  pulled  to  pieces,with  whom I had  broken  off  relations.  He  was  greatly  mistaken.When I broke  with  Diderot,  whom  I believed  to  be weak  and  indis-creet  rather  than  absolutely  wicked,  I still  preserved  in  my  heart  afeeling  of  attachment,  even  of  esteem,  for  him,  and  of  respect  forour  old  friendship,  which  I am  convinced  was  for  a  long  time  assincere  on  his  part  as  on  my  own.  The  case  is quite  different  withGrimm,  a  man  whose  character  is false,  who  never  loved  me,  whois not  even  capable  of loving,  and  who,  with  a  light  heart,  withoutany  reason  for  complaint,  simply  in  order  to  satisfy  his  spiteful7ABBÉ  MORELLET  IMPRISONED555jealousy,  has  secretly  become  my  bitterest  calumniator.  He  is  nolonger  anything  to  me.  Diderot  will  always  be  my  old  friend.  Mytenderest  feelings  were  moved  at  the  sight  of  this  hateful  piece;  1could  not  bear  to  read  if and, without  finishing  it, I sent  it back  teDuchesne,  together  with  the  following  letter:Montmorency,  May  2rst,  1760.“Sir,—On  looking  through  the  piece  which  you  have  sent  me,  Ihave  shuddered  at  finding  myself  praised.  I refuse  to  accept  thishorrible  present.  I am  convinced  that,  in  sending  it to  me,  you  didnot  intend  to  insult  me;  but  you  either  do  not  know,  or  you  haveforgotten,  that  I have  had  the  honour  of being  the  friend  of a  mandeserving  of respect,  who  is  unworthily  traduced  and  calumniatedin  this  libellous  production.”Duchesne  handed  this  letter  round.  Diderot,  who  ought  to  havebeen  touched  by it, was  annoyed.  His  amour-propre  could  not  par-don  me  the  superiority  of  a  generous  action,  and  I heard  that  hiswife  attacked  me  on  every  possible  occasion,  with  a  rage  which  af-fected  me  but  little,  since  I knew  that  everybody  looked  upon  heras  a  regular  “fish-fag.”Diderot,  in his  turn,  found  an  avenger  in the  Abbé  Morellet,  whowrote  a little  brochure  against  Palissot,  after  the  manner  of  the“Petit  Prophète,”  called  “La  Vision.”  In  this  pamphlet  he  very  im-prudently  insulted  Madame  de  Robeck,  whose  friends  caused  himto  be imprisoned  in the  Bastille;  she  herself  was  not  of a  sufficientlyrevengeful  disposition—not  to  mention  that  at  that  time  she  was  adying  woman—to  have  had  anything  to  do  with  it.D’Alembert,  who  was  very  intimate  with  the  Abbé  Morellet,wrote  and  asked  me  to  beg Madame  de Luxembourg  to  procure  hisrelease,  promising,  in  token  of  his  gratitude,  to  praise  her  in  the“Encyclopédie.”  14  The  following  was  my  reply:“Sir,—I  have  not  waited  for  your  letter,  before  expressing  toMadame  la Maréchale  de Luxembourg  the pain which  the  imprison-14  This  letter,  together  with  several  others,  disappeared  at  the  Hotel  de  Luxem-bourg,  while  my  papers  were  deposited  there.550THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUment  of the Abbé  Morellet  caused  me.  She  knows  the interest  whichI take  in the matter,  she  shall  also  know  the  interest  that  you  take  init; it will  be  sufficient  for  her, in order  that  she  herself  may  take  aninterest  in it, to  know  that he is a person  of merit.  Further,  althoughshe  and  M.  le  Maréchal  honour  me  with  a  kindness  which  is  theconsolation  of my  life,  and  although  your  friend’s  name  is, in theiropinion,  a  recommendation  in  favour  of  the  Abbé  Morellet,  I donot  know  how  far  they  may  consider  it fitting,  on  this  occasion,  tomake  use  of the  influence  attached  to  their  position  and  the  personalesteem  in which  they are  held.  I do not  even  feel  convinced,  that  theact  of  vengeance  in  question  concerns  Madame  la  Princesse  deRobeck  so  much  as  you  appear  to  think;  and,  even  should  you  becorrect,  one  must  not  suppose  that  the  pleasure  of avenging  oneselfis the  exclusive  property  of philosophers,  and  that,  when  they chooseto  be  women,  women  will  be  philosophers.“I  will  inform  you  of what  Madame  de  Luxembourg  says  to  mewhen  I have  shown  her  your  letter.  Meanwhile,  I think  that  I amsufficiently  well  acquainted  with  her, to  be able  to  assure  you  before-hand  that, even  if she should  have  the pleasure  of contributing  to  therelease  of  the  Abbé  Morellet,  she  would  certainly  refuse  to  acceptthe  tribute  of  gratitude  which  you  promise  to  render  her  in  thecolumns  of  the  ‘Encyclopédie,  although  she  might  feel  herselfhonoured  by it, because  she  does  not  do good  for  the  sake  of praise,but  only  in  order  to  satisfy  her  goodness  of heart.”I spared  no  pains  to  arouse  the  zeal  and  compassion  of  Madamede  Luxembourg  on  behalf  of  the  poor  prisoner,  and  I succeeded.She  took  a  journey  to  Versailles  on  purpose  to  see  M.  le Comte  deSaint-Florentin;  and  this  journey  shortened  her  stay  at  Montmor-ency,  which  the  Maréchal  was  obliged  to  leave  at  the  same  time,  hispresence  being  required  at  Rouen,  whither  the  King  was  sendinghim  as  the  Governor  of Normandy,  in connection  with  certain  pro-ceedings  in  the  Parliament,  which  it was  desired  to  suppress.  Thefollowing  is the  letter  which  Madame  de Luxembourg  wrote  to  methe  second  day  after  her  departure  (Packet  D,  No.  23):“M.  de Luxembourg  left  yesterday  at  six  o’clock  in  the  morning.I do  not  yet  know  whether I shall  join  him.  I am  waiting  to  hear“VERSAILLES,  Wednesday.PROCURES  THE  ABBE’S  RELEASE557from  him,  because  he  does  not  know  himself  how  long  he  will  bethere.  I have  seen  M.  de  Saint-Florentin,  who  is  most  favourablydisposed  towards  the  Abbé  Morellet;  but  he  finds  that  there  aredifficulties,  which,  however,  he hopes  to  surmount  the  first  time  hehas  to  see  the  King,  whith  will  be next  week.  I have  also  asked  as  afavour,  that  he  shall  not  be  banished,  which  was  talked  of:  it wasintended  to  send  him  to  Nancy.  This,  sir, is as  much  as  I have  beenable  to  do;  but  I promise  you  that  [ will  not  leave  M+  de  Saint-.Florentin  alone,  until  the  matter  is arranged  as  you  desire.  And  nowlet  me  tell  you  how  sorry  I was  to  be  obliged  to  leave  you  so  soon,but  I flatter  myself  that  you  have  no  doubt  of it. I love  you  with  allmy  heart,  and  shall  do  so  as  long  as  I live.”A few  days later  I received  the  following  letter  from  D’Alembert,which  caused  me  real  joy  (Packet  D,  No.  26):August  ist.“Thanks  to  your  efforts,  my  dear  philosopher,  the  Abbé  has  leftthe  Bastille,  and  his  imprisonment  will  have  no  further  conse-quences.  He  is setting  out  for  the country,  and, together  with  myself,sends  you  a  thousand  thanks  and  compliments.  Vale  et  me  ama.”The  Abbé  also, a  few  days afterwards,  wrote  me a letter  of thanks(Packet  D,  No.  29),  which  did  not  appear  to  me  to  come  straightand  in  which  he  appeared  to  some  extent  to  depreciate  the  servicewhich  I had  rendered  him;  and,  some  time  afterwards,  I found  thathe and  D’Alembert  had  in a  manner,  I will  not  say  supplanted,  butsucceeded  me  in  Madame  de  Luxembourg’s  favour,  and  that  I hadlost  in  her  esteem  as  much  as  they  had  gained.  However,  I am  farfrom  suspecting  the  Abbé  Morellet  of having  contributed  to  my  lossof favour;  I esteem  him  too  highly  to  think  that.  As  for  M.  d’Alem-bert,  I say  nothing  about  him  here;  I will  return  to  him  later.At  the  same  time  I had  another  affair  on  hand,  which  was  theoccasion  of  the  last  letter  I ever  wrote  to  Voltaire—a  letter  whichhe exclaimed  loudly  against  as  an  abominable  insult,  but  which  henever  showed  to  anyone.  I will  here  supply  the  omission.The  Abbé  Trublet,  with  whom  I was  slightly  acquainted,  butof whom I had  seen  very  little,  wrote  to  me  on  the  13th of June,  1760558THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU(Packet  D, No.  11), to  inform  me  that  M.  Formey,  his  friend  andcorrespondent,  had  printed  in his journal  my  letter  to  M.  de Voltaireabout  the  disaster  at  Lisbon.  The  Abbé  Trublet  wanted  to  knowhow  this  publication  had  been  rendered  possible;  and,  with  hisJesuitical  slyness,  asked  me  my  opinion  of the reprinting  of the letter,without  wanting  to  tell  me  his own.  As  I thoroughly  detest  cunningpersons  of  this  sort,  I thanked  him,  as  he  deserved,  but  somewhatstiffly:  he noticed  this,  but  nevertheless  it did  not  prevent  him  fromtrying  to  get over  me  in one  or  two  more  letters,  until  he had  foundout  everything  he  wanted  to  know.I well  understood,  whatever  Trublet  might  say,  that  Formey  hadnot  found  the  letter  printed,  and  that  it had  been  printed  by himfor  the  first  time.  I knew  that  he  was  an  unblushing  pilferer,  who,without  ceremony,  earned  an  income  from  the  works  of others,  al-though  he had  not  yet  ventured  upon  the  astounding  impudence  ofremoving  the  author’s  name  from  a  book  already  published,  puttinghis  own  to  it, and  selling  it for  his  own  profit.1®But  how  had  this  manuscript  come  into  his  hands?  That  wasthe  question.  It was  not  a  difficult  one  to  answer,  but  I was  simpleenough  to  be  puzzled  by it.  Although  Voltaire  was  honoured  be-yond  all  measure  in  this  letter,  he  would  have  had  reason  to  com-plain,  in  spite  of his  uncivil  behaviour,  if I had  had  it printed  with-out  his  consent,  and  I accordingly  decided  to  write  to  him  on  thematter.  Here  is the  second  letter,  to  which  he made  no  reply,  and  atwhich,  in  order  to  give  freer  vent  to  his  brutality,  he  pretended  tobe  irritated  even  to  madness:MontMorency,  June  17th,  1760.“Sir,—I  never  thought  to  find  myself  writing  to  you  again.  But,having  learnt  that  the  letter  which  I wrote  to  you  in  1756  has  beenprinted  at  Berlin,  I feel  it  my  duty  to  give  you  an  account  of  myconduct  in regard  to  it, and  I will  fulfil  this  duty  in all  truthfulnessand  sincerity.“This  letter,  having  been  really  addressed  to  yourself,  was  nevermeant  to  be  printed.  I communicated  its  contents,  conditionally,  tothree  persons  to  whom  the rights  of friendship  did  not  permit  me  to:1  In  this  fashion  he  afterwards  appropriated  “Emile.”559LETTER  TO  VOLTAIRE”refuse  anything  of the  kind,  and  whom  these  same  rights  of friend-ship still  less  permitted  to abuse  their  trust  by violating  their  prom-ise.  These  three  persons  are:  Madame  de  Chenonceaux,  MadameDupin’s  step-daughter;  Madame  la  Comtesse  d’Houdetot;  and  aGerman  named  Grimm“ Madame  de Chenonceaux  was  anxious  forthe  letter  to  be  printed,  and  asked  my  consent.  I told  her  that  it de-pended  upon  you.  Your  consent  was  asked;  you  refused  it,  andnothing  more  was  said  about  the  matter.í“Nevertheless,  M.  Abbé  Trublet,  with  whom  I have  no  sort  ofconnection,  has just written,  with  a  most  friendly  mark  of attention,to  inform  me,  that  he has  received  the  sheets  of a  journal  belongingto  M. Formey,  in which  he has read  this identical  letter,  accompaniedby a  note,  in which  the  editor,  under  date  of the  23rd October,  1759,says  that he found  it some  weeks  ago  in the  Berlin  booksellers’  shops,and  that,  since  it is  one  of  those  pamphlets  which  soon  disappearbeyond  hope of return,  he thought  it his duty to  allot  it a place in hisjournal.“This,  sir, is all  that  I know  about  the  matter.  It is quite  certainthat  hitherto  this  letter  has  never  even  been  heard  of  in  Paris.  Itis quite  certain  that  the copy,  whether  in manuscript  or  print,  whichhas fallen  into  M. Formey’s  hands,  can  only have  come  to him  eitherthrough  you,  which  is not  likely,  or  through  one  of the three  personswhom  I have  just mentioned.  Lastly,  it is quite  certain  that  the  twoladies  are  incapable  of  such  a  breach  of  confidence.  From  my  re-treat,  I cannot  gain  any  further  information  about  the  matter.  Youhave  correspondents,  by whose  assistance  it would  be  easy  for  you,if it were  worth  the  trouble,  to  trace  it back  to  its  source,  and  learnthe  truth  about  the  facts.“In  the  same  letter,  M.  ?Abbé  Trublet  informs  me  that  he  iskeeping  back  the  number  of the  journal,  and  will  not  lend  it with-out  my  consent,  which  I certainly  will  never  give.  But  this  copy  maynot  be  the  only  one  in  Paris.  My wish  is that  the  letter  may  not  beprinted  there,  and  I will  do  my  best  to  prevent  it; but,  in case  I amunable  to  succeed,  and,  being  informed  in  time,  may  be  able  to  se-cure  the  prior  right,  then  I will  not  hesitate  to  have  it printed  my-self.  This  appears  to  me  to  be  only  fair  and  natural.“As  for  your  reply  to  the  same  letter,  it has  not  been  communi-cated  to  anyone,  and  you  may  feel  assured  that  it  will  never  beprinted  without  your  consent,'®  which  I shall  never  be so  indiscreet16 That  is to  say,  during  his  life-time  and  mine:  and  surely,  the  most  scrupu-560THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUas  to  ask  for, for I know  well,  that  what  one  man  writes  to  another,is not  meant  for  the  public.  But  if you  like  to  write  an  answer  forpublication,  addressed  to  me,  I promise  you  that  I will  faithfullyadd  it to  my  letter,  without  a single word  of reply on  my  part.“I do not  love  you,  sir:  you  have  done  me  injuries,  which  I couldnot  but  feel  most  deeply—me,  your  disciple  and  most  enthusiasticadmirer.  You  have  ruined  Geneva in  return  for  the  shelter  you  havefound  there:  you  have  alienated  my  fellow-citizens  from  me,  inreturn  for  the  eulogies  which  I have  lavished  upon  you  in  theirmidst:  it is  you  who  have  made  life  in  my  native  country  unen-durable  for  me:  it is you  who  will  cause  me  to  die  in a  foreign  land,deprived  of  all  the  consolations  of  a  dying  man,  and  to  be  throwninto  a  gutter,  as  the last  token  of respect:  while  you  will  be followedto  the  grave  with  all  the  honours  that  a  man  can  expect.  In  fact,  Ihate  you,  since  you  have  so  willed  it; but  I hate  you  as  a  man  whois more  worthy  loving  you,  if you  had  so  chosen.  Of  all  the  senti-ments  towards  you,  with  which  my  heart  was  filled,  the  only  onethat  survives  is  the  admiration  which  one  cannot  refuse  to  yoursplendid  genius,  and  admiration  for  your  writings.  If I can  honournothing  but  your  talents,  the  fault  is not  mine.  I shall  never  fail  inthe  respect  that  is  due  to  them,  or  in  the  behaviour  which  suchrespect  demands.  Farewell,  sir!”  17In  the  midst  of all  these  petty  literary  squabbles,  which  only con-firmed  me  more  and  more  in  my  resolution,  I was  the  recipient  ofthe greatest  honour  which  the profession  of letters  has ever  conferredupon  me,  and  of which  I felt most  proud:  M. le Prince  de Conti  con-descended  to  visit  me  twice,  once  at  the  little  chateau,  and  once  atMont-Louis.  On  both  occasions,  he  selected  the  time  when  Madamede Luxembourg  was  not  at  Montmorency,  in order  to  make  it clearerthat  he only came  to  see  me.  I have  never  had  any  doubt  that  I owedlous  behaviour,  especially  in dealing  with  a  man  who  tramples  it ruthlessly  underfoot,  cannot  require  more.Tt  will  be  observed  that,  although  this  letter  has  been  written  nearly  sevenyears,  I have  neither  mentioned  it nor  shown  it to  a  living  soul.  This  has  alsobeen  the  case  with  the  two  letters  which  M.  Hume  forced  me  to  write  to  himlast  summer,  until  he  made  the  noise  about  them,  which  everybody  knows  of.The  evil  that  I have  to  say  about  my  enemies,  I say  to  themselves  privately;  asfor  the  good,  when  there  is any,  I say  it openly  and  with  a  good  heart.M.  LE  PRINCE  DE  CONTI56xhis kindness  originally  to  Madame  de Luxembourg  and  Madame  deBoufflers;  but neither  have  I any  doubt  that  I owe  the kindness  withwhich  he  has  never  ceased  to  honour  me  since  then,  to  his  ownfeelings  and  myself.18As my  apartment  at  Mont-Louis  was  very  small,  and  the situationof  the  turret  was  delightful,  I took  the  Prince  there;  and  he,  tocrown  his  favours,  desired  that  I would  have  the  honour  of playinga  game  of chess  with  him.  I knew  that  he could  beat  the  Chevalierde  Lorenzi,  who  was  a  much  better  player  than  myself.  However,in  spite  of the  signs  and  grimaces  of  the  Chevalier  and  those  whowere  present,  which  I pretended  not  to  see,  J won  the  two  gameswhich  we  played.  When  they  were  finished,  I said  to  him  in  a  re-spectful,  but  serious  tone,  “My  Lord,  I have  too  much  respect  foryour  most  serene  Highness,  not  to  beat  you  always  at  chess.”  Thisgreat  Prince,  so  witty  and  learned,  who  deserved  to  be  spared  fromflattery,  felt—at  least,  I think  so—that  I was  the  only person  presentwho  treated  him  as  a  man,  and  I have  every  reason  to  believe  thathe  felt  really  grateful  to  me  for  it.lEven  if he  had  been  displeased,  I could  not  reproach  myself  withwishing  to  deceive  him  in  anything,  and  I certainly  have  not  to  re-proach  myself  with  having  ill-requited  his  goodness  in  my  heart,although  I certainly  sometimes  requited  it with  a bad  grace,  whereashe  himself  displayed  infinite  delicacy .in  the  manner  in  which  heshowed  it.  A  few  days  afterwards,  he  sent  me  a  hamper  of game,which  I accepted  in a  proper  manner.  Some  time  after  that,  he  sentme  a  second  hamper,  accompanied  by a  note  from  one  of his  officersof the  hunt,  written  by his  instructions,  informing  me  that  the  con-tents  had  been  shot  by His  Highness  himself.  I accepted  it; but  Iwrote  to  Madame  de  Boufflers  that  I would  accept  no  more.  Thisletter  was  generally  blamed,  and  deservedly.  To  refuse  presents  ofgame  from a Prince  of the blood,  who, besides,  displays  such  delicacyin  sending  them,  shows  rather  the  boorishness  of an  ill-bred  personwho  forgets  himself,  than  the  delicate  feeling  of  a proud  man,  whodesires  to  preserve  his  independence.  I have  never  read  over  this18  Notice  the  persistency  of this  blind  and  stupid  confidence,  in  the  midst  of allthe  ill-treatment,  which  ought  to  have  disabused  me  of  it.  It  never  disappeareduntil  after  my  return  to  Paris  in  1770.562THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUletter  without  blushing  for  it,  or  without  reproaching  myself  forhaving  written  it.  However,  I have  not  undertaken  to  write  myConfessions  in  order  to  be  silent  upon  my  follies,  and  the  presentinstance  disgusts  me  with  myself  too  much  for  me  to  allow  myselfto  conceal  it.If I did  not  commit  the  additional  folly  of becoming  his  rival,  Ivery  nearly  did  so;  for,  at  the  time,  Madame  de  Boufflers  was  stillhis mistress,  and  I knew  nothing  about  it. She  came  to  see  me  prettyoften  with  the  Chevalier  de  Lorenzi.  She  was  handsome  and  stillyoung.  She  affected  the  old  Roman  spirit,  while  I was  always  ro-mantic;  this  was  a  sufficient  similarity.  I was  nearly  caught;  I believeshe  saw  it. The  Chevalier  saw  it also;  at  least,  he  spoke  to  me  aboutit, and  in  a  manner  not  calculated  to  discourage  me.  But  this  time  Iwas  prudent—and  it was  time  to  be so,  at  fifty years  of age.  Full  ofthe  good  advice  which  I had  just  given  to  the  grey-beards  in  myletter  to  D’Alembert,  I was  ashamed  to  profit  so  little  by it myself.Besides,  after  learning  what  I did  not  know  before,  I must  have  lostmy  head  entirely,  if  I had  dared  to  carry  my  rivalry  so  high!  Lastly,being  perhaps  not  yet  thoroughly  cured  of my  passion  for  Madamed’Houdetot,  I felt  that  nothing  could  henceforth  take  her  place  inmy  heart,  and  I bade  adieu  to  love  for  the  remainder  of my  life.  Atthe  moment  of  writing  these  lines,  a  young  woman,  who  had  herdesigns  upon  me,  has  just  made  dangerous  advances  to  me,  andthat  with  very  significant  glances;  but, if she had  pretended  to  forgetmy  fifty  years,  I have  remembered  them.  After  having  extricatedmyself  from  this  snare,  I have  no  longer  any  fear  of  falling,  and  Ifeel  that  I can  answer  for  myself  for  the  rest  of my  days.Madame  de  Boufflers  had  observed  the  emotion  which  her  pres-ence  caused  me,  and could  also  see  that  I had triumphed  over  it.  I amneither  foolish  nor  vain  enough  to  believe  that,  at  my  age,  I canhave  inspired  her  with  any  fancy  for  me;  but,  from  certain  expres-sions  which  she  made  use  of  to  Thérése,  I believe  that  I aroused  acertain  feeling  of curiosity  in her  mind.  If this  is the case,  and  if shehas  not  forgiven  me  for  not  having  satisfied  this  curiosity,  it  mustbe admitted  that  I was  born  to  be the victim  of my  weaknesses,  sincevictorious  love  was  so  fatal  to  me,  and  vanquished  love  even  morefatal  still.END  OF  THE  LETTERS563Here  ends  the collection  of letters  which  has  served  me  as  a  guidein  these  two  books.  Henceforth,  I can  only  follow  in  the  footstepsof my  recollections;  which,  however,  in reference  to  this  cruel  periodof my  life,  are  so  vivid,gand  have  left  so  strong  an  impression  uponme  that,  lost  in  the  vast  ocean  of  my  misfortunes,  I am  unable  toforget  the  details  of  my  first  shipwreck,  although  its  results  onlyafford  me  confused  recollections.  Accordingly,  in  the  followingbook,  I can  still  proceed  with  tolerable  certainty.  If  I go  further,  Ishall  have  to  grope  in  the  dark.BOOK  XI[1761]ALTHOUGH  “Julie,”  which  had  been  in  the  press  for  a  long time,  wasnot  yet  published  at  the  end  of  1760,  it  was  beginning  to  make  agreat  stir.  Madame  de  Luxembourg  had  spoken  of  it  at  Court,Madame  d’Houdetot  in Paris.  The  latter  had  even  obtained  permis-sion  from  me  for  Saint-Lambert  to  have  it read  in manuscript  to  theKing  of Poland,  who  was  delighted  with  it. Duclos,  to  whom  I hadalso  had  it read,  had  spoken  of it to  the  Academy.  All Paris  was  im-patient  to  see  this  romance;  the  booksellers’  shops  in the  Rue  Saint-Jacques  and  the  Palais-Royal  were  besieged  by persons  making  in-quiries  about  it. At last  it appeared,  and  its success,  contrary  to  whatis usually  the  case,  corresponded  to  the  eagerness  with  which  it hadbeen  expected.  Madame  la Dauphine,  who  was  one  of the  first  whoread  it,  spoke  of  it  to  M.  de  Luxembourg  as  a  delightful  work.Opinions  were  divided  amongst  men  of  letters;  but  amongst  thegeneral  public  the  verdict  was  unanimous;  the  ladies,  especially,  be-came  infatuated  with  the  book  and  the  author  to  such  an  extent,that  there  were  few,  even  amongst  the  highest  circles,  whose  con-quest  I could  not  have  made  if  I had  been  so  disposed.  I possessproofs  of this, which  I do not  wish  to  commit  to  writing,  but  which,without  any  need  of putting  them  to  the  test,  confirm  my  opinion.It is singular  that  this  work  has  met  with  greater  success  in  Francethan  in  the  rest  of  Europe,  although  the  French,  both  men  andwomen,  are  not  very  well  treated  in it.  Quite  contrary  to  my  expec-tation,  it  was  least  successful  in  Switzerland,  most  successful  inParis.  Do  then  friendship,  love,  and  virtue,  prevail  more  in  Paristhan  elsewhere?  Most  certainly,  no;  but  there  still  prevails  there  thatexquisite  feeling,  by which  the heart  is transported,  when  these  qual-ities  are  portrayed,  and  which  makes  us  cherish  in others  the  pure,564PUBLICATIQN  OF  “JULIE”565tender,  and  virtuous  feelings,  which  we  ourselves  no  longer  possess.The  corruption  of  manners  is  at  the  present  day  everywhere  thesame;  virtue  and  morality  no  longer  exist  in  Europe;  but,  if therebe a  place  where  affection  for  them  still  exists,  it is in Paris  that  wemust  look  for  it.tAmidst  so  many  prejudices  and  factitious  passions,  one  must  knowhow  to  analyse  properly  the  human  heart,  in  order  to  disentanglethe true  feelings  of nature.  A delicacy  of tact  is necessary,  which  canonly  be  acquired  by intercourse  with  the  great  world,  in  order  tofeel,  if  I may  so  venture  to  say,  the  delicacies  of heart  of which  thiswork  is full.  I unhesitatingly  place the fourth  part  of it by the  side  ofthe  “Princesse  de  Cléves,”  and I assert  that,  if these  two  works  hadbeen  read  only  in  the  provinces,  their  true  value  would  never  havebeen  recognised,  It  is, therefore,  not  surprising  that  the  book  metwith  the  greatest  success  at  Court.  It abounds  in piquant,  but  veiledallusions,  which  were  bound  to  please,  because  those  at  Court  aremore  practised  in seeing  through  them.  However,  a  further  distinc-tion  must  here  be made.  The  reading  of such  works  is certainly  notsuited  to  those  witty  people,  whose  cunning  and  finesse  is  only  ofavail  to  see  through  what  is bad,  and  who  see  nothing  at  all  wherethere  is only good  to  be  seen.  If, for  instance,  “Julie”  had  been  pub-lished  in  a  certain  country  which  I have  in  my  mind,  I am  sure  noone  would  have  read  it to  the  end, and  that  it would  have  died  at  itsbirth.I have  collected  most  of the  letters,  which  were  written  to  me  onthe  subject  of  this  work,  in  a  packet  which  is  in  the  hands  ofMadame  de Nadaillac.  If this  collection  ever  sees  the light, it will  dis-close  several  curious  things,  amongst  others,  a  diversity  of  opinion,which  shows  what  it is to  have  anything  to  do with  the  public.  Thefeature  which  has  been  least  observed,  and  which  will  always  makeit  a work  unique  of its  kind,  is the  simplicity  of the  subject  and  thesustained  interest  which,  confined  to  three  persons,  is  kept  upthrough  six  volumes,  without  the  aid  of incidents,  romantic  adven-tures,  or  improprieties  of any  kind,  either  in the characters  or  in theiractions.  Diderot  has paid great  compliments  to  Richardson  upon  theenormous  variety  of his  situations  and  the  number  of characters  in-1 These  words  were  written  in  1769.566THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUtroduced  by him.  Richardson  certainly  has  the merit  of having  giventhem  all distinctive  characteristics;  but, in regard  to  their  number,  hehas the fault  common  to  most  insipid  writers  of romance,  who  makeup  for  the  barrenness  of their  ideas  by the  aid  of characters  and  incidents.  It  is  easy  to  excite  interest  by  incessantly  presenting  un-heard-of  incidents  and  new  faces,  who  pass  like  the  figures  in  amagic-lantern;  but  it  is  far  more  difficult  to  sustain  this  interestcontinually  by means  of the  same  obiects,  without  the  aid  of won-derful  adventures.  And  if, other  things  being  equal,  the  simplicity  ofthe  subject  adds  to  the beauty  of the  work,  the romances  of Richard-son,  though  superior  in so  many  other  things,  cannot,  in this  respect,be compared  to  mine.  However,  it is dead—I  know  it, and  I knowthe  reason;  but  it will  come  to  life  again.My  only  fear  was  that,  owing  to  its  extreme  simplicity,  the  de-velopment  of the  story  might  prove  wearisome,  and  that  I had  notbeen  able  to  keep  up a sufficiently  lively  interest  to  the  end.  I wasreassured  by an  incident  which,  of  itself  alone,  flattered  me  morethan  all the  compliments  which  this  work  has  procured  me.It appeared  at  the beginning  of the Carnival.  A book-hawker  tookit to  Madame  la Princesse  de  Talmont  ?  one  day  when  there  was  aball  at  the  Opera.  After  supper  she  dressed  herself  to  go,  and,  whilewaiting,  began  to  read  the  new  romance.  At  midnight  she  orderedher  horses  to  be  put  in,  and  went  on  reading.  She  was  informedthat  her  carriage  was  waiting;  she  made  no  reply.  Her  servants,seeing  that  she  had  forgotten  herself,  went  to  tell  her  that  it was  twoo'clock.  “There  is no  hurry  yet,”  she  answered,  and  still  went  onreading.  Some  time  afterwards,  her  watch  having  stopped,  she  rangthe  bell  to  know  what  time  it was.  When  she  heard  that  it was  fouro'clock,  she  said,  “Then  it is too  late  to  go  to  the  ball;  take  out  thehorses,”  undressed  herself,  and  spent  the rest  of the night in reading.Since  hearing  of  this  incident,  I  have  always  wanted  to  seeMadame  de  Talmont,  not  only  to  learn  from  her  own  lips  if it isstrictly  true,  but  also  because  I have  never  thought  it possible  thatanyone  could  feel  so  lively  an  interest  in  “Julie”  without  possessingthe  sixth  sense,  that  moral  sense,  with  which  so  few  hearts  are  en-It  was  not  she,  but  another  lady  whose  name  I do  not  know;  but  I have  beenassured  of  the  fact.THEce“PAIX  PERPETUELLE5393567dowed,  and  without  which  it is impossible  for anyone  to  understandmy  own.What  made  the  womeń  so  favourably  disposed  towards  me  wastheir  conviction  that  I had  written  my  own  history,  and  that  I my-self  was  the  hero  of  thifromance.  This  belief  was  so  firmly  estab-lished,  that  Madame  de  Polignac  wrote  to  Madame  de  Verdelin,begging  her  to  persuade  me  to  let  her  see  the  portrait  of  Julie.Everyone  was  convinced  that  it was  impossible  to  express  Sentimentsso  vividly  without  having  felt  them,  or  to  describe  the  transports  oflove  so  glowingly,  unless  they  came  straight  from  the  heart.  In  thisthey were  right.  It is quite  true  that  I wrote  this  romance  in a stateof  most  feverish  ecstasy,  but  they  were  wrong  in  thinking  that  ithad  needed  real  objects  to  produce  this condition;  they were  far fromunderstanding  to  what  an  extent  I am  capable  of being  inflamed  bybeings  of the  imagination.  Had  it not  been  for  a  few  reminiscencesof my  youth  and  Madame  d’Houdetot,  the  love  which I felt  and  de-scribed  would  have  had  only  the  nymphs  of the  air  for  its  object.  Idid  not  desire  either  to  confirm  or  refute  an  error  which  was  to  myadvantage.  It may  be seen  in the  preface,  in the  form  of a  dialogue,which  I had  printed  separately,  how I left  the  public  in suspense  onthat point.  Rigid  moralists  may  say  that  I ought to  have  declared  thetruth  without  reserve.  For  my  own  part,  I do not  see  what  obligationthere  was  for me  to  do  so;  and  I think  that  I should  have  shown  farmore  stupidity  than  frankness  in  making  such  a  declaration,  whenthere  was  no  necessity  for  it.Nearly  about  the  same  time  appeared  the  “Paix  Perpetuelle,”  themanuscript  of which  I had  given  up  in the  preceding  year  to a cer-tain  M.  de  Bastide,  editor  of a  journal  called  Le  Monde,  into  which,whether I liked  it or  not,  he  would  have  been  glad  to  cram  all  mymanuscripts.  He  was  acquainted  with  M.  Duclos,  and  came  in  hisname  to  try  and  induce  me  to  help  him  to  fill  his  journal.  He  hadheard  “Julie”  spoken  of,  and  wanted  me  to  let  it  appear  in  it, aswell  as  “Emile”;  he  would  also  have  liked  to  have  the  “ContratSocial,”  if  he  had  had  any  suspicion  of  its  existence.  At  length,wearied  by his  importunities,  I decided  to  let him  have  my  extractsfrom  the  “Paix  Perpetuelle”  for  twelve  Jouts.  The  agreement  was,that  it should  be printed  in his journal;  but, as  soon  as  he became  theTHE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU568owner  of the  manuscript,  he  thought  fit to  have  it printed  by itself,after  certain  passages  had  been  cut  out,  in  accordance  with  the  re-quirements  of  the censorship.  What  would  have  been  the  result,  ifI had  added  my  own  criticisms  of  the  work,  which,  fortunately,I did  not  mention  to  M.  de  Bastide,  and  which  were  not  includedin  our  agreement!  These  criticisms  are  still  unprinted,  and  I havethem  amongst  my  papers.  If they  ever  appear,  it will  be  seen  howVoltaire’s  witticisms  and  self-complacency  on  this  subject  must  havemade  me  laugh—me,  who  understood  so  well  the  extent  of  thispoor  man’s  intelligence  in  regard  to  the  political  matters  in  whichhe ventured  to  interfere.In  the midst  of the  successful  reception  of my  work  by the  publicand  the  favour  of  the  ladies,  I felt  that  I was  losiag  ground  at  theHôtel  de  Luxembourg,  not  with  M.  de  Luxembourg,  whose  kind-ness  and  friendship  seemed  to  increase  daily,  but  with  Madame  deLuxembourg.  Since  I had  found  nothing  more  to  read  to  her,  herroom  had  not  been  so  freely  open  to  me;  and,  during  her  visits  toMontmorency,  although  I presented  myself  with  great  regularity,I hardly  ever  saw  her  except  at  table.  My  place  at  her  side,  even,was  no  longer  reserved  for  me  as  before.  As  she  no  longer  offered  itto  me,  spoke  to  me  but  little,  and  I had  not  much  to  say  to  hereither,  I was  glad  to  find  another  place,  where  I was  more  at  myease,  especially  in  the  evening;  for  I unconsciously  made a practiceof sitting  closer  to  M.  le Maréchal.In  regard  to  “the  evening,”  I remember  that I have  said  that  I didnot  sup  at  the  chateau,  and  this  was  true  at  the  commencement  ofour  acquaintance;  but,  as  M.  de  Luxembourg  did  not  dine  at  all,and  did  not  even  appear  at  table,  the  result  was  that,  at  the  endof several  months,  although  I was  on  a  very  familiar  footing  in thehouse,  I had  never  been  at  a  meal  with  him.  He  was  kind  enough  tomake  a  remark  to  that  effect.  This  decided  me  to  go  to  supper  theresometimes,  when  there  were  not  many  guests;  and I greatly  enjoyedmyself,  seeing  that  we  took  our  dinner  almost  in  the  open,  and,  asis ‘said,  sur  le  bout  du  banc*;  whereas  supper  was  a  very  lengthymeal,  because  the  guests  made  themselves  comfortable,  in  order  torest  themselves  after  a  long  walk;  it was  a  very  good  meal,  because® Without  ceremony.E P=THE  MISERIES  OF  GREATNESS569M. de Luxembourg  was  somewhat  of a gourmand;  and a very  agree-able  one,  because  Madame  de  Luxembourg  did  the  honours  withcharming  grace.  Without  fhis  explanation,  it would  be  difficult  tounderstand  the  concluding  portion  of  one  of  M.  de  Luxembourg’sletters  (Packet  C,  No.  36),  in  which  he  tells  me  that  he  recallsour  walks  with  great  pleasure,  especially,  he  adds,  when,  on  ourreturn  to  the  courtyard  in  the  evening,  we  found  no  marks  ofcarriage  wheels;  for,  as  the  ruts  in  the  sand  were  raked  over  everymorning,  I guessed,  from  the  number  of  wheel-tracks,  how  manyguests  had  arrived  during  the  afternoon.This  year  (1761)  filled  to the  brim  the cup  of the afflictions,  whichthis  worthy  gentleman  had  suffered,  since  I had  had  the  honourof knowing  him;  as  if the  evils  which  destiny  was  preparing  for my-self  were  fated  to  commence  with  the  man  to  whom I felt  the  mostsincere  attachment,  and  who  was  most  worthy  of it. In the first  year,he  lost  his  sister,  Madame  la  Duchesse  de  Villeroy;  in  the  second,his  daughter,  Madame  la  Princesse  de  Robeck;  in  the  third,  hisonly son,  the Duc  de Montmorency,  and  his grandson,  the  Comte  deLuxembourg,  the  last  and  only  inheritors  of  his  name  and  family.Outwardly,  he  endured  all  these  losses  with  apparent  courage;  buthis  heart  did  not  cease  to  bleed  inwardly  for  the  rest  of his  life,  andhis  health  gradually  declined.  He  must  have  felt  the  unexpectedand  tragic  end  of his  son  the  more  keenly,  as  it happened  at  the  verymoment  when  the  King had  just granted  him  for  his  son,  and  prom-ised  him  for  his  grandson,  the  reversion  of his  commission  as  Cap-tain  of the  Gardes  du  Corps.  He  had  the  sorrow  of  seeing,  beforehis own  eyes,  the life  of this  child,  in whom  such  hopes  were  centred,gradually  wasting  away,  in consequence  of the  mother’s  blind  con-fidence  in  the  physician  who  caused  the  poor  child’s  death  fromsheer  want  of nourishment,  owing  to  his being fed  upon  nothing  butdrugs.  Alas!  if they had  only trusted  in me,  the grandfather  and  thegrandson  would  both  be still  alive.  I said  everything  I could;  I wroteto  M.  le Maréchal!  I remonstrated  with  Madame  de  Montmorencyupon  the  more  than  strict  diet,  which,  in her  faith  in her  physician,she prescribed  for her  son.  Madame  de Luxembourg,  whose  opinionscoincided  with  my  own,  did not  wish  to  usurp  the  mother’s  author-ity.  M.  de  Luxembourg,  who  was  weak  and  gentle,  never  careda?570,  THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUto  oppose  anyone.  Madame  de  Montmorency  felt  a  confidence  inBordeu,  of which  her  son  finally  became  the  victim.  How  delightedthe  poor  child  was,  when  he was  able  to  get  permission  to  come  toMont-Louis  with  Madame  de Boufflers,  to ask  Thérèse  for somethingto  eat,  and  to  put a little  nourishment  into  his  famished  stomach!How I deplored,  in  my  own  heart,  the  miseries  of greatness,  whenI saw  the  only  heir  of  so  large  an  estate,  of  so  great  a  name,  of  somany  titles  and  dignities,  devour  with  the  greediness  of  a  beggar  asorry  morsel  of bread.  But it was  no  use  for me  to  say or  do anything;the physician  triumphed,  and  the child  starved.The  same  confidence  in  quacks,  which  caused  the  death  of  thegrandson,  dug the  grave  of the  grandfather,  and,  in addition  to  this,he was  weak-minded  enough  to  attempt  to  conceal  from  himself  theinfirmities  of  old  age.  M.  de  Luxembourg  suffered  at  times  frompains  in  his  great  toe;  he  had  an  attack  while  at  Montmorency,: which  prevented  him  from  sleeping,  and  made  him  somewhat  fever-ish.  I ventured  to  pronounce  the  word  “gout”;  Madame  de Luxem-bourg  scolded  me.  The  Maréchal’s  valet  de chambre  and  surgeon  de-clared  that  it  was  not  the  gout,  and  proceeded  to  dress  the  partafflicted  with  some  healing  ointment.  Unfortunately,  the  painabated,  and,  when  it returned,  recourse  was  invariably  had  to  thesame  remedy  which  had  previously  given  relief;  his  constitutionbroke  up,  his  sufferings  increased,  and  the  remedies  in  proportion.Madame  de  Luxembourg,  who  at  last  saw  that  it  was  the  gout,opposed  this  senseless  treatment.  They  afterwards  concealed  his con-dition  from  her,  and  he  died  at  the  end  of a  few  years,  through  hisown  fault  and  his  persistent  efforts  to  cure  himself.  But  let  me  notso  far  anticipate  misfortunes;  how  many  others  have  I to  relate  be-fore  I come  to  that!It  is  strange  by what  fatality  all  that  I could  say  or  do  seemeddoomed  to  displease  Madame  de  Luxembourg,  even  when  I wasexceedingly  anxious  to  preserve  her  goodwill.  The  blows  which  M.de Luxembourg  sustained  one  after  another  only made  me  more  at-tached  to  him,  and  consequently  to  Madame  de  Luxembourg;  forthey always  seemed  to me  so  sincerely  united,  that the feelings  whichI entertained  for  the  one  naturally  extended  to  the  other.  M.  leMaréchal  was  getting  old.  His  constant  attendance  at  Court,  the7ANTAGONISM  OF  ABBÉ  DE  BOUFFLERS571duties  entailed  by it, the  continual  hunting-expeditions,  above  all,the  fatigues  of  his  office  during  the  three  months  he  was  on  duty,would  have  required  the  wigour  of  a  young  man,  and I no  longersaw  anything  which  could  keep  up  his  strength  in  the  positionwhich  he occupied.  Since  his dignities  would  be distributed  amongstothers,  and  his  name  would  become  extinct  after  his  death,  therewas  little  need  for  him  to  continue  a  laborious  life,  the  chief  objectof  which  had  been  to  secure  the  Prince’s  favour  for  his  children.One  day, when  we  three  were  alone,  and  he was  complaining  of thefatigue  of his  Court  duties  like  a  man  disheartened  by his  losses,  Iventured  to  speak  to  him  of  retiring,  and  to  give  him  the  advicewhich  Cineas  gave  to  Pyrrhus.  He  sighed,  but  made  no  decidedanswer.  But,  the  very  first  time  she  saw  me  alone,  Madame  de Lux-embourg  scolded  me  severely  for  this  advice,  which  seemed  to  me  tohave  alarmed  her.  She  added  a  remark,  the  justice  of  which  I felt,and  which  made  me  abandon  the  idea  of ever  referring  to  the  sametopic  again;  that  the  habit  of  living  so  long  at  the  Court  had  be-come a real  necessity;  that,  even  at  that  moment,  it was  a  diversionfor  M.  de  Luxembourg;  and  that  the  retirement  which  I recom-mended  to  him  would  not  be  so  much a rest  for  him  as  an  exile,in  which  idleness,  weariness,  and  grief  would  soon  put  an  end  tohis  life.  Although  she  must  have  seen  that  she  had  convinced  me,although  she  could  depend  upon  the  promise  which  I made  andkept,  she never  seemed  to  me  quite easy  in regard  to  the  matter,  andI remember  that,  since  that  time,  my #éte-a-tétes  with  M. le Maréchalwere  less frequent  and  were  nearly  always  interrupted.While  my  awkwardness  and  ill-luck  thus  united  to  injure  me  inher  opinion,  the  people  of whom  she  saw  most,  and  for  whom  sheentertained  the  greatest  affection,  did  not  promote  my  interests  inthat  quarter.  The  Abbé  de  Boufflers,  especially,  who  was  as  brilliantas  a  young  man  could  possibly  be, never  seemed  particularly  well-disposed  towards  me;  not  only is he  the  only  person,  in  Madame  laMaréchale’s  circle,  who  has  never  shown  me  the  slightest  marks  ofattention,  but  I fancied  that  I observed  that,  after  each  of  his  visitsto  Montmorency,  I lost  ground  with  her.  Certainly,  however,  it istrue  that,  without  any  attention  on  his  part,  the  mere  fact  of  hispresence  was  sufficient  to  account  for  it, so  dull  and  heavy  did  my572THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUclumsy  spropositi  * appear  by the side  of his graceful  and refined  wit.During  the  first  two  years,  his  visits  to  Montmorency  had  been  veryrare;  and,  thanks  to  the  indulgence  of Madame  la Marquise,  I hadheld  my  ground  tolerably  well;  but,  as  soon  as  he made  his  appear-ance  with  tolerable  regularity,  I was  crushed  beyond  hope  of  re-covery.I should  have  liked  to  take  refuge  under  his  wing,  and  to  makehim  my  friend;  but  the  same  awkwardness  which  made  his  favoura  necessity  to  me  prevented  me  from  gaining  it;  and  my  maladroitefforts  in  that  direction  ended  by  completely  ruining  me  withMadame  la Maréchale,  without  being  of any  service  to  me  in regardto  him.  With  his  intellect,  he  might  have  succeeded  in  everything;but  his  total  incapacity  for  steady  application,  and  his  taste  foramusement  only  permitted  him  to  acquire  imperfect  accomplish-ments  of  every  description.  By  way  of  compensation,  these  attain-ments  were  extensive;  and  that  is all  that  is necessary  in  the  greatworld  in which  he is anxious  to  shine.  He  can  compose  pretty  littlepoems,  write  pretty  little  notes,  can  play a little  on  the  cithern,  anddaub a little  in  pastil.  He  undertook  to  paint  Madame  de  Luxem-bourg’s  portrait;  the  result  was  horrible.  She  declared  that  it  wasnot  in the  least  like  her,  which  was  quite  true.  The  traitorous  Abbéconsulted  me;  and  I, like  a  fool  and a liar,  said  that  it was  like  her.I wanted  to  flatter  the  Abbé;  but  I did  not  flatter  Madame  la Maré-chale,  who  scored  it down  against  me;  and  the  Abbé,  after  his  trickhad  succeeded,  laughed  at  me.  I learned,  through  the  result  of mytardy  first  attempt,  never  again  to  attempt  to  play the  sycophant  andflatterer,  invita  Minerva.”My ability  lay in telling  useful  but  hard  truths  to  mankind  with  acertain  amount  of energy  and  courage;  and  I ought  to  have  stoppedat  that.  I was  not  born,  I will  not  say  to  flatter,  but  to  praise.  Theawkwardness  of  the  praises  which  I attempted  to  bestow  has  donewe  more  harm  than  all  the  severity  of  my  reproaches.  I will  herequote a terrible  example  of this, the consequences  of which  have  nott  Absurdities,  blunders.Malgré  Minerve:  specially  applied  to  a  poet,  who  persists  in writing  verses,  inspite  of his  having  no  talent  for  it.>jM.  DE  CHOISEUL573only  decided  my  destiny  for  the  rest  of  my  life,  but  will  idecide  my  reputation  among  posterity.When  the  family  stayed at  Montmorency,  M.  de  Choiseul  some-times  came  to  supper  at  the  château.  He  came  one  day as  I was  leav-ing it. They  spoke  about  me:  M.  de  Luxembourg  told  him  the  his-tory  of my  relations  with  M. de Montaigu  at  Venice.  M. de Choiseulsaid  that  it was  a  pity  that  I had  abandoned  the  diplomatic  career,and  that,  if I was  inclined  to  enter  it again,  it would  give him  greatpleasure  to  find me  employment.  M.  de Luxembourg  repeated  this tome:  as  I was  not  accustomed  to  be  spoiled  by ministers,  I felt  it allthe  more;  and  J am  not  at  all  sure  that,  if my  health  had  permittedme  to  entertain  the  idea,  I should  not  have  made a fool  of  myselfagain,  in  spite  of my  resolutions.  Ambition  only  took  possession  ofme  during  the  brief  intervals  when  all  other  passions  left  me  alone;but  one  of  these  intervals  would  have  been  sufficient  to  enlist  mysympathies  again.  This  kindly  intention  on  M.  de  Choiseul’s  partgained  my  affection  and  strengthened  the  esteem  which  some  of theproceedings  of his  ministry  had  caused  me  to  entertain  for  his  tal-ents:  the  pacte  de famille,®  in  particular,  appeared  to  me  to  indicatea  statesman  of the  first  rank.  He  gained  my  esteem  still  more  fromthe  poor  opinion  I  had  of  his  predecessors,  not  even  exceptingMadame  de  Pompadour,  whom  I looked  upon  as  a sort  of  PrimeMinister;  and  when  it was  currently  reported  that  one  of those  twowould  drive  out  the  other,  I believed  that  I was  offering  prayers  forthe  glory  of France  when  I prayed  for  the  triumph  of M.  de  Choi-seul.  I had  always  had a feeling  of  antipathy  against  Madame  dePompadour  even  when I saw  her,  before  she  had  risen  to  power,  atMadame  de  Popliniére’s,  while  she  was  still  Madame  d’Etioles.Since  then,  I had  been  annoyed  by  her  silence  in  the  matter  ofDiderot,  and  the  manner  in  which  she  had  behaved  towards  me,both  in regard  to  the  Fétes  de Ramire,  the  Muses  Galantes,  and  theDevin  du Village,  which  had  by no  means  brought  me  advantagesproportionate  to  its  success:  in  all  these  cases  I  had  found  verylittle  inclination  on  her  part  to  oblige  me:  this,  however,  did  notprevent  the  Chevalier  de  Lorenzi  from  proposing  to  me  to  write€  A  treaty  of  defensive  alliance,  concluded  in  1761,  between  the  two  branchesof  the  house  of  Bourbon  in  France  and  Spain.574THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsomething  in  praise  of  this  lady,  at  the  same  time  giving  me  tounderstand  that  it might  be  useful  to  me.  This  proposal  made  methe  moré  indignant,  as  I saw  clearly  that  it did  not  come  from  him:I knew  well  that  this  man,  who  was  totally  insignificant  in  him-self,  never  thought  or  acted  except  as  he  was  prompted  by others.I am  not  sufficiently  Bea of  putting  restraint  upon  myself  tohave  heen  able  to  conceal  from  him  my  contempt  for his proposition,or,  from  anyone  else,  my  dislike  for  the  favourite,  which  I am  con-vinced  she  knew;  all  these  considerations  united  my  self-interest  tomy  natural  inclination,  in the prayers  which  I offered  for the  successof  M.  de  Choiseul.  Already  prepossessed  in  favour  of  his  abilities,which  was  the extent  of my  acquaintance  with  him;  full  of gratitudefor  his  good  intentions;  in  addition,  totally  ignorant,  in  my  retire-ment,  of his tastes  and  manner  of life,  I regarded  him  by anticipationas  the  avenger  of  the  public  and  myself;  and,  as  I was  at  the  timeengaged  in  putting  the  finishing  touches  to  the  “Contrat  Social,”  Iset  down,  in  a  single  passage,  my  opinion  of  preceding  ministries,and  of  that  which  was  beginning  to  eclipse  them  all.  On  this  oc-casion,  I  offended  against  my  most  firmly  established  principle;and,  further,  I did  not  reflect  that,  when  one  desires  to  praise  orblame  strongly  in  the  same  article,  without  mentioning  names,  itis necessary  to  apportion  the  praise  to  those  for  whom  it is intendedin  such  a  manner  that  the  most  sensitive  amour-propre  cannotpossibly  misunderstand  it. In regard  to  this, I felt  so  foolishly  secure,that  it never  even  occurred  that  it could  be  possible  for  anyone  tobe  mistaken.  It will  soon  be  seen  whether  I was  right.It had  been  one  of my  misfortunes  to  be  always  connected  withauthoresses.  I thought  that,  amongst  the  great,  I should  at  least  befree  from  this.  Not  at  all;  my  misfortune  still  pursued  me.  As  faras  I know,  Madame  de  Luxembourg  was  never  attacked  by  thiscomplaint;  but  Madame  de  Boufflers  was.  She  wrote  a  tragedyin  prose,  which  was  at  first  read,  sent  round,  and  praised  up  inM.  le  Prince  de  Conti’s  circle;  and,  not  satisfied  with  all  theseeulogies,  she  wanted  to  ask  my  opinion  also,  in  order  to  securemy  approbation.  I gave  it, and  praised  the  work  in  the  moderateterms  which  it  deserved.  I also  informed  her,  as  I thought  wasonly  right,  that  her  piece,  entitled  L’Esclave  Généreux,  had  a  greatMADAME  DU  DEFFAND575resemblance  to  a  little  known  English  play,  which,  however,  hadbeen  translated  into  French,  called  Oroonoko."  Madame  de Boufflersthanked  me  for  my  opinjpn,  but  assured  me  that  her  piece  had  notthe  least  resemblance  to  the  English.  I have  never  mentioned  thisplagiarism  to  a  single  person  except  herself,  and  then  only  to  fulfila  duty  which  she  herself  had  imposed  upon  me;  but  this  has  notprevented  me  from  often  thinking  since  then  of  the  manner  inwhich  Gil  Blas  fulfilled  his  duty  to  the  preaching  archbishop,  andits  results.Without  mentioning  the  Abbé  de  Boufflers,  who  was  not  fondof  me,  and  Madame  de  Boufflers,  whom  I  had  offended  in  amanner  which  women  and  authors  never  forgive,  none  of Madamela  Maréchale’s  other  friends  seemed  particularly  inclined  to  be-come  mine.  I may  mention  M.  le  Président  Hénault,  who,  as  amember  of  the  society  of  authors,  was  not  free  from  their  faults;Madame  du Deffand  and  Mademoiselle  de Lespinasse,  both  of themon  intimate  terms  with  Voltaire  and  D’Alembert,  with  the  latterof  whom  Mademoiselle  de  Lespinasse  finally  lived—of  course,  ina  most  respectable  manner:  let  no  one  imagine  that  I mean  any-thing  else.  I had  begun  by feeling a lively  interest  in  Madame  duDeffand,  whom  I pitied  on  account  of the  loss  of her  eyesight;  buther  manner  of  living,  so  entirely  contrary  to  mine,  that  she  got  upabout  the  time  that  I  went  to  bed;  her  extravagant  passion  fortrifling  displays  of  wit;  the  importance  which  she  attached  to  themost  contemptible  rags  which  appeared,  whether  complimentary  orabusive;  the  despotic  violence  of  her  oracular  utterances;  her  ex-aggerated  prepossessions  in  favour  of  or  against  everything,  whichprevented  her  from  speaking  of  any  subject  except  hysterically;her  incredible  prejudices,  her  unconquerable  obstinacy,  her  unrea-soning  enthusiasm  to  which  she  was  carried  away  by the  stubborn-ness  of  her  impassioned  judgments—all  this  soon  discouragedme  from  the  attentions  which  I was  ready  to  pay  her.  I neglectedher;  she  noticed  it.  This  was  sufficient  to  put  her  in  a  rage;  and,although  I felt  how  greatly  a  woman  of  this  character  was  to  befeared,  I preferred  to  expose  myself  to  the  scourge  of  her  hatredthan  to  that  of her  friendship.7  By T.  Southerne  (1696),  founded  upon  a  novel  by Mrs.  Aphra  Behn.576THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUAs  if it was  not  enough  for me  to  have  so  few  friends  in Madamede  Luxembourg’s  circle,  I had  enemies  in  her  family—only  one,certainly,  but one  who, in the  situation  in which  I now  found  myself,is equal  to  a  hundred.  It  was  certainly  not  her  brother,  M.  le  Ducde  Villeroy,  who  not  only  came  to  see  me,  but  invited  me  severaltimes  to  Villeroy;  and,  as  I had  answered  this  invitation  with  allpossible  politeness  and  respect,  he  had  taken  this  vague  answer  asan  acceptance,  and  arranged  that  M.  and  Madame  de Luxembourgshould  pay  him  a  fortnight’s  visit,  on  which  it  was  proposed  thatI should  accompany  them.  As  the  care  which  my  health  requiredtendered  it dangerous  for  me  at  that  time  to  change  my  quarters,[ begged  M. de Luxembourg  to be good enough  to  make  my  excuses.It  may  be  seen  from  his  answer  (Packet  D,  No.  3)  that  he  didso  with  the  best  grace  in  the  world;  and  M.  le  Duc  de  Villeroy’skindness  towards  me  showed  no  alteration.  His  nephew  and  heir,the  young  Marquis  de  Villeroy,  did  not  share  the  kindly  feelingswith  which  his  uncle  honoured  me,  nor,  I must  confess,  did  I enter-tain  the  same  respect  for  him.  His  frivolous  behaviour  made  himunendurable  to  me,  and  my  coldness  brought  upon  me  his  dislike.One  evening,  at  table,  he  wantonly  insulted  me;  I came  out  verybadly,  because  I am  a  fool  and  utterly  without  presence  of  mind,and  anger,  instead  of sharpening  the  little  ready  wit  I may  possess,entirely  deprives  me  of  it.  I had  a  dog  which  had  been  given  tome  when  it was  quite  a  puppy,  almost  immediately  after  my  arrivalat  the  Hermitage,  and  which  I  had  named  “Duke.”  This  dog,which,  although  no  beauty,  was  of  an  uncommon  breed,  I  hadmade  my  friend  and  companion;  and  it  certainly  deserved  thename  better  than  the  majority  of those  who  had  assumed  it. It hadbecome  a  favourite  at  the  chateau  of  Montmorency,  owing  to  itssensible  and  affectionate  disposition,  and  the  attachment  whichwe  felt  for  each  other;  but,  in  a  moment  of  foolish  weakness,  Ihad  changed  its name  to  “Turk,”  as  if there  had  not  been  hundredsof  dogs  called  “Marquis,”  without  any  Marquis  being  offended  atit.  The  Marquis  de  Villeroy,  who  knew  of  this  change  of  name,pressed  me  so  hard  upon  the  point  that  I was  obliged  to  relate,  inthe  presence  of the  company,  what  I had  done.  What  gave  offencein  the  story  was,  not  so  much  that  I had  given  the  dog  the  nameKINDNESS  OF  MME.  DE  LUXEMBOURGMET;577of  “Duke,”  as  that  I had  afterwards  altered  it.  The  worst  thingwas,  that  there  were  several  dukes  present,  amongst  others,  M.  deLuxembourg  and  his  son.  The  Marquis  de  Villeroy,  who  was  aduke  presumptive,  and  Bears  that  title  at  the  present  day,  cruellyenjoyed  the  embarrassing  position  in  which  he had  placed  me,  andthe  effect  produced  by it.  I was  assured,  the  next  day,  that  his  aunthad  severely  scolded  him;  and  it  may  be  imagined  how  far  this  ,reprimand,  if he really  received  it, must  have  improved  my  relationswith  him.My  only  protector  against  all  these  enemies,  both  at  the  Hôtelde  Luxembourg  and  at  the  Temple,  was  the  Chevalier  de  Lorenzi,who  professed  to  be my  friend;  but  he  was  still  more  the  friend  ofD’Alembert,  under  whose  wings  he  passed  amongst  the  ladies  fora  great  geometrician.  He  was,  besides,  the  gallant,  or  rather  thetame  cat,  of  Madame  la  Comtesse  de  Boufflers,  who  was  herself  agreat  friend  of D’Alembert;  the  Chevalier  de  Lorenzi’s  very  exist-ence  and  thoughts  depended  upon  her.  Thus,  far from  my  possessingany  outside  counterpoise  to  my  folly  which  could  keep  me  inMadame  de  Luxembourg’s  good  graces,  all  who  approached  herseemed  to  work  together  to  injure  me  in  her  esteem.  However,  be-sides  her  kindness  in  undertaking  to  see  after  “Emile,”  she  showedme  an  additional  mark  of favour  and  sympathy,  which  caused  me  tobelieve  that,  even  if she  was  getting  tired  of me,  she  still  preserved,and  would  always  preserve,  the  friendship  which  she  had  so  oftenpromised  to  entertain  for  me  to  the  end  of  my  life.As  soon  as  I thought  that  I could  reckon  upon  this  feeling  onher  part,  I began  to  relieve  my  heart  by making  a  confession  of allmy  faults  to  her;  since  it is an  inviolable  principle  with  me,  to  showmyself  to  my  friends  exactly  as  I am,  neither  better  nor  worse.  Iinformed  her  of  my  relations  with  Thérése,  and  all  their  conse-quences,  not  omitting  the  manner  in  which  I had  disposed  of  mychildren.  She  received  my  confessions  kindly,  even  too  kindly,  andspared  me  the  censure  which  I  deserved;  and  what  especiallytouched  me  was  the  kindness  which  she  lavished  upon  Thérése:she  gave  her  little  presents,  sent  for  her,  encouraged  her  to  go  and.see  her, received  her most  tenderly,  and  frequently  kissed  her  beforeeverybody.  The  poor  girl  was  transported  with  joy  and  gratitude,578THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUwhich  I certainly  shared;  the  kindness  with  which  M.  and  Madamede  Luxembourg  overwhelmed  me  through  her  touched  me  morethan  that  which  they  showed  to  me  directly.For  a  considerable  time  matters  remained  on  this  footing;  butat  last  Madame  la  Maréchale  pushed  her  kindness  so  far  as  to  ex-press  a  wish  to  remove  and  adopt  one  of  my  children.  She  knewthat  I had  put  a monogram  upon  the  eldest  one’s  linen;  she  askedme  for  the  duplicate  of  it, and  I gave  it to  her.  In  the  search  sheemployed  La  Roche,  her  valet  de chambre  and  confidential  servant,whose  inquiries  proved  useless;  he  found  out  nothing,  althoughonly  twelve  or  fourteen  years  had  elapsed;  if  the  registers  of  theFoundling  Hospital  had  been  regularly  kept,  or  if  the  inquiryhad  been  properly  conducted,  the  mark  ought  not  to  have  been  sodifficult  to  discover.  However  that  may  be, I was  less  annoyed  at  hisfailure  than  I should  have  been,  if I had  followed  the  child’s  careerfrom  its  birth.  If, with  the  assistance  of  the  information  afforded,any  child  had  been  presented  to  me  as  mine,  the  doubt,  whether  itreally  was  so,  or  whether  another  had  been  substituted  for  it, wouldhave  tormented  my  heart  with  uncertainty,  and  I should  not  haveenjoyed  in  all  its  charm  the  true  feeling  of nature,  which,  in  orderto  be  kept  alive,  must  be  kept  up  by constant  familiarity  at  leastduring  infancy.  The  continued  absence  of  a  child  whom  one  doesnot  yet  know,  weakens  and  at  last  utterly  destroys  the  feelings  of aparent;  it is impossible  to  love  a  child  which  has  been  put  out  tonurse  as  much  as  one  which  is brought  up  at  home.  This  reflectionmay  extenuate  the  effects  of  my  faults,  but  only  aggravates  theirorigin.It may  be useful  to  observe  that,  through  the  medium  of Thérése,this  same La Roche  made  the  acquaintance  of Madame  le Vasseur,whom  Grimm  still  kept  at  Deuil,  close  to  La  Chevrette,  and  onlya  little  distance  from  Montmorency.  After I left,  it was  through  M.la  Roche  that  I continued  to  send  this  woman  the  money  which  Inever  ceased  to  supply  her with, and  I believe  that  he very  often  tookpresents  to  her  from  Madame  la Maréchale;  thus,  although  she  wasalways  complaining,  she  was  certainly  not  to  be pitied.  In regard  toGrimm,  as  I am  not  fond  of speaking  of people  whom I feel  boundto  hate,  I never  mentioned  him  to  Madame  de  Luxembourg  unlessARRANGES  TO  PUBLISH  “EMILE”579I was  obliged  to;  but  she  several  times  introduced  his name  withouttelling  me  what  she  thought  of  him,  and  without  ever  letting  mediscover  whether  she  was  acquainted  with  the  man  or  not.  As  re-serve  with  those  whom  Istove,  and  who  are  perfectly  frank  with  me,is by no  means  to  my  taste,  especially  in what  concerns  them.  I havesometimes  reflected  since  then  upon  the  reserve  which  she  showedtowards  me,  but only when  such  reflection  has been  rendered  naturalby other  events.After  having  waited  a  considerable  time  since  I  had  handed“Emile”  to  Madame  de  Luxembourg,  without  hearing  anythingabout  it, I at  length  was  informed  that  an  arrangement  had  beenmade  at  Paris  with  the  bookseller  Duchesne,  and  by  him  withNéaulme  of Amsterdam.  Madame  de Luxembourg  sent  me  the  twocopies  of  the  agreement  with  Duchesne  to  sign.  I recognised  thewriting  as  that  of M.  de Malesherbes’  letters,  which  he did  not  writehimself.  The  certainty  that  my  agreement  had  been  concludedwith  the consent  and  under  the  eyes  of the  magistrate  made  me  signit with  confidence.  Duchesne  gave  me  6,000  francs  for  the  manu-script,  half  down,  and, I think,  100  to  200  copies.  Having  signed  thetwo  documents,  I sent  them  both  to  Madame  de  Luxembourg,  inaccordance  with  her  desire;  she  gave  one  to  Duchesne  and  kept  theother  herself,  instead  of  sending  it  back  to  me,  and  I have  neverseen  it again.Although  my  acquaintance  with  M. and  Madame  de Luxembourghad  interrupted  my  plans  of retirement,  they  had  not  caused  me  torenounce  them  altogether.  Even  at  the  time  when  I was  most  infavour  with  Madame  la  Maréchale,  I always  felt  that  nothing  butmy  sincere  attachment  to  her  and  her  husband  could  render  theirsurroundings  endurable;  my  whole  difficulty  was  to  unite  this attach-ment  with  a  manner  of life  more  agreeable  to  my  taste  and  less  in-jurious  to  my  health,  which  the  perpetual  restraint  and  the  latesuppers  continually  undermined,  in  spite  of all  the  care  which  theytook  to  avoid  exposing  me  to  any  risk;  for,  in  this  respect,  as  ineverything  else,  they  showed  the  greatest  possible  attention.  For  in-stance,  every  evening,  after  supper,  M.  le  Maréchal,  who  went  tabed  early,  never  failed  to  take  me  away  with  him,  whether  I likedit or  not,  in  order  that  I might  do  the  same.  It  was  not  until  just580THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUbefore  my  catastrophe  that  he ceased,  for  some  reason  unknown  tome,  to  show  me  this  attention.Even  before  I perceived  any  coldness  on  the  part  of  Madame  laMaréchale,  I was  anxious,  in  order  to  avoid  exposing  myself  to  it,to  carry  out  my old  plan;  but,  as  I was  without  the  means,  I wasobliged  to  wait  until  the  agreement  of “Emile”  was  concluded,  andin the meantime I put  the  final  touches  to  the  “Contrat  Social,”  andsent  it to  Rey,  fixing  the  price  of  the  manuscript  at  1,000  francs,which  he gave  me.  I ought not  perhaps to  omit  a little  incident  whichhas  reference  to  that  manuscript.  I handed  it,  carefully  sealed,  toDuvoisin,  a  minister  from  the  Pays  de  Vaud,  and  chaplain  at  thehôtel  de  Hollande,  who  sometimes  came  to  see  me,  and  undertookto  forward  it to  Rey,  with  whom  he  was  acquainted.  This  manu-script,  written  in  a  very  fine  hand,  was  very  small,  and  did  not  fillhis  pocket.  However,  as  he  was  passing  the  barrière,’  it  somehowor  other  fell  into  the  hands  of the  clerks,  who,  after  having  openedand  examined  it, afterwards  returned  it to  him,  when  he  claimedit in the  name  of the  Ambassador.  This  gave  him  the  opportunity  ofreading  it himself,  which,  as  he  ingenuously  informed  me,  he  did,at  the  same  time  praising  the work  highly,  without  a  word  of blameor  criticism,  no  doubt  reserving  to  himself  the  right  of playing  thepart  of the  avenger  of Christianity  when  the  work  should  have  ap-peared.  He  resealed  the  manuscript,  and  sent  it to  Rey.  Such  wasessentially  the  story  which  he told  me  in the  letter  in which  he gaveme  an  account  of the  matter,  and  that is all that  I have  heard  about it.Besides  these  two  works  and  my  “Dictionnaire  de  Musique,”  atwhich  I worked  from  time  to  time,  I had  some  other  writings  ofless  importance,  all  ready  for  publication,  which  I intended  to  bringout,  either  separately  or  in  a  general  collection  of  my  works,  if  Iever  undertook  to  produce  one.  The  most  important  of these,  mostof which  are  still  in manuscript  in the  hands  of Du  Peyrou,  was  an“Essai  sur  l’Origine  des  Langues,’  which  I  had  read  to  M.  deMalesherbes  and  the  Chevalier  de  Lorenzi,  who  expressed  his  ap-proval  of it.  I calculated  that  all  these  works  together,  after  all  ex-penses,  would  be worth  to  me  at  least  8,000  or  10,000  francs,  whichI intended  to  sink  in  a  life-annuity  for  myself  and  Thérèse.  After8 The  gate  where  the  offices  of  the  octroi,  or  town  dues,  were.GENEROSITY  OF  HIS  PUBLISHER581  .this,  we  would  go  and  live  together  in  the  corner  of  some  province,where  I would  no  longer  trouble  the  public  with  myself,  or  troublemyself  about  anything  further,  except  how  to  end  my  days  peace-fully,  while  continuing  to do  as  much  good  around  me  as  waspossible,  and  to  write  at  my leisure  the  Memoirs  which I meditated.Such  was  my  scheme,  the  execution  of  which  was  rendered  stilleasier  to  me  by the  generosity  of Rey,  which  I must  not  pass  by insilence.  This  publisher,  of  whom  I heard  so  much  that  was  bad  at  -Paris,  is nevertheless  the only one,  of all those  with  whom  I have  hadanything  to  do, that  I have  always  had  reason  to  be  satisfied  with.®We  certainly  often  quarrelled  about  the  publication  of my  books;  hewas  careless,  and  I was  hasty.  But,  in  financial  matters  and  othersconnected  with  them,  although  I never  had  a  regular  agreementwith  him,  I always  found  him  strictly  honourable.  He  is  also  theonly  one  who  has  openly  admitted  that  he  made  a  good  thing  outof  me;  and  he  has  often  told  me  that  he  owed  his  fortune  to  me,and  offered  to  share  it with  me.  Being  unable  to  show  his  gratitudeto  myself  directly,  he  desired  to  prove  it at  least  in  the  person  ofmy  better-half,  upon  whom  he  settled  an  annuity  of  300  francs,stating  in  the  deed  that  it  was  an  acknowledgment  of  the  advan-tages  he  owed  to  me.  We  settled  the  matter  between  us,  withoutany  show  or  pretentiousness;  and if I had  not  been  the  first  to  leteverybody  know  of it, no  one  would  ever  have  heard  of it.  I was  soaffected  by his behaviour,  that from  that  I became  sincerely  attachedto  him.  Some  time  afterwards,  he  asked  me  to  stand  godfather  toone  of  his  children;  I consented;  and  one  of  my  regrets,  in  thecondition  to  which  I have  been  reduced,  is that  I have  been  deprivedof all  opportunity  of ever  making  my  attachment  of any  service  temy  goddaughter  and  her  parents.  How  is it that  I, who  am  so  grate-ful for  the modest  generosity  of this  publisher,  feel  so  little  gratitudefor  the  noisy  attentions  of  so  many  distinguished  personages,  whoboastfully  fill  the  world  with  an  account  of the  benefits  which  theyclaim  to  have  bestowed  upon  me,  the  results  of which  I have  neverfelt?  Is it their  fault,  or  is it mine?  Is it merely  vanity  on  their  part,>® When’'I  wrote these  lines,  I was  far  from  imagining,  or  conceiving,  much  lesabelieving,  the  frauds  which  I  subsequently  discovered  in  the  printing  of  myworks,  which  he  was  obliged  to  admit.582THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUor  ungratefulness  on  mine?  I ask  the  intelligent  reader  to  considerand  decide  the  matter;  for  myself,  I am  dumb.This  pension  was  a great  assistance  to  Thérése,  and a great  relieffor  me.  But  I was  far  from  desiring  any  direct  profit  for  myselffrom  it, any  more  than  from  any  other  presents  which  she  received.She  has  always  had  the  absolute  disposal  of it.  If  I kept  her  money,I rendered  her  a  faithful  account  of  it,  without  ever  deducting  afarthing  for  our  common  expenses,  even  when  she  was  better  offthan  I was.  “That  which  is mine  is  ours,”  I said  to  her,  “and  thatwhich  is  yours  is  yours.”  I always  behaved,  in  money  matters,  inaccordance  with  this  principle,  which  I often  repeated  to  her.  Thosewho  are  base  enough  to  accuse  me  of accepting  through  her  handswhat  I refused  to  accept  with  my  own,  no  doubt  judged  my  heartby their  own,  and  had  but  little  knowledge  of  me.  I would  gladlyeat  with  her  the  bread  she  may  earn,  but  never  that  which  may  begiven  to  her.  I appeal  to  her  own  testimony  on  this  point,  both  nowand  hereafter,  when,  in the  course  of nature,  she  shall  have  survivedme.  Unfortunately,  she knows  little  about  economy  in anything,  andshe  is  careless  and  extravagant,  not  from  vanity  or  fondness  ofdelicacies,  but  from  sheer  thoughtlessness.  No  one  is perfect  in  thisworld;  and,  since  her  excellent  qualities  must  be counterbalanced,  Iprefer  that  she  should  have  faults  rather  than  vices,  although  thesefaults  are  sometimes  more  prejudicial  to  us  both.  The  efforts  whichI have  made  for  her  sake,  as  formerly  for  mamma’s,  to  put  by alittle  hoard  which  might  some  day  be  useful  to  her,  are  inconceiv-able;  but  it  has  always  been  labour  lost.  Neither  of  them  everreckoned  with  herself;  and,  in  spite  of all  my endeavours,  all  that  Iearned  was  immediately  gone.  Notwithstanding  the  simplicity  withwhich  she  dresses,  Rey’s  pension  has  never  been  sufficient,  and  Ihave  always  been  obliged  to  assist  her  every  year.  Neither  she  norI was  born  to  be rich,  and  I certainly  do  not  reckon  that  as  one  ofour  misfortunes.The  “Contrat  Social”  was  printed  with  little  delay.  It  was  dif-ferent  with  “Emile,”  for  the  publication  of which  I was  obliged  towait,  before  I could  carry  out  my  project  of  retirement.  From  timeto  time,  Duchesne  sent  me  specimens  of  type  to  choose  from;  andafter  I had  made  a  choice,  instead  of putting  the  work  in  hand,  hePUBLICATION  OF  “EMILE”  DELAYED583sent  me  fresh  ones.  When  we  had  at  last  settled  upon  the  size  andtype,  and  several  sheets  had  already  been  struck  off, in consequenceof  a  slight  alteration  which  I made  in  a  proof  he  began  all  overagain,  and, at  the  end  of six months,  we  were  not  so  far  advanced  ason  the first  day. While  these  experiments  were  going on,  I discoveredthat  the  book  was  being  printed  in  France  as  well  as  in  Holland,and  in two  separate  editions.  What  could  I do?  The  manuscript  wasno  longer  under  my  control.  Far  from  having  had  anything  to  dowith  the  French  edition,  I had  always  opposed  it;  but,  at  length,since  it was  being  brought  out,  whether I liked  it or  not,  and  servedas  a  model  for  the  other,  I was  obliged  to  glance  over  it and  lookat  the  proofs,  to  prevent  my  work  being  mutilated  and  disfigured.Besides,  the  work  was  being  printed  with  such  definite  approval  onthe  part  of  the  magistrate,  that  the  undertaking  was  in  some  sortunder  his  direction;  he frequently  wrote  to  me,  and  even  came  to  seeme  on  the  subject,  on  a  certain  occasion  of  which  I will  speakpresently.While  Duchesne  proceeded  at a tortoise-pace,  Néaulme,  whomhe  kept  back,  proceeded  even  still  more  slowly.  The  sheets  werenot  sent  to  him  regularly  as  they  were  printed.  He  thought  thatDuchesne,  that  is  to  say  De  Guy,  who  acted  for  him,  was  not  be-having  in good  faith;  and,  seeing  that  the  agreement  was  not  beingcarried  out,  he  wrote  to  me  letter  after  letter  full  of complaints  andgrievances,  which  I could  no  more  remedy  than  my  own.  His  friendGuérin,  who  at  that  time  saw  me  pretty  frequently,  was  alwaystalking  to  me  about  the  book,  but  with  the  greatest  reserve.  He  didand  he  did  not  know  that  it  was  being  printed  in  France;  he  didand  he did  not  know  that  the  magistrate  was  interesting  himself  init;  he  sympathised  with  me  upon  the  embarrassment  the  bookwould  cause  me,  while  at  the  same  time  he  seemed  to  accuse  me  ofimprudence,  without  ever  telling  me  in what  it consisted;  he equivo-cated  and  shuffled  incessantly;  he  seemed  to  talk  only  to  make  metalk.  At  that  time,  I fancied  myself  so  secure,  that  I laughed  at  thecautious  and  mysterious  tone  which  he  adopted  in  the  matter,  asa  habit  contracted  by  constant  intercourse  with  ministerial  andmagisterial  offices.  Feeling  sure  that  everything  connected  with  thework  was  in  order,  firmly  convinced  that  it enjoyed  not  only  the584THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUapproval  and  protection  of  the  magistrate,  but  even  deserved  andhad  obtained  the  favour  of  the  ministry,  I congratulated  myselfupon  my  courage  in  acting  rightly,  and  laughed  at  the  faintheart-edness  of  my  friends,  who  seemed  anxious  about  me.  Duclos  wasamongst  the  number,  and  I confess  that  my  confidence  in  his  up-rightness  and  shrewdness  might  have  alarmed  me  if I had  felt  lessconfidence  in  the  usefulness  of  the  work  and  the  honour  of  itspatrons.  He  came  to  see  me  on  the  part  of M.  Baille,  while  “Emile”was  in  the  press,  and  spoke  to  me  about  it.  I read  to  him  the  “Sa-voyard  Vicar’s  Profession  of  Faith”;  he  listened  to  it  quietly,  and,as  it  seemed  to  me,  with  great  pleasure.  When  I had  finished,  hesaid  to  me:  “What,  citizen!  is  this  part  of  a  book  which  is  beingprinted  in  Paris?”  “Yes,”  I answered;  “and  it was  to  be  printed  atthe  Louvre,  by order  of  the  King.”  “I  admit  it,”  said  he;  “but  bekind  enough  not  to  tell  anyone  that  you  have  read  me  this  extract.”This  singular  way  of  expressing  himself  surprised,  but  did  notalarm  me.  I knew  that  Duclos  saw  a  good  deal  of  M.  de  Males-herbes;  and  I found  it  difficult  to  understand  how  he  could  holdso  different  an  opinion  in  regard  to  the  same  thing.I had  lived  at  Montmorency  for  more  than  four  years,  withouthaving  enjoyed  one  single  day  of good  health.  Although  the  air  isexcellent,  the  water  is bad;  and  this  may  very  well  have  been  oneof  the  causes  which  aggravated  my  usual  complaints.  About  theend  of the  autumn  of  1761 I fell  seriously  ill, and  spent  the  wholewinter  in almost  constant  suffering.  My physical  ailments,  increasedby numerous  uneasinesses,  made  them  still  more  painful  to  me.  Forsome  time  secret  and  gloomy  forebodings  had  been  disturbing  me,although  I did  not  know  to  what  they  referred.  I received  severalcurious  anonymous  letters,  and  even  signed  ones  which  were  equallycurious;  one  from  a  councillor  of  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  who,dissatisfied  with  the  present  constitution  of  affairs,  and  prognosti-cating  no  good  from  its  results,  wished  to  consult  me  as  to  thechoice  of an  asylum  in Geneva  or  Switzerland,  to  which  he and  hisfamily  might  retire;  another  from  M.  de ——,  président  à mortierwho  proposed  to  me  to  draw  up  a  memo-in the  Parliament  of——,randum  and  remonstrances  for  this  Parliament,  which  at  that  timewas  out  of  favour  with  the  Court,  at  the  same  time  offering  toFOREBODINGS585supply  me  with  all  the  materials  and  documents  which  I mightrequire.When  I  am  suffering,  I am  easily  irritated.  This  was  whathappened  when  I  recemed  these  letters,  and  I showed  it  by  myanswers,  in which I flatly refused  to  do what  I was  asked.  I certainlydo  not  reproach  myself  for  refusing,  since  these  letters  might  havebeen  snares  set  for  me  by my  enemies,!°  and  what  I was  asked  to.do  was  opposed  to  the  principles  from  which  I was  still  less  thanever  inclined  to  depart;  but,  when  I might  have  refused  politely,I refused  rudely;  and  therefore  in  that  I was  wrong.The  two  letters  of which  I have  just spoken  will  be found  amongstmy  papers.  The  letter  from  the councillor  did  not  altogether  surpriseme,  because,  in common  with  him  and  many  others,  I thought  thatthe  break  up  of  the  constitution  threatened  France  with  speedydestruction.  The  disasters  of an  unfortunate  war,!!  which  were  allthe  fault  of the  Government;  the  incredible  financial  disorders;  thecontinued  disagreements  in  the  administration,  which  had  hithertobeen  conducted  by two  or  three  ministers  openly  opposed,  and  who,in order  to injure  each  other,  were  running  the kingdom;  the genera}discontent  of  the  people  and  of  all  classes  in  the  State;  the  stub-bornness  of  an  obstinate  woman,  who,  ever  sacrificing  her  intel-lectual  powers,  if she  possessed  any,  to  her  inclinations,  almost  in-variably  kept  the  most  capable  men  out  of  offices,  in  order  to  fillthem  with  those  who  were  her  favourites;  all  these  things  con-tributed  to  justify  the  forebodings  of the  councillor,  the  public,  andmyself.  These  forebodings  several  times  made  me  consider  whetherI should  not  act  wisely  in  seeking  a  refuge  for  myself  outside  thekingdom,  before  the  troubles,  which  seemed  to  threaten  it,  brokeout;  but,  reassured  by my  insignificance  and  peaceful  disposition,I believed  that,  in  the  retirement  in  which  I intended  to  live,  nostorm  could  reach  me.  My  only  regret  was  that,  when  things  werein this  condition,  M. de Luxembourg  undertook  commissions  whichcould  not  fail  to  make  him  disliked  in his government.  I could  havewished  him  to  prepare  a  retreat  for  himself  there,  ready  for  all1  For  instance,  I knew  that  the  President  ofwas  intimately  connectedwith  the  Encyclopaedists  and  the  Holbachians.1  The  Seven  Years’  War.586THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUemergencies,  in case  the  great  machine  should  fall  to  pieces,  whichthere  seemed  reason  to  fear  under  existing  circumstances;  and  itstill  seems  to  me  at  the  present  time  that  there  can  be  no  doubtthat,  if the  reins  of government  had  not  fallen  completely  into  thehands  of one  man,  the  French.monarchy  would  now  be  in  its  lastagonies.While  my  condition  grew  worse,  the  printing  of  “Emile”  pro-ceeded  more  slowly,  and  was  at last entirely  suspended.  I was  unableto  learn  the  reason.  Guy  did  not  condescend  either  to  write  to  meagain  or  to  answer  my  letters.  I  could  not  procure  informationfrom  anyone,  and  knew  nothing  of  what  was  going  on,  M.  deMalesherbes  being  in the country  at  the  time.  No  misfortune,  what-ever  it  may  be,  ever  troubles  or  overwhelms  me,  provided  that  Iknow  in  what  it consists;  but  I am  naturally  afraid  of  darkness;  Idread  and  hate  its  gloomy  appearance;  mystery  always  makes  meuneasy;  it is  too  much  opposed  to  my  disposition,  which  is  frankto  the  verge  of  imprudence.  During  the  daytime,  the  sight  of  themost  hideous  monster  would,  I believe,  alarm  me  but  little;  but  ifI were  to  see  by night  a  figure  in  a  white  sheet,  I should  be  afraid.Thus  my  fancy,  kindled  by  this  prolonged  silence,  busied  itselfin conjuring  up  for  me  a  number  of phantoms.  The  more  I had  atheart  the publication  of my  last and  best  work,  the more  I tormentedmyself  to  find  out  what  could  be  delaying  it; and,  as  I always  wentto  extremes  in  everything,  I saw  in  the  suspension  of  the  printingthe  suppression  of the  book’ Meanwhile,  as  I was  unable  to  imaginethe  reason  or  the  manner  of  this  interruption,  I remained  a  preyto  the  most  cruel  uncertainty.  I wrote  letter  after  letter  to  Guy,  M.de  Malesherbes,  and  Madame  de  Luxembourg;  and  as  no  answerscame  at  all,  or  did  not  come  when  I expected  them,  I was  utterlyconfused  and  almost  beside  myself.  Unfortunately  I heard,  at  thesame  time,  that  Father  Griffet,  a  Jesuit,  had  spoken  of “Emile,”  andhad  even  quoted  passages  from  it. In  a moment  my imagination,  likea  flash  of  lightning,  disclosed  the  whole  iniquitous  mystery;  I sawits progress  as  clearly  and  as  surely  as  if it had  been  revealed  to  me.I imagined  that  the Jesuits,  furious  at  the tone  of contempt  in whichI had  spoken  of their  colleges,  had  got possession  of my  work;  thatit was  they who  were  delaying  its publication;  that,  having  been  in-THE  TeESUITS?AA587formed  by their  friend  Guérin  of  my  present  condition,  and  fore-seeing  my  speedy  death,  of  which  I myself  entertained  no  doubt,their  object  was  to  delay  the printing  until  that  event  occurred,  withthe  intention  of mutilating  and  altering  the  work,  and,  in  order  toserve  their  own  ends,  of attributing  to  me  opinions  totally  differentfrom  my  own.  It is astonishing  what  a  crowd  of facts  and  circum-stances  entered  my  head  to  accommodate  themselves  to  this  madidea,  and  to  give it an  air  of probability—nay,  to  prove  and  demon-strate  its  truth.  I knew  that  Guérin  was  completely  devoted  to  theJesuits.  I attributed  to  them  all  the  friendly  advances  which  he  hadmade  to  me.  I persuaded  myself  that  it was  at  their  instigation  thathe  had  urged  me  to  enter  into  negotiations  with  Néaulme;  that  itwas  through  the  latter  that  they  had  got  hold  of the  first  sheets  ofmy  work;  and  that  they had  subsequently  found  means  to  make  Du-chesne  stop  printing,  and  perhaps  to  get  possession  of  my  manu-script,  in  order  to  work  upon  it  at  their  leisure,  until  my  deathshould  leave  them  free  to  publish  their  travesty  of  it.  I had  alwaysfelt,  in  spite  of  Father  Berthier’s  show  of  affection,  that  the  Jesuitshad  no  love  for me,  not  only as  being  an  Encyclopaedist,  but  also  be-cause  my  views  were  even  more  hostile  to  their  principles  and  influ-ence  than  the  unbelief  of my  colleagues,  since  atheistic  and  religiousfanaticism,  which  approach  closely  in their  common  intolerance,  areeven  capable  of uniting,  as  they have  done  in China,  and  as  they  donow  against  myself;  whereas  rational  and  moral  religion,  whichtakes  away  all  human  control  over  the  conscience,  deprives  of  fur-ther  resource  those  who  claim  that  power.  I knew  that  the  Chancel-lor  also  was  a  great  friend  of the  Jesuits;  I was  afraid  that  the  son,intimidated  by the  father,  might  find  himself  compelled  to  abandonto  them  the  manuscript  which  he  had  taken  under  his  protection.  1even  imagined  that  I could  see  the  effect  of this  abandonment  in thechicanery  which  was  stirred  up  against  me  in regard  to  the  two  firstvolumes,  in  which  fresh  sheets  were  required  for  mere  trifles;  whilethe  two  remaining  volumes,  as  was  well  known,  were  full  of  suchoutspoken  sentiments,  that  it would  have  been  necessary  to  recastthem  entirely,  if they  had  been  criticised  by the  censor  like  the  twofirst.  I knew  besides—and  M.  de  Malesherbes  himself  told  me—that  the  Abbé  de Grave,  who  had  been  charged  with  the  inspection588THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUof this edition,  was  another  partisan  of the Jesuits.  I saw  nothing  butJesuits  everywhere,  without  reflecting  that  they,  on  the  eve  of theirannihilation,  and  fully  occupied  with  their  own  defence,  had  some-thing  else  to  do  than  to  intrigue  against  the  printing  of  a  book  inwhich  they  were`not  concerned.  I am  wrong,  however,  in  saying,“without  reflection”;  I certainly  did  think  of it.  M.  de  Malesherbeshimself  even  took  care  to  make  the  objection,  as  soon  as  he heard  ofmy  fantastic  idea;  but,  owing  to  another  of these  caprices,  to  whicha  man  is subject  who  attempts,  in  the  bosom  of  obscurity,  to  judgeof  secret  and  important  affairs  of  which  he  knows  nothing,  I re-fused  to  believe  that  the  Jesuits  were  in danger,  and  I regarded  suchrumours  as  a  ruse  on  their  part  to  lull  their  adversaries  to  sleep.Their  past  and  ever  consistent  successes  gave  me  so  terrible  an  ideaof their  power,  that  I already  lamented  the  degradation  of the  Par-liament.  I knew  that  M. de Choiseul  had  studied  amongst  the Jesuits,that  Madame  de  Pompadour  was  not  on  bad  terms  with  them,  andthat  their  league  with  the  favourites  and  ministers  had  always  beenconsidered  of  great  service  to  both  parties  against  their  commonenemies.  The  Court  appeared  to  be  neutral;  and  feeling  convincedthat,  if the  society  one  day met  with  a  severe  check,  the  Parliamentwould  never  be  strong  enough  to  give  it, I drew  from  this  inactionon  the part  of the  Court  the  justification  of their  confidence  and  theaugury  of their  triumph.  In  short,  seeing  in  all  the  rumours  of theday nothing  but  a  feint  and  snares  on  their  part,  and  believing  that,in their  position  of security,  they had  time  to  attend  to  everything,  Ihad  no  doubt  that  they would  soon  crush  Jansenism,  the Parliament,.the  Encyclopaedists,  and  all  who  had  not  submitted  to  their  yoke; -and  that,  if they permitted  my  book  to  appear,  it would  not  be untilthey  had  transformed  it  into  a  weapon  for  themselves,  by makinguse  of my  name  in order  to  deceive  my  readers.I felt  that  I was  dying.  I can  scarcely  understand  how  it was  thatmy  extravagant  notions  did  not  prove  my  death-blow,  so  terriblywas  I alarmed  at  the idea that  my  memory  would  be dishonoured  ina  work  which  was  my  best  and  most  worthy  of me.  I never  felt  suchdread  of death;  and  I believe  that,  if I had  died  then,  I should  havedied  in a  state  of utter  despair.  Even  at  the  present  day,  when  I seethe  blackest  and  most  hideous  conspiracy  which  has  ever  been  en-LETTERS  TO  M.  DE  MALESHERBES589tered  into  against  a  man’s  memory  advancing  without  hindrance  toits accomplishment,  I shall die much  more  peacefully, feeling  sure  ofleaving  behind  me  in  my writings  a  witness  in  my  favour  which,`  sooner  or  later,  will  triumph  over  the  conspiracies  of men.[1762.]—M.  de  Malesherbes,  the  witness  and  confidant  of  myagitation,  did  his  utmost  to  calm  it, in  a  manner  which  proved  hisinexhaustible  goodness  of heart.  M.  de  Luxembourg  assisted  in  thisgood  work,  and  went  to  see  Duchesne  several  times,  in order  to  find”out  how  the  edition  was  progressing.  At  last  the  printing  was  re-sumed  and  proceeded  more  rapidly;  and  I have  never  known  whyit had  been  suspended.  M.  de Malesherbes  took  the  trouble  to  cometo  Montmorency  to  calm  my  agitation,  and  he  succeeded.  My  per-fect  confidence  in  his  uprightness,  having  overcome  the  derange-ment  of my  poor  head,  rendered  effectual  every  effort  on  his  part  torestore  its  equilibrium.  After  what  he  had  seen  of my  distress  andfrenzy,  it was  natural  that  he should  consider  that  I greatly  deservedto  be  pitied.  The  talk  of  the  philosophical  cabal,  by which  he  wassurrounded,  repeated  over  and  over  again,  came  back  to  his  mind.When I went  to  live  at  the  Hermitage,  they  publicly  declared,  as  Ihave  already  said,  that  I should  not  be  able  to  stand  it long.  Whenthey  saw  that  I persevered,  they  said  that  it  was  due  to  obstinacy,pride,  and  shame  at  the  idea  of  giving  in,  but  that  I was  reallywearied  to  death,  and  was  very  unhappy.  M.  de  Malesherbes  be-lieved  it and  wrote  to  me.  Feeling  deeply  this  mistake  on  the  part  ofa  man  whom I so  highly  esteemed,  I wrote  to  him  four  letters  oneafter  the  other,  in  which  I explained  the  true  reasons  for  my  con-duct,  and  at  the  same  time  faithfully  described  my  tastes,  my  char-acter,  and  all  the  feelings  of  my  inmost  heart.  These  four  letters,written  offhand,  hurriedly,  with  a  single  stroke  of  the  pen,  andwhich  I never  even  read  over,  are  perhaps  the  only  compositionswhich  I have  ever  written  with  perfect  ease  during  the  whole  of mylife,  and,  what  is even  more  astonishing,  at  a  time  when  I was  suf-fering  deeply  and  was  in a state  of the  utmost  depression.  Feelingmy  strength  giving  way,  I sighed  at  the  thought  that  I was  leavingbehind,  in  the  minds  of  honourable  men,  so  unjust  an  opinion  ofmyself;  and,  by means  of the  sketch  hastily  thrown  off in these  fourletters,  I attempted,  in some  degree,  to  supply  the  place of the  Mem:590THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUoirs  which  I had  proposed  to  write.  These  letters,  which  pleased  M.de  Malesherbes,  and  which  he  showed  to  people  in  Paris,  are  to  acertain  extent  the  summary  of that  which  I here  set  forth  in  detail,and,  on  this  ground,  are  worthy  of  being  preserved.  The  copy  ofthem,  which  he  had  made  at  my  request,  and  which  he  sent  mesome  years  afterwards,  will  be  found  amongst  my  papers.From  that time  the only thing  which  troubled  me,  when  I thoughtof my  approaching  death,  was  the  want  of a  literary  friend  whom  Icould  trust,  in  whose  hands  I could  deposit  my  papers,  so  that,  aftermy  death,  he  might  pick  and  choose  from  them.  After  my  journeyto  Geneva,  I had  become  friendly  with  Mouitou;  I was  fond  of thisyoung  man,  and  should  have  liked  him  to  close  my  eyes.  I told  himof my  desire,  and  I believe  that  he would  have  performed  this  act  ofhumanity  with  pleasure,  if his  affairs  and  his  family  had  permittedhim.  Deprived  of  this  consolation,  I wished  at  least  to  give  him  aproof  of my  confidence,  by sending  him  the  “Savoyard  Vicar’s  Pro-fession  of Faith”  before  it was  published.  He  was  very  pleased  withit; but,  from  the  tone  of his  reply,  he did  not  appear  to  me  to  sharethe  feeling  of confidence,  with  which  at  that  time  I awaited  its  ef-fect.  He  expressed  a  wish  to  have  something  of mine  which  no  oneelse  possessed.  I sent  him  a  “Funeral  Oration  upon  the  late  Duke  ofOrleans,”  which  I had  written  for  the  Abbé  d’Arty,  but  which  hadnot  been  delivered  because,  contrary  to  his expectation,  that  duty hadnot  been  intrusted  to  him.The  printing,  when  it had  once  been  resumed,  was  quietly  con-tinued  and  finished;  and I noticed  as  a  singular  fact,  that,  after  thefresh  sheets,  which  had  been  stringently  exacted  for  the  first  twovolumes,  the  last  two  were  passed  without  a  word,  and  no  objectionof any  kind  was  taken  to  their  contents.  However,  I still  felt  an  un-easiness,  which  I  must  not  omit  to  mention.  After  having  beenalarmed  at  the  Jesuits,  I became  alarmed  at  the  Jansenists  and  phi-losophers.  An  enemy  to  everything  that  comes  under  the  denomina-tion  of  party,  faction,  and  cabal,  I have  never  expected  any  goodtrom  those  who  belong  to  them.  The  “Gossips”  had  left  their  formerabode  some  time  ago,  and  had  established  themselves  so  close  to  me,that,  from  their  room,  it was  possible  to  hear  everything  that  wassaid  either  in  mine  or  on  my  terrace,  and  it was  perfectly  easy  to+fSUSPICION  OB  HIS  NEIGHBORS591climb,  from  their  garden,  the  low  wall  which  separated  it from  myturret.  I had  made  this  turret  my  study,  and  in  it there  was  a  tablecovered  with  proofs  and  sheets  of  “Emile”  and  the  “Contrat  So-cial”;  these  sheets  I stitcfied  together  as  they  were  sent  to  me,  andthus  had  complete  copies  of all  the  volumes  long  before  they  werepublished.  My  thoughtlessness,  carelessness,  and  confidence  in  M.Mathas,  in the  garden  by which  I was  enclosed,  often  made  me  for-get  to  shut  my  turret  at  night,  and  in  the  morning  I found  it wideopen.  This  would  not  have  caused  me  the  least  uneasiness,  had  Inot  fancied  that  I noticed  that  my  papers  had  been  disturbed.  Hav-ing noticed  this  several  times,  I became  more  careful  about  shuttingthe  turret.  The  lock  was  bad, and  the  key would  only turn  half-wayin it.  A more  careful  examination  showed  me  that  my  papers  weredisturbed  even  more  than  when I left  the  door  wide  open.  At  last,one  of my  volumes  disappeared  for a  day and  two  nights,  and  I wasutterly  unable  to find  what  had  become  of it until  the morning  of thethird  day, when  I found  it on  my  table  again.  I neither  felt then, norever  have  felt,  any  suspicion  of  M.  Mathas,  or  his  nephew  M.  Du-moulin,  as  I know  that  both  had a sincere  regard  for  me,  and I feltevery  confidence  in  them.  I began  to  feel  less  sure  about  the  “Gos-sips.”  I knew  that,  although  they  were  Jansenists,  they  had  someconnection  with  D’Alembert  and  lived  in  the  same  house.  Thiscaused  me  some  uneasiness,  and  made  me  more  careful.  I removedmy  papers  to  my  room,  and  entirely  gave  up  visiting  these  people,as  I had  also  heard  that  they had  exhibited  in several  houses  the firstvolume  of  “Emile,”  which  I had  been  imprudent  enough  to  lendthem.  Although  they  continued  to  be  my  neighbours  until  I left,  Iheld  no  further  communication  with  them  from  that  time  forth.=The  “Contrat  Social”  appeared  a  month  or  two  before  “Emile.”Rey, whom  I had  made  promise  never  to  introduce  any  of my  bookssecretly  into  France,  applied  to  the  magistrate  for  permission  to  in-troduce  this  by way  of  Rouen,  to  which  place  he  sent  his  consign-ments  by sea.  He received  no  reply;  his packages  remained  at  Rouenfor  several  months,  when  they  were  sent  back  to  him,  after  an  at-tempt had  been  made  to  confiscate  them;  but  he  created  such  a  dis-turbance  that  they  were  returned  to  him.  Certain  persons,  out  ofcuriosity,  procured  some  copies  from  Amsterdam,  which  circulated592THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAU  .without  making  much  stir.  Mauléon,  who  had  heard  and  even  seensomething  of this, spoke to  me  about  it with  an  air of mystery  whichsurprised  me,  and  would  even  have  made  me  uneasy,  unless,  feelingsure  that  I had  acted  in order  in  everything,  and  had  done  nothingwith  which  I could  reproach  myself,  I had  reassured  myself  by mygrand  principle.  I entertained  no  doubt  that  M.  de  Choiseul,  whohad  already  shown  himself  favourably  disposed  towards  me,  andappreciated  the  eulogy  which  my  esteem  had  caused  me  to  pro-nounce  upon  him  in  this  work,  would  support  me  on  this  occasionagainst  the  illwill  of Madame  de  Pompadour.At  that  time,  I certainly  had  as  much  reason  as  ever  to  reckonupon  the  kindness  of M.  de Luxembourg,  and  his  support  in case  ofnecessity;  for  he  never  gave  me  more  frequent  or  more  touchingproofs  of  his  friendship.  During  his  Easter  visit,  my  melancholystate  of health  did  not  allow  me  to  go  to  the  chateau;  but  he  neverlet a  day pass  without  paying  me a visit,  and,  seeing  chat  my  suffer-ings  were  incessant,  he  at  last  persuaded  me  to  let  him  send  forBrother  Céme.!”  He  brought  him  to  me  himself,  and  had  the  cour-age,  certainly  rare  and  meritorious  in  a  great  nobleman,  to  remainwith  me  during  the  operation,  which  was  a  long  and  painful  one.However,  it was  only  a  question  of  being  probed;  but  I had  neverbeen  able  to  submit  to  it, even  at  the  hands  of  Morand,  who  madethe  attempt  several  times,  but  always  unsuccessfully.  Brother  Côme,whose  skill  and  lightness  of hand  was  unequalled,  at  last  succeededin introducing  a  very  small  probe,  after  having  caused  me  great  suf-fering  for  more  than  two  hours,  during  which  I did  my  utmost  torestrain  my  cries,  to  avoid  distressing  the  tender-hearted  Marquis.On  the  first  examination,  Brother  Côme  thought  he had  discovereda  large  stone,  and  told  me  so;  on  the  second,  he  could  not  find  it.After  having  made  a  second  and  third  examination,  with  a  care  andexactitude  which  made  the  time  seem  very  long,  he  declared  thatthere  was  no  stone  at  all, but  that  the  prostate  gland  was  scirrhousand  abnormally  swollen.  He  found  the  bladder  large  and  in  goodcondition,  and  he ended  by expressing  his opinion  that  I should  suf-Jean  Baseilhac  (1703-1781),  a  great  authority  on  stone  and  diseases  of  thebladder.  He  was  a  member  of the  religious  order,  founded  by Robert  de Molesme,in the  village  of Citeaux,  in  1098.DETERMINES  TO  RETIRE593fer  greatly,  and  that  I should  live  for  a  long  time.  If the  second  prediction  is  fulfilled  as  completely  as  the  first,  my  sufferings  are  notnearly  at  an  end.Thus,  after  having  been  successively  treated  for  so  many  years  forcomplaints  which  I never  had,  I ended  by learning  that  my  malady,incurable  without  being  fatal,  would  last  as  long  as  myself.  My im-agination,  checked  by this  knowledge;  no  longer  presented  to  methe  prospect  of a  cruel  death  in the  agonies  of stone.  I ceased  to  fearthat  the  end  of a  bougie,  which  had  long ago  been  broken  off in theurethra,  had  laid  the  foundation  for  the  formation  of a  stone.  Freedfrom  imaginary  evils,  more  cruel  than  those  which  were  real,  I en.dured  the  latter  more  patiently.  There  is  no  doubt  that,  since  thattime,  I have  suffered  much  less  from  my  malady  than  I had  everdone  before,  and  I never  remember  that  I owe  this  relief  to  M.  deLuxembourg,  without  being  stirred  to  fresh  emotion  when  I thinkof him.Thus  restored,  so  to  speak,  to  life,  and  more  than  ever  occupiedwith  my  plans  for  passing  what  still  remained  of it, I only  waitedfor  the  publication  of  “Emile”  in  order  to  put  them  into  execution.I thought  of  Touraine,  which  I  had  already  visited,  and  whichpleased  me  greatly,  owing  to  the  mildness  of  its  climate  and  thegentleness  of its inhabitants,“La  terra  molle  e  lieta  e  dilettosaSimile  a  se  gli abitator  produce.”  *I had  already  mentioned  my  plan  to  M.  de Luxembourg,  who  en-deavoured  to  dissuade  me  from  it.  I spoke  to  him  of  it again,  as  astep  upon  which  I had  decided.  He  then  proposed  to  me  the  Châ-teau  of Merlou,  fifteen  leagues  from  Paris,  as  a  refuge  which  mightpossibly  suit  me,  where  he and  ħis wife  would  be delighted  to  see  mesettled.  The  proposal  touched  me,  and  made  a  favourable  impressionupon my  mind.  First  of all, it was  necessary  to  see  the  place,  and  weagreed  that  he should  send  his  valet  de chambre  with  a  carriage,  ona  day which  was  fixed  upon,  to  drive  me  there.  On  that  day  I wasvery  unwell,  the  journey  had  to  be  put  off, and  various  disappoint-18  The  country,  agreeable,  fertile,  and  delightful,  produces  inhabitants  likeitself.594THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUments  prevented  the  plan from  being  carried  out.  As  I subsequentlyheard  that  Merlou  belonged,  not  to  M.  de  Luxembourg,  but  to  hiswife,  I had  less  difficulty  in  consoling  myself  for  not  having  gonethere.“Emile”  at  last  appeared,  without  my  having  heard  any  moreabout  fresh  proofs  or  other  difficulties.  Before  its  publication,  M.  deLuxembourg  asked  me  to  return  all  the  letters  from  M.  de  Males-herbes,  which  had  reference  to  the  work.  My  great  confidence  inboth,  my  feeling  of perfect  security,  prevented  me  from  consideringthe  extraordinary,  and  even  alarming,  aspect  of this  request.  I gaveup  the  letters,  with  the  exception  of one  or  two  which  had  inadver-tently  been  left  in  some  books.  Some  time  previously,  M.  de  Males-herbes  had  observed  to  me  that  he would  withdraw  the letters  whichI had  written  to  Duchesne  at  the  time  when  I was  alarmed  aboutthe  Jesuits;  and  I must  confess  that  these  letters  were  not  very  credi-table  to  my  intelligence.  But  I told  him  that  I was  not  desirous  of ap-pearing  better  in  any  respect  than  I really  was,  and  that  he  mightleave  the  letters  with  Duchesne.  I do not  know  whether  he did  so.The  publication  of this  book  did  not  take  place  with  the  outburstof approval  which  had  followed  that  of all my  other  writings.  Neverdid  a  work  meet  with  such  praise  from  private  individuals,  and  solittle  approbation  from  the  public.  What  those  who  were  most  capa-ble  of judging  said  and  wrote  to  me  about  it, confirmed  me  in  theopinion  that  it was  the  best,  as  well  as  the  most  important,  of  mywritings.  But  all this  was  told  me  with  the  most  curious  circumspec-tion,  as  if it had  been  a  matter  of importance  to  keep  all  favourableopinion  of it secret.  Madame  de  Boufflers,  who  declared  to  me  thatthe  author  of  such  a  work  deserved  statues  and  the  homage  of  allmankind,  without  any  ceremony  begged  me,  at  the end  of her  note,to  send  it back  to  her.  D’Alembert,  who  wrote  to  me  to  the  effectthat  the work  decided  my  superiority,  and  was  bound  to  place me  atthe  head  of all men  of letters,  did  not  sign his note,  although  he hadsigned  all  those  which  he  had  previously  written  to  me.  Duclos,  afriend  on  whom  I could  depend,  an  upright  but  cautious  man,  andwho  thought  highly  of the  work,  avoided  expressing  any  opinion  ofit in  writing.  La  Condamine  fell  upon  the  “Profession  of  Faith,”and  beat  about  the  bush.  Clairaut,  in his  letter,  confined  himself  toOPINIONS  ABOUTadEaiEMILE33595the  same  part  of the book,  but  was  not  afraid  to  declare  how  greatlyhe had  been  touched  by reading  it:  he told  me,  in  so  many  words,that  the  perusal  of it had  warmed  his old  soul.  Of  all those  to  whomI sent  my  book,  he was  tfie  only  one  who  told  the  world,  openly  andunreservedly,  how  highly  he  thought  of it.Mathas,  to  whom I had  also  given  a  copy  before  it  was  on  sale,lent  it to  M.  Blaire,  Parliamentary  Councillor,  and  father  of  the  In-tendant  of  Strasburg.  M.  de  Blaire  had  a  country  house  at  Saint-Gratien,  and  Mathas,  who  was  an  old  acquaintance,  sometimes  wentto  see  him  when  he was  able.  He  made  him  read  “Emile”  before  it!came  out.  M.  de  Blaire,  on  giving  it back  to  him,  made  the  follow-ing  remark,  which  was  repeated  to  me  on  the  same  day:  “M.Mathas,  this  is a  very  fine  book;  but  it will  soon  be  spoken  of morethan  is  desirable  for  the  author.”  When  he  repeated  this  to  me,  }merely  laughed,  and  saw  nothing  more  in it than  the  self-importanceof  a  magistrate,  who  makes  a  mystery  of  everything.  All  the  dis-turbing  expressions,  which  were  repeated  to  me,  made  equally  littleimpression  upon  me;  and,  far  from  foreseeing  in  the  least  the  catas-trophe  which  was  close  at  hand,  convinced  of the  beauty  and  useful-ness  of my  work,  certain  that  I was  in  order  in all respects,  sure,  as  Ibelieved  I had  a  right  to  be, of all  the  influence  of Madame  de Lux-embourg,  and  even  of the  favour  of  Ministers,  I congratulated  my-self  upon  the  resolution  which  I had  taken—to  retire  in  the  midstof my  triumphs,  and  when  I had  just  crushed  all  those  who  werejealous  of me.One  thing  alone  alarmed  me  in  regard  to  the  publication  of thework,  not  so  much  out  of consideration  of my  own  safety  as  from  adesire  to  quiet  my  conscience.  At  the  Hermitage  and  at  Mont-morency,  close  to  my  doors,  I had  seen  with  indignation  the  vexa-tious  annoyances  inflicted,  owing  to  the  jealous  care  with  which  thepleasures  of  princes  are  guarded,  upon  the  unfortunate  peasants,who  are  obliged  to  put  up  with  the  damage  caused  to  their  fields  bythe game,  not  venturing  to  protect  themselves  further  than  by mak-ing  a  noise,  and  compelled  to  spend  the  nights  amidst  their  beansand  peas,  beating  kettles,  drums,  and  bells,  to  keep  off  the  wildboars.  A witness  of the  barbarous  severity  with  which  M.  le Comtede  Charolois  caused  these  poor  people  to  be  treated,  I had  made  an596THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUattack  upon  this  cruel  behaviour,  towards  the  end  of “Emile.”  Thiswas  another  violation  of my  principles,  which  has  not  remained  un-punished.  I heard  that  the  officers  of  M.  le Prince  de  Conti  treatedthe  peasants  upon  his  estates  with  hardly  less  cruelty.  I trembled  forfear  that  this  Prince,  towards  whom  I entertained  the  deepest  feel-ings  of  respect  and  gratitude,  might  apply  to  himself-the  attackwhich  a  feeling  of revolted  humanity  had  caused  me  to  make  uponhis  uncle,  and  be  offended  at  it.  However,  as  my  conscience  com-pletely  justified  me  on  this  point,  I quieted  myself  by its  testimony,and  I was  right.  At  least,  I have  never  heard  that  this  great  Princepaid  the  slightest  attention  to  this  passage,  which  was  written  longbefore  I had  the  honour  of his  acquaintance.A few  days before  or  after  the  publication  of my  book—I  do notexactly  remember  the  time—another  work  on  the  same  subject  ap-peared,  taken  word  for  word  from  my  first  volume,  with  the  excep-tion  of a  few  platitudes,  scattered  over  the  extract.  This  book  borethe  name  of  a  Genevese,  named  Balexsert;  and,  according  to  thetitle, it had  gained  the prize at the Haarlem  Academy.  I easily under-stood  that  this  Academy  and  this  prize  had  been  quite  recentlyfounded,  in order  to  disguise  the plagiarism  in the eyes  of the public;but  I also  saw  that  there  must  have  been  some  previous  intriguing,which  I was  at  a  loss  to  understand,  either  through  the  communica-tion  of  my  manuscript,  without  which  the  theft  would  have  beenimpossible,  or  for  the  purpose  of establishing  the  story  of this  pre-tended  prize,  for  which  it had  been  necessary  to  find  some  founda-tion.  It was  not  until  several  years  afterwards  that  I penetrated  themystery,  in  consequence  of  a  word  which  D’lvernois  let  fall,  andsaw,  as  it were  between  the  lines,  who  it was  that  had  drawn  M.Belexsert  into  the affair.The  dull  murmur  which  precedes  the  storm  began  to  make  itselfheard.  All  keen-witted  persons  saw  clearly  that,  in  regard  to  mybook  and  myself,  some  plot  was  brewing,  which  would  soon  ex-plode.  As  for me,  my  feeling  of security  and  stupidity  were  so  great,that, far from  having  any  idea  of my  misfortune,  I did  not  even  sus-pect  the  cause,  after  I had  felt  the  effects  of it. My opponents  beganby cleverly  spreading  the  idea  that,  while  the  Jesuits  were  severelytreated,  no  favouritism  could  be  shown  towards  books  and  authorsALARMING  RUMOURS597who  attacked  religion.  I was  reproached  for having  put  my  name  to“Emile,”  as  if  I had  not  put  it  to  all  my  other  writings,  againstwhich  nothing  had  been  said.  It  seemed  as  if people  were  afraid  ofbeing  forced  to  take  ceftain  steps  which  they  would  regret,  ‘butwhich  circumstances  rendered  necessary,  and  to  which  my  impru-dence  had  given  occasion.  These  rumours  reached  my  ears,  butcaused  me  scarcely  any  uneasiness.  It never  even  occurred  to  me  thatin the whole  affair  there  could  be anything  which  personally  affectedme—me,  who  felt  myself  so  completely  beyond  reproach,  so  stronglysupported,  and  so  entirely  in  order  in  all  respects,  and  who  had  nofear  that  Madame  de Luxembourg  would  leave  me  in  difficulties  onaccount  of  an  error,  which,  if it had  been  committed,  was  entirelydue  to  her.  But,  as  I knew  the  usual  course  of things  in  similar  cases,that  it is the custom  to  rage  against  the  booksellers  while  the  authorsate  spared,  I was  not  without  some  uneasiness  in  regard  to  poorDuchesne,  if M.  de  Malesherbes  should  abandon  him.I remained  calm.  The  rumours  increased  and  soon  assumed a dif-ferent  character.  The  public,  and,  above  all,  the  Parliament,  ap-peared  irritated  by my  calmness.  At the end  of a  few  days the excite-ment  became  terrible;  the  threats  changed  their  object,  and  were  ad-dressed  directly  to  myself.  Members  of Parliament  might  be  heardsaying  quite  openly,  that  it was  no  good  to  burn  the  books;  that  theauthors  ought  to  be burnt  as  well.  As  for  the  booksellers,  not  a  wordwas  said  about  them.  The  first  time  that  these  expressions  of  opin-ion,  more  worthy  of an  inquisitor  of Goa  than  of a  senator,  were  re-peated  to  me,  I had no  doubt  that  they were  an  invention  of the Hol-bachians  intended  to  frighten  me  and  drive  me  out  of the country.  Ilaughed  at  this  childish  trick,  and  said  to  myself  that  if  they  hadknown  the  real  state  of things,  they  would  have  sought  some  othermeans  of frightening  me;  but  at  length  the  rumour  became  so  pro-nounced,  that  it was  clear  that  it was  serious.  M.  and  Madame  deLuxembourg  had  made  their  second  visit  to  Montmorency  some-what  earlier  than  usual  this  year,  and  were  there  at  the  beginning  ofJune.  I heard  very  little  said  about  my  new  books,  in  spite  of  thestir  which  they  created  in  Paris;  and  neither  M.  nor  Madame  deLuxembourg  said  a  word  to  me  on  the  matter.One  morning,  however,  when  I was  alone  with  M.  de  Luxem-598THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUbourg,  he  asked  me,  “Have  you  said  anything  against  M.  de  Choi-seul  in  the  ‘Contrat  Social’?”  Starting  back  with  surprise,  I replied,“I?  No,  certainly  not;  that  I swear  to  you;  on  the  contrary,  I havepronounced  upon  him,  with  a  pen  which  is not  given  to  flattery,  themost  splendid  eulogy  that  a  minister  has  ever  received.”  With  that,I quoted  the  whole  passage  to  him.  “And  in  ‘Emile’?”  he  went  onto  ask.  “Not  a  word,”  I answered;  “there  is not  even  a  single  wordin  it which  refers  to  him.”  “Ah!”  said  he,  with  more  vivacity  thanusual,  “you  ought  to  have  done  the  same  thing  in the  other  book,  orto  have  made  yourself  clearer.”  “I  thought  that  I had  done  so,”  Ianswered;  “I  esteemed  him  highly  enough  for  that.”  He  was  on  thepoint  of speaking  again;  I saw  that  he  was  ready  to  unbosom  him-self;  but  he checked  himself  and  remained  silent.  Oh!  the  misery  ofa  courtier’s  diplomacy,  which,  even  in  the  best  of hearts,  overpowersfriendship  itself!This  conversation,  although  brief,  enlightened  me  upon  my  situa-tion,  at  least,  in  regard  to  certain  things,  and  made  me  understandthat  it was  certainly  I who  was  attacked.  I deplored  this  unheard-offatality,  which  turned  to  my  disadvantage  all  the  good  that  I saidand  did.  However,  believing  that  I had  Madame  de  Luxembourgand  M.  de  Malesherbes  to  protect  me  in  this  matter,  I did  not  seehow  it would  be  possible  for  my  enemies  to  thrust  them  aside  andreach  me;  for, in addition,  I felt  from  that  moment  that  it would  nolonger  be  a  question  of  equity  and  justice,  and  that  no  one  wouldtrouble  himself  to  examine  whether  I was  really  right  or  wrong.However,  the  storm  roared  louder  and  louder.  Even  Néaulme  him-self,  in his  wearisome  chatter,  showed  me  how  greatly  he  regrettedhaving  had  anything  to  do  with  this  work,  and  the  certainty  whichhe  seemed  to  entertain  of the  fate  which  threatened  both  the  bookand  its  author.  One  thing,  however,  still  comforted  me.  I  foundMadame  de  Luxembourg  so  calm,  so  contented,  so  cheerful  even,that  she  must  have  known  what  she  was  about,  since  she  did  notshow  the  least  anxiety  on  my  account,  did  not  utter  a word  of sym-pathy  or  apology,  and  regarded  the  turn  the  affair  was  taking  withas  much  coolness  as  if she  had  nothing  to  do with  it, and  had  nevertaken  the  least  interest  in myself.  The  only  thing  that  surprised  mewas,  that  she  said  nothing  at  all  to  me,  It appeared  to  me  that  sheWARNED  TO  LEAVE  FRANCE599ought  to  have  said  something.  Madame  de  Boufflers  seemed  moreuneasy.  She  came  to  and  fro  in  an  agitated  manner,  showed  greatactivity,  assured  me  that  M.  le  Prince  de  Conti  was also  exertinghimself  to  ward  off  the  blew  which  was  being  prepared  for  me,  andwhich  she  attributed  simply  to  the  present  state  of affairs,  in  whichit was  of importance  to  the  Parliament  not  to  give the  Jesuits  an  op-portunity  of  accusing  it  of  indifference  in  religious  matters.  Sheseemed,  however,  to  have  little  confidence  in  the  success  of  thePrince’s  efforts  or  her  own.  The  drift  of all her  conversations,  whichwere  more  alarming  than  reassuring,  was  the  same:  to  induce  me  toleave  the  country  and  retire  to  England,  where  she  offered  to  findme  several  friends,  amongst  others  the celebrated  Hume,  with  whomshe  had  long  been  acquainted.  Seeing  that  I persisted  in  remainingcalm,  she  adopted  a  line  which  was  more  calculated  to  shake  myresolution.  She  gave  me  to  understand  that, if I was  arrested  and  ex-amined,  I should  be  obliged  to  mention  Madame  de  Luxembourg,and  that  her  friendship  for  me  certainly  deserved  that  I should  notexpose  myself  to  the  danger  of  being  forced  to  compromise  her.  Ireplied  that  she  might  make  herself  easy,  and  that  in  such  a  case  Iwould  certainly  not  compromise  her.  She  answered,  that  such a reso-lution  was  easier  to  take  than  to  keep,  and  in  this  she  was  right,  es-pecially  in  my  case,  since  I was  quite  determined  never  to  perjuremyself,  or  speak  falsely  before  the judges,  whatever  risk  there  mightbe in telling  the truth.Seeing  that,  although  this  observation  had  made a certain  impres-sion  upon  me,  I could  not  yet bring  myself  to  decide  upon  flight,  shespoke  to  me  of the  Bastille  for  a  few  weeks,  as  a means  of escapingfrom  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Parliament,  which  does  not  interferewith  State  prisoners.  I made  no  objection  to  this  singular  favour,provided  that  it was  not  solicited  in my  name.  As  she  said  no  moreabout  it, I afterwards  assumed  that  she  had  only  proposed  the  ideain order  to  try  me,  and  that  an  expedient,  which  would  have  put  anend  to  everything,  was  not  desired.A few  days  afterwards,  M.  le Maréchal  received  from  the  curé  ofDeuil,  a  friend  of Grimm  and  Madame  d’Epinay, a letter,  contain-ing  the  information,  which  he  declared  came  from  a  trustworthysource,  that  the  Parliament  intended  to  proceed  against  me  with  ex-600THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUtreme  severity,  and  that,  on  a  certain  day,  which  he  mentioned,  awarrant  would  be issued  for my  apprehension.  I regarded  this  as  aninvention  on  the  part  of  the  Holbachians;  I knew  that  the  Parlia-ment  paid great  attention  to forms,  and  that  it would  be an  infringe-ment  of  them  all,  to  commence  on  this  occasion  with  a  warrant  ofarrest,  before  it had  been  judicially  established  whether  I acknowl-edged  the book  and  was  really  its author.  I said  to  Madame  de Bouf-flers:  “It is only in the  case  of those  crimes  which  disturb  the  publicsafety,  that  a  warrant  is issued,  upon  a  simple  information,  for  thearrest  of  the  accused,  for  fear  they  may  escape  punishment.  But,when  it is  desired  to  punish  an  offence  like  mine,  which  deserveshonours  and  rewards,  the  custom  is,  to  proceed  against  the  book,and  to  avoid  attacking  the  author  as  much  as  possible.”  Upon  this,she  pointed  out  to  me a very  subtle  distinction,  which  I had  forgot-ten,  in order  to  prove  to  me  that  it was  a  favour  to  me  to  issue  a  war-rant,  instead  of summoning  me  to  be heard.  On  the  following  day, Ireceived  a  letter  from  Guy,  in  which  he  informed  me  that,  havingbeen  with  M.  le Procureur-général  the  same  day,  he  had  seen  uponhis  desk  the  rough  draft  of  a  “Requisition”  14  against  “Emile”  andits  author.  Observe  that  the  said  Guy  was  a  partner  of  Duchesne,who  had  printed  the  work,  and  also,  having  no  anxiety  on  his  ownaccount,  gave  this  information  to  the  author  out  of charity.  One  mayimagine  how  likely  it all  appeared  to  me!  It was  so  simple,  so  natu-ral,  that  a  bookseller,  when  admitted  to  an  audience  of  the  procur-eur-général,  should  quietly  read  the  manuscripts  and  rough  draftsscattered  over  his  desk!  Madame  de Boufflers  and  others  assured  methat  it was  true.  In consequence  of the  absurdities  which  were  beingcontinually  dinned  into  my  ears,  I was  inclined  to  believe  that  every-body  had  gone  mad.Feeling  sure  that,  under  all this,  there  was  some  secret  which  wasbeing  withheld  from  me,  I quietly  awaited  the  issue  of events,  hav-ing full  confidence  in my  upright  behaviour  and  innocence  through-out  the affair,  and being only too  happy,  whatever  persecution  mightawait  me,  to  be summoned  to  the  honour  of suffering  for  the truth’ssake.  Far  from  being  afraid,  and  keeping  myself  concealed,  I wentRéquisitoire:A demand  for  surrender.THE  STORM  BREAKS60revery  day to  the  chateau,  and  took  my  usual  walk  in the  afternoon,On  the  8th  of June,  the day before  the issue  of the  decree,  I took  it incompany  with  two  professors  belonging  to  the  Oratory,  FatherAlamanni  and  Father  Mamdard.  We  took  some  provisions  with  usto  Champeaux,  where  we  enjoyed  a  hearty  meal.  We  had  forgottento  take  glasses,  and, supplied  their  place with  stalks  of rye,  throughwhich  we  sucked  the  wine  from  the  bottles,  eagerly  picking  out  thethickest  stalks,  in  order  to  see  which  could  suck  the  hardest.  I-havenever  been  so  gay  in my  life.I have  mentioned  how I suffered  from  sleeplessness  in  my  youth.Since  then,  I had  accustomed  myself  to  read  in bed  every  night, untilI found  my  eyes  getting  heavy.  Then  I put  out  my  candle,  and  triedto  doze  for  a  few  minutes,  which  did  not  last  long.  My  usual  eve-ning  reading  was  the  Bible,  and  in  this  manner  I have  read  thewhole  of it through  at  least  five  or  six  times.  On  this  particular  eve-ning,  finding  myself  more  wakeful  than  usual,  I continued  my  read-ing for  a  longer  time,  and  read  the  whole  book,  which  ends  withthe  history  of the  Levite  of  Ephraim—the  Book  of Judges,  if  I amnot  mistaken,  for  I have  never  looked  at  it since  then.  This  historygreatly  affected  me,  and  I was  pondering  over  it in  a  half-dreamystate,  from  which  I was  suddenly  roused  by a  noise  and a light.  Thelatter  was  carried  by Thérése,  who  was  showing  the  way  to  M.  laRoche,  who,  seeing  me  start  up  abruptly,  said  to  me,  “Do  not  bealarmed:  I come  from  Madame  la  Maréchale,  who  has  written  toyou  herself,  and  also  sends  you a letter  from  M.  le Prince  de Conti.”Inside  Madame  de Luxembourg’s  letter  I found  another,  which  hadbeen  brought  to  her  by a  special  messenger  from  the  Prince,  con-taining  the  information  that,  in  spite  of  all  his  efforts,  it had  beendecided  to  proceed  against  me  with  the  utmost  rigour  of  the  law.“The  excitement,”  so  he wrote,  “is very  great:  nothing  can  avert  theblow:  the  Court  demands  it, the  Parliament  wills  it:  at  seven  o’clockto-morrow  morning  the  warrant  of  arrest  will  be  issued,  and  exe-cuted  immediately.  I have  obtained  an  assurance  that,  if he  makeshis  escape,  he  will  not  be  pursued;  but,  if he  persists  in  his  wish  toallow  himself  to  be  taken,  then  he  will  be  arrested.”  La  Roche  be-sought  me,  in  Madame  de  Luxembourg’s  name,  to  get  up  and  go602THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUand  consult  with  her.  It was  two  o'clock:  she  had  just gone  to  bed.“She  is waiting  for  you,”  he  added,  “and  will  not  go  to  sleep  untilshe has  seen  you.”  I hurriedly  dressed  myself,  and  hastened  to  her.For  the first  time  in her life  she appeared  to  me  agitated.  Her  anx-iety  touched  me.  In  this  moment  of  surprise,  in  the  middle  of thenight,  I myself  was  not  free  from  excitement,  but  when  I saw  her  Iforgot  myself,  and  thought  only  of  her  and  the  melancholy  partwhich  she  would  play  if I allowed  myself  to  be  taken;  for,  while  Ifelt that I had  courage  enough  never  to  speak  anything  but the truth,even  though  it was  bound  to  injure  and  ruin  me,  I did  not  feel  thatI had  sufficient  presence  of mind  or  cleverness,  or  even,  perhaps,  suf-ficient  firmness,  to  avoid  compromising  her,  if I was  hard  pressed.This  decided  me  to  sacrifice  my  reputation  for  the  sake  of her  peaceof  mind,  and,  on  this  occasion,  to  do  for  her,  that  which  nothingwould  have  induced  me  to  do  for  myself.  The  moment  my  mindwas  made  up, I told  her, as  I did  not  wish  to  depreciate  the  value  ofmy  sacrifice,  by allowing  it to  be purchased  from  me.  I am  convincedthat  she  could  not  have  been  mistaken  as  to  my  motives,  but  she  didnot  say  a  single  word  to  me  which  showed  that  she  appreciatedthem.  I was  so  shocked  at  this  indifference  that  I even  hesitatedwhether  I should  not  draw  back,  but  M.  de Luxembourg  appearedupon  the  scene,  and  Madame  de  Boufflers  arrived  from  Paris  a  fewmoments  afterwards.  They  did  what  Madame  de  Luxembourgought  to  have  done.  I allowed  myself  to  be flattered,  I was  ashamedto  go  back  from  my  word,  and  the  only  question  remaining  was,where  I should  go,  and  when  I should  start.  M.  de  Luxembourgproposed  that  I should  stay  a  few  days at  his house,  incognito,  whichwould  give me  more  time  to  consider  and  decide  upon  my  course  ofaction. 1 would  not  agree  to  this,  any  more  than  to  the  suggestionthat  I should  go secretly  to  the  Temple.  I persisted in  my intention  ofsetting  out  the  same  day,  rather  than  remain  in  concealment  any-where.Feeling  that  I had  secret  and  powerful  enemies  in the  kingdom,  Ithought  that,  in spite  of my  attachment for France,  I ought  to  leaveit to  make  sure  of not  being  disturbed.  My first  impulse  was  to  re-tire  to  Geneva,  but  a  moment’s  reflection  was  sufficient  to  dissuademe  from  committing  so  great  an  act  of folly.  I knew  that the FrenchDECIDES  TO  GO  TO’  SWITZERLAND603Ministry,  which  had  even  greater  power  in  Geneva  than  in  Paris,would  not  leave  me  in peace  in one  of these  two  cities  any  more  thanin  the  other,  if it was  determined  to  persecute  me.  I knew  that  the“Discours  sur  lInégalite” had aroused  against  me,  in the  Council,  afeeling  of hatred,  which  was  the  more  dangerous,  as  that  body  didnot  venture  to  show  it openly.  Lastly,  I knew  that  when  the  “Nou-velle  Héloïse”  appeared  it had  been  eager  to  prohibit  it, at the  ur-gent  request  of Doctor  Tronchin;  but,  finding  that  no  one  imitatedits  example,  not  even  in  Paris,  it  was  ashamed  of  its  blunder  andwithdrew  the  prohibition.  I had  no  doubt  that,  finding  the  presentopportunity  more  favourable,  it would  do  its  best  to  profit  by it.  Iknew  that,  in  spite  of  all  appearances,  a  secret  jealousy  prevailedagainst  me  in  the  hearts  of all  the  Genevese,  which  only waited  foran  opportunity  to  satisfy  itself.  Nevertheless,  patriotism  called  meback  to  my  country,  and  if  I could  have  ventured  to  hope  that  Icould  live  there  in peace,  I should  not  have  hesitated  for  a moment;but,  since  neither  honour  nor  reason  allowed  me  to  take  refugethere  as  a  fugitive,  I resolved  only to  retire  to its neighbourhood,  andto  wait  in  Switzerland  until  I saw  what  course  would  be  taken  inregard  to  me  at Geneva.  It will  presently  be seen  that  this  state  of un-certainty  did  not  last  long.Madame  de  Boufflers  strongly  disapproved  of this  resolution,  andmade  fresh  efforts  to  persuade  me  to  cross  over  to  England.  She  didnot  shake  my  determination.  I have  never  liked  England  or  the Eng-lish,  and  all  the  eloquence  of  Madame  de  Boufflers,  far  from  over-coming  my  dislike,  only seemed  to  increase  it, without  my  knowingwhy.Being  determined  to  set  out  the  same  day,  as  soon  as  morningcame,  I had  already  started,  as  far  as  everybody  else  was  concerned;La  Roche,  whom [ sent  to  fetch  my  papers,  would  not  tell  evenThérése  whether  I had  left or  not.  Ever  since  I had  decided  some  dayto  write  the  Memoirs  of my  life, I had  accumulated  a  number  of let-ters  and  papers,  so  that  he  was  obliged  to  make  several  journeys.Those  papers  which  had  already  been  sorted  were  laid  aside,  and  Ispent  the  rest  of the morning  in sorting  the others,  intending  only totake  away  with  me  such  as  might  be useful  and  to  burn  the  rest.  M.de  Luxembourg  was  kind  enough  to  help  me  in  this  task,  which604THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUtook  up  so  much  time,  that  we  were  unable  to  finish  it in the  morn-ing,  and  I had  not  time  to  burn  anything.  He  offered  to  sort  thepapers  which  remained,  and  to  burn  the  rubbish  himself,  withoutleaving  anyone  else  to  do  it, and  to  send  me  all  that  he  put  aside.  Iaccepted  his  offer,  very  glad  to  be freed  from  this  anxiety,  so  that  Imight  be able  to  spend  the  few  hours  which  still  remained  to  me  to-gether  with  those  who  were  so  dear,  whom  I was  on  the  point  ofleaving for ever.  He took  the  key of the room  where I left  the papers,and,  at  my  earnest  entreaty,  sent  for  my  poor  “aunt,”  who  was  con-sumed  by most  cruel  anxiety  to  know  what  had  become  of me  andwhat  was  going  to  become  of me,  and  was  expecting  the  officers  ofjustice  to  arrive  at  any  moment,  without  knowing  what  she  was  todo or  what  she  was  to  say  to  them.  La  Roche  brought  her  to  the  cha-teau,  without  telling  her  anything;  she  believed  that  I was  alreadyfar  away;  when  she  saw  me,  she  uttered  a  piercing  cry,  and  flungherself  into  my  arms.  Oh,  friendship,  union  of  hearts,  intercourse,and  intimacy!  During  this  sweet  and  cruel  moment  all  the  happy,tender,  and  peaceful  days  which  we  had  spent  in  company,  crowd-ing together,  made  me  feel  the  more  keenly  the  anguish  of our  firstseparation,  after  we  had  rarely  lost  sight  of  each  other  for  a  singleday,  during  a  period  of nearly  seventeen  years.  M.  de Luxembourg,who  witnessed  our  embrace,  was  unable  to restrain  his  tears,  and  leftus  alone.  Thérése  did  not  want  to  leave  me.  I represented  to  her  thedifficulties  in  the  way  of her  following  me  at  this  moment,  and  thenecessity  for her  remaining  to  dispose  of my  effects  and  to collect  mymoney.  When  a  warrant  of arrest  is issued  against  a  man,  it is thecustom  to  seize  his  papers,  to  set  a  seal  upon  his  belongings,  or  tomake  an  inventory  of them  and  appoint  some  one  to  take  charge  ofthem.  It was  very  necessary  that  she  should  remain,  to  observe  whattook  place,  and  do the best  she could.  I promised  her  that  she  shouldsoon  rejoin  me;  M.  le  Maréchal  confirmed  my  promise;  but  I re-fused  to  tell  her  where  I was  going,  so  that,  if questioned  by thosewho  came  to  arrest  me,  she  might  be able  to  declare  with  truth  herignorance  on  this  point.  When  I embraced  her  at  the  moment  ofseparation,  I was  conscious  of  a  most  singular  emotion,  and I saidto  her,  with  a  fervour,  which  was,  alas!  only  too  prophetic:  “Mychild,  you  must  arm  yourself  with  courage.  You  have  shared  theFAREWELLSaeof605prosperity of my  happy days;  it now  remains  for  you,  since  you  de-sire  it, to  share  my  misery.  You must  expect  nothing  but insults  andaffliction  if you  follow  me.  The lot, which  begins  for me  on  this  mel-ancholy  day,  will  attend  me  until  my  last  hour.”Nothing  further  remained  for me  to  do, except  to  think  about  mydeparture.  The  officers  of justice  were  to  have  arrived  at  ten  o'clock.It was  four  o’clock  in the afternoon  when I started,  and  they had  notyet  arrived.  It had  been  settled  that  I should  travel  by the  post;  Ihad  no  conveyance.  M.  le Maréchal  made  me a present  of a  cabrio-let,1°  and  lent  me  horses  and  a  postillion  as  far  as  the  first  post,where,  thanks  to  the  arrangements  he  had  made,  no  difficulty  wasmade  about  providing  me  with  horses.|As  I had  not  dined  at  table,  and  had  not  shown  myself  in the cha-teau,  the  ladies  came  to  say  good-bye  to  me  in  the  entresol,  where  Ihad  spent  the  day.  Madame  la  Maréchale  embraced  me  severaltimes,  with  every  appearance  of  melancholy;  but  I no  longer  per-ceived  in  her  embraces  the  heartiness  of  those  which  she  had  lav-ished  upon  me  two  or  three  years  before.  Madame  de  Boufflers  alsoembraced  me  and  spoke  very  kindly  to  me.  Madame  de  Mirepoix,who  was  present,  also  embraced  me,  which  considerably  surprisedme.  This  lady  is  extremely  cold,  formal,  and  reserved,  and,  as  itseems  to  me,  not  altogether  free  from  the haughtiness  which  is natu-ral  to  the  house  of Lorraine.  She  had  never  paid  much  attention  tome.  Whether  it was  that,  flattered  by the  unexpected  honour,  I wasinclined  to  attach  greater  value  to  it, or  that  she  really  mingled  withher  embrace a little  of that  pity which  is natural  to  generous  hearts,I found  in  her  movements  and  looks  a  certain  earnestness,  whichdeeply  affected  me.  On  thinking  of it afterwards,  I have  often  sus-pected  that  she,  knowing  the  lot  to  which  I was  condemned,  hada  momentary  feeling  of  sympathy  for  mybeen  unable  to  resistdestiny.M.  le Maréchal  did  not  open  his  mouth;  he was  as  pale as  death.He  persisted  in  accompanying  me  as  far  as  the  conveyance,  whichwas  waiting  for  me  at  the  watering-place.  We  crossed  the  gardenwithout  uttering  a  word.  I had  a  key  of  the  park,  with  which  Iopened  the  gate;  after  which,  instead  of  putting  it  back  into  my1  A light  two-wheeled  carriage.606THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUpocket,  I gave  it to  him  without  a  word.  He  took  it with  surprisingeagerness,  of which  I have  been  unable  to  avoid  thinking  frequentlysince  then.  I have  rarely  in  my  life  experienced  a  more  bitter  mo-ment  than  that  of this  separation.  Our  embrace  was  long and  silent;we  both  felt  that  it was  a last  farewell.Between  La  Barre  and  Montmorency  I met,  in a  hired  coach,  fourmen  dressed  in  black,  who  saluted  me  with  a  smile.  From  whatThérèse  afterwards  told  me  concerning  the  appearance  of  the  ofh-cers,  the  hour  of  their  arrival,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  be-haved,  I have  always  been  convinced  that  it was  they  whom  I met;especially  as  I subsequently  heard  that,  instead  of  the  warrant  hav-ing been  issued  against  me  at  seven  o'clock,  as  I had  been  informed,it  had  not  been  put  in  force  until  midday.  I had  to  pass  rightthrough  Paris.  There  is not  much  facility  for concealment  in an  opencarriage.  In  the  streets,  I saw  several  persons  who  saluted  me  as  ifthey  knew  me,  but  I did  not  recognise  one  of them.  The  same  eve-ning I turned  aside  to  pass  Villeroy.  At Lyons,  travellers  had  to  gobefore  the  town-major.  This  might  have  been  embarrassing  for  aman  who  desired  neither  to  lie nor  to  change  his name.  I went  witha  letter  from  Madame  de Luxembourg,  to  ask  M.  de Villeroy  that  Imight  be  excused  from  this  duty.  M.  de  Villeroy  gave  me a letter,which  I did  not  make  use  of,  since  I did  not  pass  through  Lyons.This  letter  may  still  be found,  sealed  up,  amongst  my  papers.  M.  leDuc  pressed  me  to  sleep  at  Villeroy,  but  I preferred  to  take  the highroad  again,  and  I accomplished  two  more  stages  the  same  day.My conveyance  was  uncomfortable,  and  I was  too  unwell  to  makelong-day  journeys.  Besides,  my  appearance  was  not  sufficiently  im-posing  to  ensure  my  being  well  served;  and  everybody  knows  that,in France,  post-horses  only feel  the  whip upon  the  postillions’  shoul-ders.  By feeing  the guides  handsomely,  I thought  I could  supply  theplace of threatening  words  and  gestures;  but  this  only made  mattersmuch  worse.  They took  me  for  a  poor  wretch  travelling  on  commis-sion,  who  was  journeying  by post  for  the  first  time  in his  life.Fromthat  time  I was  supplied  with  nothing  but  the  most  sorry  nags,  andbecame  the  laughing-stock  of the  postillions.  I ended,  as  I ought  to°  Courriers:  those  who  make  use  of post-horses.REFLECTIONS  |607have begun, by being patient and saying nothing,  and  let them  go onas  they pleased.In abandoning  myself  to  the reflections  upon  all that  had  recentlyhappened  to  me,  which  presented  themselves  to  my  mind,  I hadample  resources  agains€  weariness  during  my  journey;  but  thissuited neither  the bent  of my  mind  nor  the  inclinations  of my  heart.It is astonishing  how  easily  I forget  misfortunes,  when  once  they arepast,  however  recent  they  may  be.  The  recollection  of  them  growsweaker  and  finally  disappears  without  difficulty  as  soon  as  they havehappened,  to  the  same  extent  as  the  thought  of them,  as  long as  theyare  in  the  future,  alarms  and  troubles  me.  My  cruel  imagination,which  tortures  itself  incessantly  in  anticipating  misfortunes  whichdo not  yet exist,  distracts  my  memory,  and  prevents  me  from  recall-ing to  mind  those  which  are  past.  No  further  precautions  are  possi-ble  against  what  has  happened,  and  it is useless  to  trouble  oneselfabout  it.  In  a  manner  I exhaust  my  misfortunes  in  advance.  Thegreater  my  suffering  in  foreseeing  them,  the  more  easily  I forgetthem;  while,  on  the  contrary,  incessantly  occupied  with  the  thoughtof my  past  happiness,  I recall  it and,  so  to  speak,  chew  the  cud  of itto  such  an  extent  that,  when  I desire  it,  I am  able  to  enjoy  it  overagain.  It is due  to  this  happy  frame  of mind,  I am  convinced,  that  Ihave  never  known  that  spiteful  disposition  which  ferments  in a re-vengeful  heart,  which  never  forgets  affronts  received,  and  worries  it-self  with  all the  evil  it would  like  to  inflict  upon  its enemy  by way  ofrequital.  Naturally  hot-tempered,  I have  felt  angry,  even  enraged,  inthe  impulse  of  the  moment;  but  a  desire  for  vengeance  has  nevertaken  root  in  my  heart.  I think  too  little  about  the  offence  to  thinkmuch  about  the  offender.  I only think  of the injury  which  I have  re-ceived  from  him  on  account  of that  which  I may  still  receive  fromhim;  and, if I were  sure  that  he would  inflict  no  further  injury  uponme,  that  which  he  has  already  inflicted  would  be  immediately  for-gotten.  Forgiveness  of offences  is constantly  preached  to  us.  This  is,no  doubt,  a  most  beautiful  virtue,  but  it is not  meant  for  me.  I donot  know  whether  my  heart  can  conquer  its  hatred,  for  it has  neverfelt any;  and  I think  too  little  about  my  enemies  to  have  the merit  offorgiving  them.  I will  not  say  to  what  extent  they  torment  them-selves,  in order  to  torment  me.  I am  at  their  mercy,  they  have  abso-608THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUlute  power,  they  make  use  of  it.  There  is  only  one  thing  beyondtheir  power,  which  I defy them  to  do. Although  they torment  them-selves  about  me,  they  cannot  compel  me  to  torment  myself  aboutthem.The  day after  my  departure,  I had  so  completely  forgotten  all thathad  recently  happened—the  Parliament,  Madame  de  Pumpadour,M.  de  Choiseul,  Grimm,  D’Alembert,  their  plots,  and  their  accom-plices—that  I should  never  have  thought  of it again,  had  it not  beenfor  the  precautions  which  I was  obliged  to  take.  In place  of all  this,I recalled  to  mind  the  subject  of my  iast  reading  on  the  eve  of mydeparture.  I also  recalled  the  Idylls  of  Gessner,!7  which  his  trans-lator,  Hubert,  had  sent  me  some  time  ago.  These  two  remembrancestook  so  strong  a  hold  upon  me,  and  became  so  blended  in  my‘thoughts,  that  I determined  to  try  and  combine  them,  by treating,after  the  manner  of Gessner,  the  theme  of  the  Levite  of  Ephraim.This  idyllic  and  simple  style  appeared  little  suited  for  so  fearful  asubject,  and  it was  hardly  to  be imagined  that  my  present  situationwould  furnish  me  with  many  cheerful  ideas  to  relieve  its  sombre-ness.  However,  I made  the  attempt,  simply  to  amuse  myself  in  mychaise,  and  without  any  hope  of  succeeding.  No  sooner  had I be-gun,  than  I was  astonished  at  the  agreeable  turn  of my  ideas,  and  theease  with  which  I expressed  them.  In  three  days,  I wrote  the  threefirst  cantos  of this  little  poem,  which  I subsequently  finished  at  Mo-tiers;  and  I am  convinced  that  I have  never  written  anything  in mylife  which  is pervaded  by a  more  touching  gentleness  of character,  afresher  colouring,  a  more  simple  delineation,  a  more  faithful  char-acteiisation,  a  more  old-fashioned  simplicity  in  every  respect—andthat  in spite of the horrible  nature  of the  subject,  which  is essentiallyabominable;  so  that,  in  addition  to  everything  else,  I had  the  creditof overcoming a further  difficulty.  The  “Levite  d’Ephraim,”  if it isnot  the  best  of my  works,  will  always  be my  favourite.  I have  neverread  it again,  I never  shall  read  it again,  without  being  sensible  ofthe  approval  of  a  heart  free  from  bitterness,  which,  far  from  beingsoured  by misfortune,  finds  consolation  for  it with  itself,  and,  in  it-self,  the  means  of compensation  for it. If all those  great  philosopherswho,  in their  works,  profess  themselves  so  superior  to  that  adversity“A  celebrated  Swiss  poet  and  landscape-painter  (1730-1788).EMOTION  ON  ENTERING  BERNE609which  they  have  never  experienced,  were  gathered  together  andplaced  in a  position  similar  to  mine—if,  in the  first  outbursts  of theindignation  of insulted  honour,  a  similar  task  were  set  them  to  accomplish,  it would  soon  be seen  how  they  would  acquit  themselves.When  leaving  Montmorency  for  Switzerland,  I had  made  up  mymind  to  go  and  stay  at  Yverdun  with  my  good  old  friend  Roguin,who  had  been  living  there  in  retirement  for  some  years,  and  hadinvited  me  to go and  see  him.  On  the road, I heard  that Lyons wouldbe out  of my  way,  and  this  prevented  me  from  passing  through  it.But,  on  the  other  hand,  I was  obliged: to  pass  Besançon,  a  fortifiedtown,  which,  consequently,  exposed  me  to  the  same  inconvenience.I accordingly  decided  to  turn  to  the left, and  travel  by way  of Salins,under  pretence  of visiting  M.  de Mairan,  M.  Dupin’s  nephew,  whoheld  a  post  at  the  salt-works,  and  from  whom I had  frequently  re-ceived  pressing  invitations  to  go  and  see  him.  The  expedient  wassuccessful;  I did  not  find  M.  de Mairan,  and,  highly  pleased  at  hav-ing avoided  delay,  I continued  my  journey,  without  a  word  beingsaid  to  me  by anyone.On  entering  the  territory  of Berne  I ordered  a halt.  I got  out  ofthe  carriage,  flung  myself  upon  the  ground,  kissed  and  embraced  it,and, in my  delight,  cried  out:  “O  Heaven,  protector  of virtue,  I offermy  praise  to  thee!  I set  foot  in  a  land  of liberty.”  Thus  it is that,  inthe  blind  confidence  of  my  hopes,  I have  always  been  seized  withpassionate  fondness  for  that  which  was  destined  to  bring  misfortuneupon  me.  The  surprised  postillion  thought  I was  mad.  I got into  thecarriage  again,  and,  a  few  hours  afterwards,  I had  the  pure  andlively satisfaction  of being pressed  in the arms  of the  worthy  Roguin.Ah!  let  us  take  breath  for  a  few  moments  with  this  worthy  host!  Imust  recover  my  courage  and  strength;  I shall  soon  have  need  ofboth.‘It is not  without  reason  that, in this  narrative,  I have  described  indetail  all  the  circumstances  which  I have  been  able  to  recollect.  Al-though  they may  not  seem  very  clear  in themselves,  they may  throwlight  upon  the  course  of  events,  when  the  reader  once  holds  thethread  of the  plot;  for  instance,  although  they  do  not  give  the  firstidea  of the  problem  which  I have  to  propose,  they  afford  considerable  assistance  in solving  it.610THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUIf  we  assume  that,  in  order  to  carry  out  the  plot  which  was  di-rected  against  me,  my  removal  was  absolutely  necessary,  then, in or-der  to  bring  it about,  everything  was  bound  to  happen  almost  ex-actly  as  it did.  But  if, instead  of allowing  myself  to  be  terrified  byMadame  de Luxembourg’s  nocturnal  embassy  and  disturbed  by heranxiety,  I had  continued  to  hold  out  as  I had  begun;  and  if, insteadof remaining  at  the  chateau,  I had  returned  from  it to  my  bed  andslept  quietly  until  morning,  would  the  warrant  have  been  put  intoexecution  just  the  same?  This  is  an  important  question,  upon  theanswer  to  which  depends  the  answer  to  many  others;  and,  in  orderto  investigate  it, it is important  to  observe  the  hour  of the  decree  ofarrest  that  was  threatened  and  the  hour  of its actual  issue.  This  is ahomely  but  expressive  example  of  the  importance  of  the  most  tri-fling details  in the  exposition  of facts,  the  secret  causes  of which  areinvestigated,  in order  to  discover  them  by a  process  of induction.BOOK  XIIHere  commences  the  work  of  darkness,  in  which,  for  eight  yearspast,  I have  been  entombed,  without  ever  having  been  able,  in spiteof all  my  efforts,  to  penetrate  its  frightful  obscurity.  In  the  abyss  ofmisfortune  in which  I am  submerged,  I feel  the  strokes  of the blowswhich  are  directed  against  me.  I perceive  their  immediate  instru-ment,  but  I cannot  see  either  the  hand  which  guides  them  or  themeans  which  it employs.  Shame  and  misfortune  fall  upon  me  as  ifof themselves,  and  unawares.  When  my  heart,  torn  with  grief, givesvent  to  lamentation,  I seem  like  a  man  who  complains  without  rea-son,  and  the  authors  of my  ruin  have  discovered  the  incomprehen-sible  art  of making  the  public  the  accomplice  of their  plot,  withouttheir  suspecting  it or  perceiving  its effect.  Therefore,  while  narratingthe  events  which  concern  me,  the  treatment  which  I have  suffered,and  all that has  happened  to  me,  I am  not  in a  position  to  trace  themback  to  the  moving  spirit,  or  to  assign  the  causes,  while  stating  thefacts.  These  first  causes  are  all  indicated  in  the  three  precedingbooks.  All  the  interests  that  concern  me  and  all  the  secret  motivesare  there  set  forth.  But  it is impossible  for  me  to  explain,  even  con-jecturally,  how  these  various  causes  are  combined  in  order  to  bringabout  the  strange  events  of my  life.  If,  amongst  my  readers,  thereare  any  sufficiently  generous  to  desire  to  fathom  these  mysteries  anddiscover  the  truth,  let them  carefully  read  again  the  three  precedingbooks,  let  them  make  use  of the  information  within  their  reach  indealing  with  each  fact  they read  of in what  follows,  let them  go backfrom  intrigue  to  intrigue,  from  agent  to  agent,  until  they  come  tothe  prime  movers  of all.  I know  well  what  will  be the  result  of theirinquiries,  but  I myself  am  lost  in the  dark  and  tortuous  windings  ofthe  subterranean  paths  which  will  lead  them  to  it.>During  my  stay  at  Yverdun  I made  the  acquaintance  of  M.  Ro-guin’s  whole  family;  amongst  others  of his  niece,  Madame  Boy  de611612THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUla Tour,  and  her  daughters,  whose  father,  as  I think  I have  alreadymentioned,  I had  known  at  Lyons.  She  had  come  to  Yverdun  on  avisit  to  her  uncle  and  sisters.  Her  eldest  daughter,  who  was  aboutfifteen  years  of age,  delighted  me  by her  intelligence  and  her  excel-lent  character.  I became  most  tenderly  attached  to  the  mother  anddaughter.  M.  Roguin  intended  the  latter  to  marry  his  nephew,  thecolonel,  a  man  already  somewhat  advanced  in  years,  who  also  dis-played  great  affection  for  myself;  but,  although  the  uncle  was  madfor  this  marriage,  although  the  nephew  also  strongly  desired  it, andI took a lively interest  in satisfying  the  wishes  of both,  the  great  dis-parity  of age  and  the  extreme  repugnance  of the  young  girl causedme  to  support  the mother  in preventing  the marriage,  which  did  nottake  place.  The  colonel  subsequently  married  Mademoiselle  Dillan,one  of his relatives,  a lady whose  beauty  and character  were  after  myown  heart,  and  who  has  made  him  the  happiest  of  husbands  andfathers.  In spite of this, M.  Roguin  has  never  been  able  to  forget  thaton  this  occasion  I opposed  his  wishes.  I am  consoled  for  this  by thecertainty  that  I fulfilled  the  holiest  duty of friendship,  both  towardshimself  and  his  family,  which  does  not  consist  in  always  makingoneself  agreeable,  but  in always  advising  for  the  best.I did  not  long remain  in doubt  as  to  the  reception  which  awaitedme  at  Geneva,  in  case  I felt  inclined  to  return  there.  My  book  was-burned  there,  and  a  warrant  was  issued  against  me  on  the  18th  ofJune,  that  is  to  say,  nine  days  after  it had  been  issued  in  Paris.  Inthis  second  decree,  so  many  incredible  absurdities  were  heaped  to-gether,  and  the  ecclesiastical  edict  was  so  distinctly  violated,  that  atfirst  | refused  to  believe  the  news  when  it reached  me,  and,  when  itwas  actually  confirmed,  I trembled  lest  so  manifest  and  crying  aninfringement  of every  law, commencing  with  that  of common  sense,should  turn  Geneva  upside  down.  But  I need  not  have  disturbédmyself;  everything  remained  quiet.  If  there  was  any  disturbanceamongst  the  people,  it was  only directed  against  me,  and  I was  pub-licly  treated  by all  the  town-gossips  and  cuistres*  like  a  pupil  threat-ened  with  a  flogging  for  having  said  his catechism  badly.These  two  decrees  gave  the  signal  for  the cry  of execration  whichwent  up  against  me  throughout  Europe  with  unexampled  fury.  AllSee  p.  399.  The  meaning  “pedant”  is more  suitable  here.EXECRATED  THROUGHOUT  EUROPE613the  newspapers,  journals,  and pamphlets  sounded  a  most  terriblenote  of alarm.  The  French  especially—that  gentle,  polite,  and  gener-ous  people,  who  so  pride  themselves  on  their  good-breeding  andrespect  for  the  unfortunate—suddenly  forgetting  their  favouritevirtues,  distinguished  th€mselves  by the number  and  violence  of theinsults  with  which  they vied  with  one  another  in overwhelming  me.I was  called  an  infidel,  an  atheist,  a  lunatic,  a madman,  a  wild  beast,a  wolf.  The  next  manager  of the  Journal  de  Trévoux?  made a sideattack  upon  my  pretended  wolfishness,  which  was a fairly  convinc-ing proof of his own.  In short,  it almost  seemed  as  if people  in Pariswere  afraid  of coming  into  collision  with  the  police,  if, when  pub-lishing  a  book  upon  any  subject  whatever,  they omitted  to  interlardit with  insults  against  myself.  Seeking  in  vain  for  the  cause  of  thisuniversal  animosity,  I was  ready  to  believe  that  all  the  world  hadgone  mad.  What!  the  compiler  of  the  “Paix  Perpetuelle”  the  pro-moter  of  discord!  the  editor  of  the  “Vicaire  Savoyard”  an  infidel!the  author  of the  “Nouvelle  Héloïse”  a  wolf!  the  author  of “Emile”a  madman!  Good  heavens!  what  then  should  I have  been  if I hadpublished  the  work  upon  “L’Esprit,’  or  something  of  the  samekind?  And  yet,  in  the  storm  which  burst  upon  the  head  of  theauthor?  of  this  book,  the  public,  instead  of uniting  its  voice  to  thatof  his  persecutors,  avenged  him  by its  eulogies.  Compare  his  bookand  mine,  the  different  reception  which  they  have  met  with,  themanner  in  which  the  two  authors  have  been  treated  in  the  differentcountries  of Europe,  and  then  find,  if possible,  reasons  for  these  dif-ferences  which  can  satisfy  a  sensible  man.  That  is all  I ask,  then  Iwill  say  no  more.I was  so  comfortable  at  Yverdun  that  I decided  to  stay  there,  atthe  earnest  entreaty  of  M.  de  Roguin  and  all  his  family.  The  kind-ness  of M.  de Moiry  de Gingins,  bailli  of this  town,  also  encouragedme  to  remain  within  his  jurisdiction.  The  colonel  pressed  me  sostrongly  to  accept  a  lodging  in a little  detached  building,  betweenthe  court  and  garden  of his  house,  that  I consented;  and  he  imme-diately  set  about  furnishing  and  providing  it with  everything  neces-2 A  Jesuit  newspaper.3 Montesquieu.614THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsary  for  my  humble  wants.  Roguin,  the  banneret,*  was  so  assiduousin my  behalf,  that  he never  left  me  for  a moment  during  the  day.  Ihighly  appreciated  all  his  kindness,  but  I was  sometimes  consider-ably  bored  by it.  The  day of  my  installation  in  my  new  abode  wasalready  settled,  and I had  written  to  Thérése  to  rejoin  me,  when  sud-denly  I heard  that  a  storm  was  brewing  against  me  in Berne,  whichwas  attributed  to  the  extreme  religionists,  and  of  which  I  havenever  been  able  to discover  the origin.  The  Senate,  aroused  by no  oneknows  whom,  seemed  determined  not  to  leave  me  in  peace  in  myretreat.  Directly  the  bailli  heard  of this  excitement,  he  wrote  on  mybehalf  to  several  members  of  the  Government,  reproaching  themfor  their  unreasoning  intolerance,  and  calling  it  a  shame  on  theirpart  to  wish  to  refuse  a  persecuted  and  worthy  man  the  refugewhich  so  many  bandits  found  in  their  States.  Shrewd  persons  haveconjectured  that  the  warmth  of  his  reproaches  rather  exasperatedthan  soothed  their  minds.  However  that  may  be, neither  his  reputa-tion  nor  his  eloquence  could  ward  off the  blow.  Having  received  anintimation  of the order  which  he had  to  make  known  to  me,  he gaveme a hint  of it beforehand,  and  I decided  to  leave  on  the  followingday,  before  the  same  arrived.  My  difficulty  was,  to  know  where  togo.  Geneva  and  France  were  closed  to  me,  and I clearly  foresaw  that,in  this  matter,  everyone  would  be  eager  to  imitate  his  neighbour’sexample.Madame  Boy de la Tour  proposed  to  me  to  take  up my  quarters  inan  empty  furnished  house,  belonging  to  her  son,  in  the  village  ofMotiers,  in Val-de-Travers,  in  the  county  of Neufchatel.  I only hadto  cross  a  mountain  to  get there.  The  offer  was  the  more  opportune,since,  in  the  territory  of the  King  of Prussia,  I should  naturally  besheltered  from  persecution;  at  least,  religion  could  not  be alleged  asan  excuse  for  it.  But  a  secret  objection,  which  it did  not  become  meto  express,  was  calculated  to  make  me  hesitate.  The  innate  love  ofjustice,  by  which  my  heart  was  always  consumed,  united  to  mysecret  liking  for France,  had  inspired  me  with  aversion  for the  Kingof Prussia,  who,  in  his  principles  and  conduct,  appeared  to  me  totrample  underfoot  all respect  for natural  law and  human  obligations.“ Banneret:  a  feudal  lord  who  had  a  sufficient  number  of  vassals  to  raise  astandard.ROUSSEAU  AND  THE  KING  OF  PRUSSIA615Amongst  the  framed  engravings,  with  which  I had  decorated  thewalls  of  my  turret  at  Montmorency,  was  a  portrait  of  this  Prince,underneath  which  I  had  written  a  distich,  which  concluded  asfollows:“Il  pense  en  philosophe,  et  se  conduit  en  roi.”  ®oThis  line,  which,  proceeding  from  any  other  pen,  would  have  beenhigh  praise,  contained,  coming  from  mine,  a  meaning  which  wasby no  means  ambiguous,  and  which,  besides,  was  only  too  clearlyexplained  by the  line  which  preceded  it.  My numerous  visitors  hadall  seen  this  distich.  The  Chevalier  de  Lorenzi  had  even  copied  itfor  D’Alembert,  and  I had  no  doubt  that  the  latter  had  taken  careto  make  use  of it to  present  me  in a  favourable  light to  the  King.”  Ihad  further  aggravated  my  first  offence  by a  passage  in  “Emile,”  inwhich,  under  the name  of  Adrastus,  King  of  the  Daunians,  I hadsufficiently  indicated  whom I had  in  view.  I knew  that  the  remarkhad  not  escaped  the  critics,  since  Madame  de  Boufflers  had  on  sev-eral  occasions  mentioned  the  subject.  I therefore  felt  sure  of  beinginscribed  in red  ink  on  the registers  of the  King  of Prussia;  and  sup-posing,  besides,  that  his  principles  were  such  as  I had  ventured  toattribute  to  him, my  writings  and  their  author  could  not  fail  to  meetwith  his  disapproval;  for  it  is  well  known  that  the  wicked  andtyrants  have  always  conceived  a  deadly  hatred  towards  me,  evenwithout  knowing  me,  on  a  simple  perusal  of my  works.However,  I ventured  to  throw  myself  upon  his  mercy,  and  I be-lieved  that  I was  running  but  little  risk.  I knew  that  the  baser  pas-sions  only overmaster  the  weak,  and  have  but little  hold  upon  mindsof a  strong  stamp,  such  as  I had  always  recognised  in his.  I arguedthat it was  part  of his plan of government  to  show  himself  magnani-mous  on  such  an  occasion,  and  that  it was  not  beyond  the  reach  ofhis  character  to  be  so  in  reality.  I argued  that  the  desire  of  a  meanand  easy  vengeance  would  never  for  a  moment  counterbalance  in5 He  thinks  as  a  philosopher,  and  acts  as  a  king.6  “La  gloire,  l'intérêt,  voilà  son  Dieu,  sa  loi.”  From  a  note  in  the  Firmin-Didotedition  we  learn  that  this  line  did  not  really  precede  the  one  quoted  above.  Thelatter  was  underneath  the  portrait,  the  other  verse  was  written  at  the  back.This  must  be  meant  ironically,  if the  text  be  correct.616THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUhim  the  love  of glory;  and,  putting  myself  in his  place,  I thought  itnot  impossible  that  he  might  take  advantage  of  circumstances  tooverwhelm  with  the  weight of his  generosity  the  man  who  had  ven-tured  to  think  ill of him.  I accordingly  went  to  settle  at  Motiers,  witha  confidence,  the  value  of which  I considered  him  capable  of appre-ciating.  I said  to  myself,  When  Jean  Jacques  raises  himself  to  thelevel  of  Coriolanus,  will  Frederic  show  himself  lower  than  theVolscian  general?Colonel  Roguin  insisted  on  crossing  the  mountain  with  me,  to  seeme  installed  at  Motiers.  A sister-in-law  of Madame  Boy  de la Tour,by name  Madame  Girardier,  who  found  the  house  which  I was  tooccupy  a  great  convenience  to  herself,  was  not  particularly  pleasedat  my  arrival.  However,  she  let me  take  possession  politely  enough,and  I took  my  meals  with  her,  until  Thérése  arrived,  and  my  littleestablishment  was  set  in  order.Since  my  departure  from  Montmorency,  feeling  certain  that  Ishould  henceforth  be  a  wanderer  upon  the  face  of the  earth,  I hesi-tated  about  allowing  her  to  join  me  and  share  the  wandering  lifeto  which  I saw  myself  condemned. I felt  that,  owing  to  this  catas-trophe,  the  relations  between  us  would  be  altered,  and  that  whathad  hitherto  been  a  favour  and  a  kindness  on  my  part  would  hence-forth  be the  same  on  hers.  If her  attachment  remained  proof  againstmy  misfortunes,  she  would  be  greatly  distressed  by them,  and  hergrief  would  only  add  to  my  woes.  If, on  the  other  hand,  my  mis-fortune  cooled  her  affection  for  me,  she  would  look  upon  it  as  asacrifice  if she  remained  constant  to  me;  and,  instead  of feeling  thepleasure  which  I felt  in  sharing  my  last  crust  of bread  with  her,  shewould  only  be  sensible  of her  own  merit  in consenting  to  follow  mewhithersoever  destiny  might  force  me  to  go.I must  speak  without  reserve.  I have  never  concealed  either  mypoor  mamma’s  faults  or  my  own.  I must  not  show  greater  favourto  Thérése  either;  and,  pleased  as  I am  to  render  honour  to  one  whois so  dear  to  me,  neither  do I wish  to  conceal  her  faults,  if so  be thatan  involuntary  change  in the heart’s  affections  is really  a  fault.  I hadlong  since  observed  that  her  affection  for  me  had  cooled.  I felt  thatshe  no  longer  was  towards  me  what  she  had  been  in our  best  days;and I felt  it the  more,  as  I was  always  the  same  towards  her.  I wasCOLDNESS  OF  THERESE617conscious  again  of  an  unpleasantness,  the  effects  of  which  I hadformerly  felt  when  with  mamma;  and  the  effect  was  the  same  withThérèse.  Let  us  not  look for  perfections  which  are  not  to be  foundin nature;  it would  be the  same  with  any  other  woman  whatsoever.The  course  of action  I hfd  taken  in regard  to  my  children,  howeverrational  it had  appeared  to  me,  had  not  always  left my heart  in peace.While  thinking  over  my  “Traité  de  Education,”  I felt  that  I hadneglected  duties  from  which  nothing  could  excuse  me.  My remorseat  length  became  so  keen,  that  it almost  extorted  from  me  a  publicconfession  of my  error  at  the beginning  of “Emile”;  and  the  allusionitself  is  so  obvious  in  a  certain  passage,  that  it is  surprising  to  mehow  anyone,  after  having  read  it, can  have  had  the  courage  to  re-proach  me.  My  situation,  however,  was  at  that  time  the  same,  andeven  aggravated  by the  animosity  of my  enemies,  who  only  soughtto  find  me  at  fault.  I was  afraid  of a  repetition;  and,  not  desiring  torun  the  risk  of it, I preferred  to  condemn  myself  to  strict  continence,than  to  expose  Thérése  to  the risk  of finding  herself  in the  same  con-dition  again.  Besides,  I had  observed  that  intercourse  with  womendistinctly  aggravated  my  ill-health;  the corresponding  vice,  of whichI have  never  been  able  to  cure  myself  completely,  appeared  to  me  toproduce  less  injurious  results.  These  two  reasons  combined  causedme  to  form  resolutions  which  I had  sometimes  been  very  inconsistentin keeping,  but  in which  I had  persevered  with  greater  firmness  forthe  last  three  or  four  years.  Since  then  I had  observed  a  coldness  onthe  part  of  Thérèse;  she  had  the  same  attachment  for  me  from  afeeling  of duty, no  longer  from  love.  This  naturally  made  our  inter-course  less  pleasant,  and  I thought  that,  feeling  sure  that  I shouldcontinue  to  look  after  her  wherever  she  might  be,  she  would  per-haps  prefer  to  remain  in  Paris  than  to  wander  through  the  worldwith  me.  However,  she  had  exhibited  such  grief  at  our  separation,she had  exacted  from  me  such  positive  promises  that  we  should  cometogether  again,  she  had  so  strongly  expressed  a  desire  to  that  effectsince  my  departure,  both  to  the  Prince  de Conti  and  M.  de  Luxem-bourg,  that,  far  from  having  the  courage  to  speak  to  her  of  separa-tion,  I could  scarcely  bear  to  think  of  it myself;  and,  when  I oncefelt how  utterly  impossible  it was  for me  to  do without  her, my  onlythought  was  to call  her back  to me  immediately.  I accordingly  wrota618THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUto  her  to  set  out;  she  came.  It was  hardly  two  months  since  I hadleft  her;  but  it was  our  first  separation,  after  the  many  years  we  hadbeen  together.  We  had  both  felt  it cruelly.  What  a  shock,  when  weembraced  each  other!  How  sweet  are  tears  of  tenderness  and  joy!How  my  heart  revels  in  them!  Why  have  I been  permitted  to  shedso  few!On  my  arrival  at  Motiers,  I had  written  to  Lord  Keith,  Marshalof Scotland,  Governor  of Neufchatel,  to  inform  him  that  I had  takenrefuge  in His  Majesty’s  territory,  and  to  ask  him  for  his  protection.He  replied  with  the  well-known  generosity  which  I expected  fromhim.  He  invited  me  to  go  and  see  him.  I went  with  M.  Martinet,lord  of the  manor  of  Val-de-Travers,  who  stood  high  in  his  Excel-lency’s  esteem.  The  venerable  appearance  of  this  illustrious  andvirtuous  Scotchman  made  a  powerful  impression  upon  my  heart,and  that  very  moment  was  the  commencement  of  that  strong  at-tachment  between  us,  which  on  my  part  has  always  remained  thesame,  and  would  still  be  the  same  on  his, had  not  the  traitors,  whohave  robbed  me  of  all  the  consolations  of  life,  profited  by my  ab-sence  to  deceive  him,  weakened  as  he is by old  age,  and  to  misrepre-sent  me  in  his  eyes.George  Keith,  hereditary  Marshal  of Scotland,  and brother  of thecelebrated  General  Keith,  who,  after  a glorious  life, died  an  honour-able  death,  had  left  his native  land  when  a  young  man,  having  beenoutlawed  for  his  attachment  to  the  house  of Stuart,  with  which  theunjust  and  tyrannical  spirit  which  he  found  in  it, and  which  wasalways  its  ruling  characteristic,  soon  disgusted  him.  He  lived  forsome  time  in  Spain,  the  climate  of  which  suited  him,  and  at  last,like  his  brother,  attached  himself  to  the  King  of Prussia,  who  wasa  judge  of men  and  received  them  as  they  deserved.  He  was  amplyrepaid  for  this  reception  of them  by the  great  services  rendered  himby Marshal  Keith,  and  by what  was  even  more  valuable,  his  sincerefriendship.  The  great  soul  of  this  worthy  man,  thoroughly  proudand  republican,  could  only  bow  to  the  yoke  of  friendship;  but  tothis  it bowed  so  completely  that,  although  his  principles  were  verydifferent,  he  no  longer  saw  anyone  but  Frederic  from  the  momenthe became  attached  to  him.  The  King intrusted  him with  importantcommissions,  and  sent  him  to  Paris  and  Spain;  and,  finally,  seeingLORD  KEITH619that, already  advanced  in years,he  needed  repose,  he bestowed  uponhim  the  government  of Neufchâtel,  where  he  spent  the  rest  of hislife  in  retirement,  occupied  with  the  delightful  task  of  renderingthis  little  country  happy.The  inhabitants  of  Neufchatel,  who  are  fond  of  nothing  buttrifles  and  tinsel,  who  are  no  judge  of genuine  goods,  and  think  thattalent  consists  in  long  phrases,  when  they  saw  a  man  who  was  un-emotional  and  unaffected,  took  his simplicity  for pride, his franknessfor  rudeness,  and  his  conciseness  for  stupidity,  and  revolted  againsthis  beneficent  measures,  because,  desiring  to  be  useful  withoutcajolery,  he  did  not  know  how  to  flatter  those  whom  he  did  notesteem.  In  the  ridiculous  affair  of Petitpierre,  who  was  driven  outby his brother  clergymen,  because  he had  refused  to  believe  that  theywere  eternally  damned,  the  Marshal,  who  had  opposed  their  en-croachments,  found  the  whole  country,  whose  part  he  took,  up  inarms  against  him;  and,  at  the  time  of my  arrival,  this  foolish  excite-ment  was  not  yet  allayed.  He  was,  at  least,  still  regarded  as  a  manwho  allowed  himself  to  be  prejudiced;-and,  of  all  the  imputationsbrought  against  him,  this  was  perhaps  the  least  unjust.  My  firstfeeling,  on  seeing  this  venerable  old  man,  was  one  of emotion  at  theleanness  of his body,  already  emaciated  by old  age;  but  when I liftedmy  eyes  towards  his  animated,  frank,  and  noble  features,  this  wassucceeded  by a feeling  of  respect  mingled  with  confidence,  whichovercame  every  other  sentiment.  To  the  brief  compliment  which  Ipaid him  when I presented  myself,  he replied  by speaking  of some-thing  else,  as  if I had  been  there  a  week.  He  did  not  even  bid  us  sitdown.  The  starchy  lord  of the  manor  remained  standing,  but  I sawin  my  lord’s  keen  and  penetrating  eye  something  so  genial  andfriendly,  that,  feeling  at  my  ease  at  once,  without  further  ceremonyI went  and  sat  down  on  the  sofa  by his side.  From  the  familiar  tone,which  he  immediately  assumed,  I felt  that  this  freedom  on  my  partwas  agreeable  to  him,  and  that  he  said  to  himself,  “This  is  noNeufchatelois.”Singular  effect  of  strong  similarity  of character!  At  an  age  when'  the  heart  has  already  lost  its  natural  warmth,  that  of this  good  old:  man  warmed  towards  me  in  a  manner  which  surprised  everyone.8 Prétintaille:  literally,  some  kind  of  dress  trimming.620THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUHe  came  to see  me  at  Motiers,  under  pretence  of shooting  quails, andspent  two  days  without  touching  a  gun.  We  became  so  friendly—that  is the  correct  word—that  we  could  not  do  without  each  other.The  chateau  of Colombier,  where  he  lived  in  the  summer,  was  sixleagues  distant  from  Motiers:  I went  at  least  every  fortnight  to  spendtwenty-four  hours  there,  and  then  returned  like  a  pilgrim,  with  myheart  always  full  of  him.  The  emotions  of  which  I was  formerlysensible  during  my  journeys  from  the  Hermitage  to  Eaubonne  werecertainly  very  different,  but  they  were  not  sweeter  than  those  withwhich  I approached  Colombier.  What  tears  of  tenderness  I haveoften  shed  on  my  way,  while  thinking  of the  paternal  kindness,  theamiable  virtues,  and  the  gentle  philosophy-of  this  worthy  old  man!{ called  him  my  father,  and  he  called  me  his  child.  These  sweetnames  give  a  partial  idea  of  the  attachment  which  united  us,  butthey  do  not  give  an  idea  of  the  need  of  each  other  which  we  felt,and  of our  continued  desire  to  be together.  He  insisted  upon  puttingme  up  at  the  chateau  of Colombier,  and  for  a  long time  pressed  meto  take  up  my  quarters  perfnanently  in  the  apartment  which I oc-cupied.  At last,  I told  him  that  I was  freer  at my  own  house,  and  that  .I preferred  to  spend  my  time  in  going  to  see  him.  He  approved  ofmy  frankness,  and  said  no  more  about  the  matter.  O my  good  lord!O my  worthy  father!  how  my  heart  is still  stirred  by emotion  whenI think  of you!  Oh!  the  barbarians!  What  a  blow  have  they  dealtme  in separating  you  from  me!  But,  no,  no,  great  man:  you  are,  andalways  will  be, the  same  for  me,  who  am  ever  the  same!  They  havedeceived  you,  but  they  have  not  altered  you.My Lord  Marshal  is not  entirely  free from  faults:  he is  a wise  man,but  still  a man.  Although  gifted  with  the  most  penetrating  intellect,the  most  delicate  tact  that  a man  can  possibly  possess,  and  the  mostprofound  knowledge  of  men,  he  sometimes  allows  himself  to  bedeceived,  and  cannot  be undeceived.  His  temper  is curious;  there  issomething  whimsical  and  strange  in  his  turn  of  mind.  He  appearsto  forget  people  whom  he  sees  every  day,  and  remembers  them  atthe  moment  when  they  least  expect  it, and  his  attentions  seem  outof place.  His  presents  are  given  capriciously,  without  regard  to  theirsuitability.  On  the  spur  of  the  moment  he  sends  or  gives  whateveroccurs  to  him,  without  discrimination,  whether  it be  very  valuableKINDNESS  OF  LORD  KEITH621or  absolutely  worthless.  A young  Genevese,  who  desired  to  enter  theservice  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  presented  himself  before  him;  mylord  gave  him,  instead  of-a  letter,  a  little  bag full  of peas  which  hecommissioned  him  to  deliver  to  the  King,  who,  on  receipt  of  thissingular  letter  of recommendation,  immediately  gave  a  place  to  thebearer.  These  lofty  geniuses  have  a  language  of  their  own,  whichvulgar minds  will  never  understand.  These  little  oddities,  resemblingthe  caprices  of  a  pretty  woman,  only  served  to  render  my  LordMarshal  more  interesting.  I was  quite  sure,  and  I have  since  foundit to  be the  case,  that  they had  exercised  no  influence  either  upon  hisfeelings  or  upon  the  attention  which  friendship  imposes  upon  himin serious  matters.  But  it is true  that,  in conferring  an  obligation,  heexhibits  the  same  singularity  as  in his manners.  I will  quote  a  singleinstance  of this  in  regard  to  a  matter  of trifling  importance.  As  thejourney  from  Motiers  to  Colombier  was  too  much  for  me  to  makein  a  day,  I generally  broke  it by starting  after  dinner,  and  sleepingat  an  inn  at  Brot,  about  halfway.  The  landlord,  named  Sandoz,who  wanted  to  solicit  at  Berlin  a  favour  which  was  of  the  greatestimportance  to  him,  begged  me  to  induce  his  Excellency  to  ask  it onhis  behalf.  I gladly  consented.  I took  him  with  me,  left  him  in  theantechamber,  and  mentioned  his  business  to  my  lord,  who  made  noreply.  The  morning  passed,  and  on  walking  through  the  hall  on  myway  to  dinner,  I saw  poor  Sandoz,  who  was  utterly  tired  of waiting.Thinking  that  my  lord  had  forgotten  him,  I spoke  about  him  againbefore  we  sat  down  to  table.  Not  a  word,  as  before.  I found  this  man-ner  of hinting  to  me  that  I was  troublesome  somewhat  severe,  and  Iheld  my  tongue,  pitying  poor  Sandoz  in my  own  mind.  On  return-ing home  the next  day, I was  greatly  surprised  by his profuse  thanksfor  the  kindly  reception  and  the  good  dinner  which  his  Excelleacyhad  given  him,  besides  taking  charge  of  his  papers.  Three  weekslater,  my  lord  sent  him  the  rescript  for  which  he  had  asked,  madeout  by the minister  and  signed  by the  King,  and  this  without  havingsaid  a  single  word  or  made  an  answer  to  either  myself  or  Sandoz  inregard  to  the  matter,  with  which  I believed  he did  not  wish  to  haveanything  to  do.I should  like  to  speak  incessantly  of George  Keith.  It is with  himthat  my  last  happy  recollections  are  connected;  the  rest  of  my  life622THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUhas  been  nothing  but  sorrow  and  affliction.  The  remembrance  of ithas  been  so  melancholy,  and  comes  back  to  me  so  confusedly,  thatit is no  longer  possible  for  me  to  introduce  any  order  into  my  narra-tive.  I shall  be  obliged,  from  this  time  forth,  to  arrange  the  factshaphazard,  as  they present  themselves  to  me.I was  soon  reliéved  of my  uneasiness  in  regard  to  my  asylum,  bythe  answer  of the  King  to  the  Marshal,  in  whom,  as  may  be  imag-ined,  I had  found  a  powerful  advocate.  His  Majesty  not  only  ap-proved  of what  I had  done,  but  also—for  I must  conceal  nothing—commissioned  him  to  give  me  twelve  Jouts.  The  worthy  Marshal,embarrassed  by such  a  commission,  and  not  knowing  how  to  acquithimself  of it delicately,  endeavoured  to  soften  the  affront  by chang-ing the  money  into  provisions,  and  informing  me  that  he  had  beenordered  to  supply  me  with  wood  and  coal  to  start  my  housekeeping;he even  added,  perhaps  on  his  own  initiative,  that  the  King  wouldbe pleased  to  have  a  small  house  built  for  me,  according  to  my  owntaste,  if  I  would  choose  a site  for  it.  This  last  offer  touched  megreatly,  and  made  me  forget  the  stinginess  of  the  other.  Withoutaccepting  either,  I looked  upon  Frederic  as  my  benefactor  and  pro-tector,  and  conceived  so  sincere  an  attachment  to  him,  that  fromthat  time  forth  I took  as  much  interest  in  his  reputation  as  I hadhitherto  found  injustice  in  his  success.  When  peace  was  concludedshortly  afterwards,  I testified  my  joy  by  an  illumination,  whichshowed  very  good  taste.  This  was  a  row  of garlands,  with  which  Idecorated  the  house  in  which  I was  living,  and  upon  which,  it  istrue,  I spent,  in a  spirit  of revengeful  pride,  almost  as  much  moneyas  he  had  wanted  to  give  me.  Peace  being  concluded,  I imaginedthat,  since  his  military  and  political  reputation  was  at  its  height,  heintended  to  secure  for  himself  one  of a  different  kind,  by revivingthe  prosperity  of  his  States,  through  the  restoration  of  commerceand  husbandry;  by creating  a  new  soil  and  peopling  it  anew;  bycontinuing  at  peace  with  all  his  neighbours,  and  making  himselfthe  umpire  of  Europe,  after  having  been  its  terror.  He  could  laydown  the  sword  without  risk,  in  the  full  confidence  that  he  wouldnot  be  obliged  to  take  it up  again.  Seeing  that  he  did  not  disarm,  Iwas  afraid  that  he  would  not  know  how  to  use  his  advantagesaright,  and  that  he was  only half  a great  man.  I ventured  to  write  toASSUMES  THE  ARMENIAN  COSTUME623him  on  this  subject,  and  adopted  the tone  of familiarity  best  adaptedto  please  men  of  his  stamp,  in  order  that  the  holy  voice  of  truth,which  so  few  kings  are  born  to  hear,  might  reach  him.  It was  onlyin confidence,  between  our  two  selves,  that  I took  this  liberty.  I didnot  even  communicate  may  secret  to  the  Marshal,  and  I sent  him  myletter  to  the  King,  carefully  sealed.  My lord  sent  the  letter  withoutinquiring  about  its  contents.  The  King  made  no  reply;  and,  sometime  afterwards,  when  the  Marshal  went  to  Berlin,  he  merely  toldhim  that  I had  severely  scolded  him.  I understood  from  this  thatmy  letter  had  been  ill received,  and  that  my  outspoken  zeal  had  beenlooked  upon  as  pedantic  awkwardness.  At  bottom,  this  may  havebeen  really  the case.  Perhaps  I did  not  say  what  I ought  to  have  said,and  had  not  adopted  the  tone  which  I ought  to  have  adopted.  I can,only  answer  for  the  feeling  which  made  me  take  the  pen  into  myhand.Shortly  after  my  establishment  at  Motiers-Travers,  having  re-ceived  every  possible  assurance  that  I should  be  left  in  peace,  I as-sumed  the  Armenian  costume.  This  was  not  a  new  idea  of  mine;it had  often  occurred  to  me  in  the  course  of  my  life,  and  it oftenoccurred  to  me  again  at  Montmorency,  where  the  constant  use  ofbougies,  which  frequently  compelled  me  to  keep  my  room,  mademe  sensible  of  the  advantages  of  a  long  garment.  The  chance  af-forded  by an  Armenian  tailor,  who  frequently  came  on a visit  to  arelation  at  Montmorency,  tempted  me  to  take  advantage  of  it, inorder  to  assume  this  new  costume,  in  spite  of  what  people  mightsay,  to  which I paid  but  little  heed.  However,  before  adopting  thisnew  outfit,  I desired  to  have  the  advice  of  Madame  de  Luxem-bourg,  who  strongly  advised  me  to  do  so.  I accordingly  procured  alittle  Armenian  wardrobe;  but  the  storm,  which  was  roused  againstme,  made  me  put  off  wearing  it until  the  times  were  calmer,  and  itwas  not  until  several  months  later  that,  being  obliged  by fresh  at-tacks  of my  complaint  to  have  recourse  to  bougies,  I thought  that  Imight,  without  risk,  assume  this  dress  at  Motiers,  especially  afterhaving  consulted  the  pastor  of the  place,  who  told  me  that  I couldwear  it even  in church  without  giving  offence.  I accordingly  put  onthe jacket,  caftan,  fur cap,  and  girdle;  and, after  having  been  presentat  divine  service  in  it,  I saw  no  impropriety  in  wearing  it  in  theNieESADSe  sy  DeeVVsVIvNoVsBM  Ve  eeepresence  of my Lord  Marshal.  His Excellency,  when  he saw  me  thus:attired,  said, by way  of compliment,  “Salaam  alek;’®  this  ended  thematter,  and  I never  afterwards  wore  any  other  dress.Having  entirely  abandoned  literature,  I only  thought  of leadinga  quiet  and  peaceful  life,  as  far  as  it depended  upon  myself.  Whenalone,  I have  never  known  what  it is to  feel  weary,  even  when  I amentirely  unemployed;  my  imagination  fills  up  every  void,  and  isalone  sufficient  to  occupy  me.  It is  only  the  idle  gossip  of  a  room,when  people  sit  opposite  each  other,  moving  nothing  but  theirtongues,  that  I have  never  been  able  to  endure.  When  walking  ormoving,  I can  put up with  it; the feet  and  eyes  are  at  least  employed;put,  to  remain  with  folded  arms,  talking  about  the  weather  and  theflies  buzzing  round,  or,  what  is  worse,  exchanging  compliments,that  is to  me  unendurable  torture.  That  I might  not  live  quite  like  asavage,  I took  it into  my  head  to  learn  to  make  laces.  I took  mycushion  with  me  on  my  visits,  or,  like  the  women,  I worked  at  my_  door,  and  talked  with  the  passers-by.  This  made  the  empty  chatterendurable,  and  enabled  me  to  spend  my  time  without  wearinessamongst  my  neighbours,  several  of  whom  were  agreeable  enoughand not  destitute  of intelligence.  One  of them, named  Isabelle  d’Iver-nois,  the  daughter  of the procureur-général  of Neufchâtel,  appearedto  me  deserving  of  my  particular  friendship,  of  which  she  has  hadno  reason  to  complain,  for  I gave  her  some  very  useful  advice,  andrendered  her  considerable  services  on  important  occasions;  so  thatnow,  a  respected  and  virtuous  mother  of  a  family,  she  perhaps  owesher  insight,  her  husband,  her  life,  and  her  happiness  to  me.  On  mypart,  I am  indebted  to  her  for  much  gentle  consolation,  especiallyduring  a  very  dull  winter,  when,  whilst  my  maladies  and  suffer-ings  were  at  their  height,  she  came  to  spend,  with  Thérése  and  my-self,  long evenings  which  she  knew  how  to  make  seem  short  by hercheerful  disposition  and  our  mutual  confidences.  She  called  me“papa,”  I called  her  “daughter”;  and  these  names,  which  we  stillgive  each  other,  will,  I hope,  never  cease  to  be  as  dear  to  her  as  tome.  To  make  some  use  of my  laces,  I presented  them  to  my  youngfriends  on  their  marriage,  on  condition  that  they  brought  up  their?  “Peace  be  with  you”—a  form  of salutation  only  interchanged  between  Mus-sulmans.'M.  DU  PEYROU623children.  Her  eldest  sister  received  one  by virtue  of  this,  and  de-served  it; Isabelle  also  had  one,  and,  as  far  as  good intentions  went,equally  deserved it;  but  she has  not  had  the  happiness  of being  ableto  carry  them  out.  Wio sending  them  these  laces,  I wrote  a  letterto  each,  the  first  of which  has  travelled  about  the  world;  the  seconddid  not  obtain  such  celebrity;  the  progress  of  friendship  is not  ac-companied  by so  much  noise.Amongst  the  connections  which  I formed  in  my  neighbourhood,into  the  details  of  which  I do not  propose  to  enter,  I must  not  omitto mention  Colonel  Pury,  who  had  a  house  on  the  mountains,  wherehe was  in the  habit  of coming  to  spend  the  summer.  I was  not  veryanxious  to  make  his  acquaintance,  because  I knew  that  he  was  inbad  odour  at  the  Court,  and  on  bad  terms  with  my  Lord  Marshal,whom  he never  visited.  However,  as  he called  upon  me  and  showedme  great  civility,  I was  obliged  to  return  his  call.  We  continuedto  visit,  and  sometirhes  dined  with  each  other.  At  his  house  I madethe acquaintance  of M. du Peyrou,  with  whom  I became  so  intimatethat  I cannot  avoid  saying  something  about  him.M.  du  Peyrou  was  an  American,  son  of  a  commandant  of  Suri-nam,  whose  widow  married  his successor,  M. de Chambrier  of Neuf-chatel.  Being  left  a  widow  for  the  second  time,  she  came  to  settlewith  her  son  in  her  husband’s  native  country.  Du  Peyrou,  an  onlyson,  very  rich,  and  the  darling  of his  mother,  had  been  brought  upwith  great  care,  and  had  made  good  use  of his  education.  He  hadacquired a great  deal  of  partial  knowledge,  a  certain  taste  for  thearts,  and  he  specially  prided  himself  on  having  cultivated  his  rea-soning  powers.  His  manner,  cold  and  philosophical,  resembling  thatof a  Dutchman,  his  tawny  complexion,  his  silent  and  reserved  dis-position,  strongly  favoured  this  opinion.  He  was  deaf  and  gouty,although  still  young.  This  rendered  all  his  movements  very  deliber-ate  and  solemn;  and,  although  he  was  fond  of arguing,  sometimeseven  at  length,  as  a  rule  he  spoke  little,  because  he  could  not  hear.His  whole  appearance  inspired  me  with  respect.  I said  to  myself:Here  is a  thinker,  a  wise  man,  such  as  one  might  be happy  to  havefor a  friend.  To complete  his conquest  of me,  he often  addressed  me,without  ever  paying  me  a  compliment.  He  rarely  spoke  to  me  abouthimself,  me,  or  my  books.  He  was  not  without  ideas,  and  everything626THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthat  he  said  was  fairly  accurate.  This  accuracy  and  precision  at-tracted  me.  His  mind  possessed  neither  the  loftiness  nor  delicacy  ofthat  of my  Lord  Marshal,  but  it was  just as  simple;  and  thus,  in onerespect,  he  always  represented  him.  I  did  not  become  infatuatedwith  him,  but  was  attracted  to  him  by a  feeling  of esteem;  and  thisesteem  gradually  led  to  friendship.  In  his  case,  I entirely  forgot  theobjection  which  I had  made  to  Baron  d’Holbach—that  he  was  toowealthy;  and  I believe  that  I was  wrong.  I have  learned  to  doubtwhether  a  man,  who  is the  possessor  of a  large  fortune,  whoever  hemay  be, can  be  sincerely  fond  of my  principles  and  their  originator.For  a  considerable  time  I saw  little  of Du  Peyrou,  because  I neverwent  to  Neufchatel,  and  he  only  came  once  a  year  to  see  ColonelPury  on  his  mountain.  Why  did  I never  go  to  Neufchatel?  For  achildish  reason,  which  I must  not  conceal.Although,  under  the  protection  of  the  King  of  Prussia  and  myLord  Marshal,  I at  first  escaped  persecution  in my  retreat,  I did  notescape  the  hostility  of the  public,  the  municipal  magistrates,  and  theclergy.  After  France  had  given  the  signal,  it was  no  longer  goodtaste  not  to  offer  me  some  kind  of insult  at least:  these  persons  wouldhave  been  afraid  of  seeming  to  disapprove  of  the  conduct  of  mypersecutors,  if they  did  not  imitate  them.  The  chief  class  of  Neuf-chatel,  that  is to  say,  the  society  of the  clergy  of the  town,  gave  thefirst  impulse,  by attempting  to  stir  up  the  State  Council  against  me.This  attempt  having  proved  unsuccessful,  the  clergy  turned  to  themunicipal  authorities,  who  immediately  prohibited  my  book,  and,treating  me  on  every  occasion  with  scant  politeness,  gave  me  tounderstand,  even  in  so  many  words,  that, if I had  desired  to  take  upmy  abode  in the  town,  it would  not  have  been  allowed.  They  filledthe  columns  of their  Mercure  with  absurdities  and  the  most  insipidcant,  which,  although  it only excited  the  ridicule  of sensible  persons,none  the  less  provoked  the  people  and  stirred  them  up  against  me.All  this,  however,  to  listen  to  them,  ought  not  have  prevented  mefrom  being  extremely  grateful  to  them  for  allowing  me  to  live  atMotiers,  where  they  had  no  authority;  they  would  willingly  have“measured  out  the  air  to  me  by the  pint,  on  condition  that  I paid  aheavy  price  for  it.  They  desired  that  I should  feel  under  a  greatobligation  to  them  for the protection  which  the  King granted  me  inWRITES  TO  M.  DE  MONTMOLLIN627spite of them,  and  of  which  they were  persistently  working  to  de-prive  me.  At  last,  finding  that they  could  not  succeed,  and  havingdone  me  all  the  harm  they  could,  and  abused  me  with  all  theirmight,  they made a virtue  of their  impotence,  by exalting  their  kind-ness  in  suffering  me  to  remain  in  their  country.  My  only  answerought  to  have  been—t6  laugh  in  their  face;  instead  of  this,  I wassilly  enough  to  feel  annoyed,  and  foolish  enough  to  make  up  mymind  never  to  go to  Neufchâtel:  a  resolution  which  I kept for nearlytwo  years,  as  if  I were  not  showing  such  creatures  too  much  honourby taking  any  notice  of their  conduct,  for  which,  whether  good  orbad,  they  cannot  be  considered  responsible,  since  they  never  actexcept  under  compulsion!  Besides,  uncultivated  and  narrow  minds,which  know  no  other  object  of esteem  but  reputation,  power,  andmoney,  are  far from  even  suspecting  that  any  respect  is due  to  talent,and  that  there  is any  dishonour  in insulting  it.A certain  village  maire,  who  had  been  deprived  of his office  for hismalpractices,  once  said  to  the  lieutenant  of Val-de-Travers,  who  wasmy  Isabelle’s  husband,  “This  Rousseau  is said  to  be  a  man  of greattalent:  bring  him  to  me,  that  I may  see  whether  it  is  true.”  As-suredly,  the  displeasure  of  a man  who  adopts  such a tone  ought  notto  trouble  those  who  are  the objects  of it.Judging  from  the manner  in which  I was  treated  at Paris,  Geneva,Berne,  and  Neufchâtel,  I expected  no  greater  consideration  fromthe  pastor  of the  place.  However,  I had  been  recommended  to  himby Madame  Boy  de  la Tour,  and  he  had  received  me  very  kindly;but,  in  this  country,  where  flattery  is  universal,  courtesies  go  fornothing.  But,  after  my  solemn  reunion  with  the  Reformed  Church,and  living  in  a  Protestant  country,  I could  not,  without  breakingmy  vows  and  failing  in  my  duties  as  a citizen,  neglect  the  publicprofession  of the  religion  which  I had  again  adopted:  I therefore  at-tended  divine  service.  On  the  other  hand,  I was  afraid  that,  by pre-senting  myself at  the Lord’s  table,  I might expose  myself  to  the insultof a refusal;  and  it was  highly  improbable  that, after  the  stir  that  hadbeen  created  at  Geneva  by the  Council  and  at  Neufchatel  by theclergy,  he would  quietly  administer  the  Holy  Communion  to  me  inhis church.  As  the  time  of Communion  was  near,  I decided  to  writeto  M.  de  Montmollin—this  was  the  minister's  name—in  order  to628THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUprove  my  good  intentions,  and  to  inform  him  that,  at  heart,  I hadalways  been  a  member  of the  Reformed  Church.  I told  him  at  thesame  time  that,  in  order  to  avoid  all  disputes  about  the  articles  offaith,  I declined  to  listen  to  any  special  explanation  upon  points  ofdogma.  Having  thus  set  myself  right  in  this  quarter,  I remainedquiet,  not  feeling the  least  doubt  that  M.  de  Montmollin  would  re-fuse  to  admit  me  without  the  preliminary  discussion,  with  which  Iabsolutely  declined  to  have  anything  to  do,  and  that  the  matterwould  thus  be  settled,  without  any  blame  being  attached  to  me.But  nothing  of the  kind  happened.  At  the  moment  when  I least  ex-pected  it, M.  de  Montmollin  came  to  tell  me,  not  only  that  he  waswilling  to  admit  me  to  the  Communion,  under  the  condition  forwhich  I had  stipulated,  but,  more  than  this,  that  he  and  his  eldersconsidered  it a  great  honour  to  have  me  as  one  of  the  members  oftheir  flock.  I was  never  so  surprised  in  my  life,  and  nothing  hasever  afforded  me  greater  consolation.  It  appeared  to  me  a  mostgloomy  fate,  to  live  always  isolated  in  the  world,  especially  in  timeof adversity.  In the midst  of so  many  proscriptions  and  persecutions,I found  the  greatest  consolation  in  being  able  to  say  to  myself,  Atleast  I am  amongst  my  brethren;  and  I went  to  Communion  with  aheart  greatly  moved  and  affected  to  tears,  which  was  perhaps  thepreparation  most  acceptable  to  God  that  one  could  take  to  His  table.Some  time  afterwards,  my  lord  sent  me a letter  from  Madame  deBoufflers,  which—so  at  least  I imagine—came  through  D’Alembert,who  was  acquainted  with  him.  In  this  letter, the  first  that  this  ladyhad  written  to  me  since  my  departure  from  Montmorency,  sheseverely  scolded  me  for  having  written  to  M.  de  Montmollin,  and,above  all,  for  having  communicated.  I was  the  less  able  to  under-stand  what  was  the  object  of her  reprimand,  since,  from  the  time  ofmy  journey  to  Geneva,  I had  always  openly  proclaimed  myself  aProtestant,  and  had  publicly  attended  the  Hôtel  de Hollande,'®  andno  one  in the world  had  made  any  objection.  It seemed  highly  amus-ing that  Madame  la Comtesse  de Boufflers  should  desire  to  interferewith  the direction  of my conscience  in matters  of religion.  However,as  I did  not  doubt  that  her  intentions—although I utterly  failed  to1°  The  chapel  of the  Reformed  Chureh.THE  DECREE  OF  CENSURE629understand  them—were  the  best  possible,  I took  no  offence  at  thisremarkable  attack,  and  I replied  to  her  without  irritation,  at  thesame  time  quietly  explaining  my  reasons.Meanwhile,  the printed  abuse  against  me  continued  as before,  andits  kindly  authors  reprgached  the  authorities  with  treating-me  tooleniently.  This  chorus  of  yelping,  the  leaders  of  which  continuedto  act  under  cover,  was  somewhat  ill-omened  and  alarming.  For  mypart,  I let them  yelp,  without  troubling  myself.  I was  assured  that adecree  of censure  had  been  obtained  from  the  Sorbonne;?!  I refusedto  believe  it.  How  could  the  Sorbonne  interfere  in  the  matter?  Didthe  members  desire  to  settle  that  I was  not  a  Catholic?  Everybodyknew  this  already.  Did  they  desire  to  prove  that  I was  not  a  goodCalvinist?  What  did  it matter  to  them?  That  would  be  to  take  asingular  responsibility  upon  themselves,  and  to  pose  as  the  substi-tutes  of our  ministers.  Before  I had  seen  the  document,  I believedthat  it was  being  circulated  in  the  name  of the  Sorbonne,  in  orderto  insult  its  members;  I felt  even  more  convinced  of  this  after  Ihad  read  it.  At  last,  when  I was  unable  to  doubt  its  genuinenessany  longer,  nothing  was  left  for me  to  believe  except  that  the  properplace for  the  Sorbonne  was  a  lunatic  asylum.[1763.]—Another  document  affected  me  more,  because  it  pro-ceeded  from  a  man  whom  I had  always  esteemed,  and  whose  firm-ess  I admired,  while  pitying  his  blindness.  I am  speaking  of  theetter!?  written  by the  Archbishop  of Paris  against  me.I thought  it  incumbent  upon  me  to  reply  to  it.  I could  do  sowithout  lowering  myself;  it was  a  case  almost  similar  to  that  of theKing  of Poland.  I have  never  been  fond  of brutal  quarrels,  a la  Vol-taire.  I can  only  fight  in  a  dignified  manner,  and,  before  I con-descend  to  defend  myself,  I must  be assured  that  he  who  attacks  mewill  not  dishonour  my  blows.  I had  no  doubt  that  this  mandatoryletter  was  the  work  of  the  Jesuits;  and,  although  they  were  them-selves  in  very  great  distress  at  the  time,  I recognised  in  it their  an-cient  maxim—that  of crushing  the  unfortunate.  I was  thus  enabledu  A  famous  school  of  theology  at  the  time.12 Mandement:  an  episcopal  letter.630THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUto  follow  my  own  established  principle—that  of  honouring  theauthor  whose  name  the  work  bore,  and  of  pulverising  the  workitself;  and  this  I think  I did  with  great  success.I found  my  stay  at  Motiers  very  agreeable;  nothing  but  an  as-sured  means  of  livelihood  was  wanting  to  make  me  decide  to  endmy  days  there;  but  living  was  rather  expensive,  and  all  my  formerschemes  had  been  upset  by the  break-up  of my  old  household  andthe establishment  of a  new  one,  by the  sale  or  dispersal  of my  effects,and  by the  expenses  which  I had  been  obliged  to  incur  since  mydeparture  from  Montmorency.  I  saw  my  little  capital  dwindlingdaily;  two  or  three  years  would  be  sufficient  to  consume  what  wasleft,  while  I saw  no  means  of  replacing  it, unless  I began  to  writebooks  again—a  fatal  profession,  which  I had  already  abandoned.Convinced  that  my  situation  would  soon  alter,  and  that  the public,recovering  from  its madness,  would  put  the  authorities  to  the blush,my only desire  was  to make  my means  last until  this happy alterationtook  place,  which  would  make  it easier  for  me  to  take  my  choice  ofsuch  means  of  subsistence  as  might  present  themselves,  With  thisobject,  I again  took  up  my  “Dictionnaire  de Musique,”  which,  afterten  years’  labour,  was  already  far  advanced,  and  only needed a finalrevision,  and  to  be  copied  out  fairly.  My book,  which  had  recentlybeen  sent  on  to  me,  furnished  me  with  the  means  of finishing  thiswork:  my  papers,  which  were  sent  at  the  same  time,  enabled  me  tostart  upon  my  Memoirs,  to  which  I intended  henceforth  to  devotmy  sole  attention.  I began  by copying  some  letters  in  a  collection,to  serve  as  a  guide  to  my  memory  in  the  order  of events  and  dates.I had  already  picked  out  those  which  I intended  to  keep  for  thispurpose,  and  they  were  arranged  in  an  almost  unbroken  series  forthe  last  ten  years.  However,  while  arranging  them  for  copying,I found  a gap  which  surprised  me.  This  embraced a period  of nearlysix months,  from  October,  1756, to  the  following  March.  I perfectlyremembered  having  included  in  my  collection  a  number  of lettersfrom  Diderot,  Deleyre,  Madame  d’Epinay,  Madame  Chenonceaux,and  others,  which  bridged  over  this  gap  and  could  no  longer  befound.  What  had  become  of them?  Had  anyone  touched  my  papersduring  the  few  months  they had  remained  at  the  Hôtel  de Luxem-hourg?  This  was  inconceivable:  for  I had  seen  M.  de LuxembourgHIS  PAPERS  TAMPERED  WITH631himself  take  the  key  of  the  room-in  which  T had  deposited  them.As  several  letters  from  ladies,  and all  those  from  Diderot,  were  un-dated,  and  as  I had  been  obliged  to  fill in  these  dates  from  memoryand, as  it were,  groping  in the dark,  in order  to  arrange  these  lettersin  order,  I at  first  thought  that  I had made  some  mistakes in  dates,and  I went  over  all the fétters  which  were  undated,  or  in which  I hadmyself  inserted  the  dates,  to  see  if  I could  not  find  those  which  wereneeded  to  fill  up  the  gap.  This  attempt  was  unsuccessful:  I foundthat  the  gap  was  a real  one,  and  that  the  letters  had  certainly  beenabstracted.  By  whom  and  for  what  reason?  This  was  beyond  mypowers  of comprehension.  These  letters,  prior  to  my  great  quarrels,and  belonging  to  the time  of my  first  infatuation  for  “Julie,”  were  ofno  interest  to  anybody.  They  contained,  at  most,  some  bickeringsof Diderot,  some  bantering  from  Deleyre,  some  assurances  of friend-ship  from  Madame  de  Chenonceaux,  and  even  from  Madamed’Epinay,  with  whom  I was  then  on  the  best  possible  terms.  Towhom  could  these  letters  be of any  importance?  What  was  intendedto  be  done  with  them?  It was  not  until  seven  years  later  that  I sus-pected  the  frightful  purpose  of this  theft.Having  settled  the  fact  of this  deficiency,  I proceeded  to  examinemy  rough  copies,  to  see  whether  I could  discover  any  further  loss.I found  several  missing,  and  this,  as  I had  a  very  bad  memory,made  me  imagine  I should  find  it the  same  with  my  multitudinouspapers.  Those  which  I missed  were  the  rough  copy  of  “La  MoraleSensitive,”  and  the  extract  of the  “Adventures  de Mylord  Edouard.”The  absence  of the  latter,  I confess,  caused  me  to  suspect  Madamede  Luxembourg.  It  was  her  valet  de  chambre,  La  Roche,  who  hadforwarded  my  papers,  and  I could  not  think  of  anyone  else  whocould  feel  any  interest  in  this  fragment;  but  how  could  the  otherhave  interested  her;  or  the  letters  which  had  been  abstracted,  ofwhich  no  use  could  be  made,  even  with  the  worst  intentions  to  in-jure me,  unless  they were  fraudulently  altered?  As for M. de Luxem-bourg,  of whose  invariable  uprightness  and  genuine  friendship  I feltassured,  I could  not  for  a moment  suspect  him.  I could  not  even  fixthe  suspicion  upon  Madame  la Maréchale.  The  most  reasonable  sup-position  that  I could  think  of, after  long  racking  my  brains  to  dis-cover  the  thief,  was  to  fix  the  guilt  upon  D’Alembert,  who,  having632THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUalready  made  his  way  into  Madame  de  Luxembourg’s  good  graces,might  have  found  means  to  rummage  amongst  these  papers,  andto  abstract  whatever  he  pleased,  whether  manuscripts  or  letters,either  with  the  intention  of stirring  up  some  annoyance  against  me,or  of  appropriating  to  himself  what  might  be  useful  to  him.  Iimagined  that,  misled  by the  title  of  “La  Morale  Sensitive,”  he  ex-pected  to  find  in it the  sketch  of  a  real  treatise  upon  Materialism,which  he might have  been  able  to  use  against  me  in  a manner  whichmay  easily  be  imagined.  Feeling  sure  that  he  would  soon  be  unde-ceived  on  examining  the rough  copy,  and  having  made  up  my  mindto  abandon  literature  altogether,  I troubled  myself  little  about  thesepetty  larcenies,  which  were,  perhaps,  not  the  first  committed  by thesame  hand  which  I have  endured  without  complaining.**  I soonthought  no  more  of this  disloyalty,  as  if no  similar  act  had  ever  beencommitted  against  me,  and  I began  to  arrange  the  materials  whichhad  been  left  to  me,  in  order  to  work  at  my  Confessions.I had  long  believed  that  the  society  of  the  clergy  at  Geneva,or,  at  least,  the  citizens  and  burgesses,  would  protest  against  theinfringement  of the  edict  involved  in the  decree  against  myself.  Allremained  quiet,  at  least  in outward  appearance,  for  a general  feelingof  discontent  prevailed,  which  only  waited  for  an  opportunity  ofmanifesting  itself.  My friends,  or  those  who  called  themselves  such,wrote  letter  after  letter,  urging  me  to  go  and  put  myself  at  theirhead,  and  assuring  me  of a  public  apology  on  the  part  of the  Coun-cil.  The  fear  of  the  disorder  and  disturbance,  which  my  presencemight  cause,  prevented  me  from  yielding  to  their  entreaties;  and,faithful  to  the  vow  I had  formerly  made—never  to  mix  myself  upin  any  civil  quarrel  in  my  own  country—I  preferred  to  let  theoffence  against  justice  remain  as  it  was  and  to  exile  myself  frommy  native  land  for ever,  than  to  enter  it again by violent  and  danger-*T  had  found,  in  his  “Eléments  de  Musique,”  several  things  which  had  beentaken  from  my  article  in the  “Encyclopédie,”  which  had  been  sent  to  him  severalyears  before  the  publication  of his  “Eléments.”  I do  not  know  what  share  he  mayhave  had  in  a  work  entitled  “Dictionnaire  des  Beaux-arts,”  but  I have  found  init articles  copied  word  for  word  from  mine,  long  before  these  same  articles  wereprinted  in  the  “Encyclopédie.”““LETTRES  ÉCRITES  DE  LA  CAMPAGNE”633ous  means.  I had  certainly  expected, on the  part  of  the  burgesses,legal  and  peaceful  remonstrances  against  an  infringement  whichgreatly  concerned  them.  But nothing  of the  kind  took  place.  Thoseat  their  head  were  less  anxious  for  the  real  redress  of  wrongs  thanfor  an  opportunity  of making  themselves  necessary.  They  intrigued,but  kept  silence,  and  allowed  the  gossips  and  hypocrites  to  prate,who  were  put  forward  by the  Council  to  render  me  odious  in  theeyes  of the  people,  and  to  cause  its  insolence  to  be  attributed  to  re-ligious  zeal.After  having  waited  in vain,  for more  than  a  year,  for  someone  toprotest  against  an  illegal  procedure,  I at  last made  up my  mind;  and,finding  myself  abandoned  by my  fellow-citizens,  I determined  torenounce  my  ungrateful  country,  in  which  I had  never  lived,  fromwhich  I had  received  no  kindness  or  assistance,  and  by which,  asthe  reward  of the honour  which  I had  endeavoured  to  bestow  uponit,  I found  myself,  by unanimous  consent,  so  unworthily  treated,seeing  that  those  who  ought  to  have  spoken  had  never  uttered  aword.  I accordingly  wrote  to  the chief  syndic  for that  year,  who  was,I believe,  M.  Favre,  a  letter  in  which  I solemnly  renounced  my  bur-gess  rights,  at  the  same  time  being  careful  to  observe  in  it the  be-coming  and  moderate  language,  which  I have  always  employed,when  acting  in  accordance  with  the  dictates  of my  pride,  as  I havefrequently  been  compelled  to  do  by the  cruelty  of  my  enemies,  intime  of misfortune.remonstrances,This  step  at  last  opened  the  eyes  of the  citizens;  feeling  that  theyhad  acted  against  their  own  interests  in  abandoning  my  defence,they  took  it  up  when  it  was  too  late.  They  had  other  grievances,which  they  added  to  mine,  and  made  them  the  subject  of  severalvery  well-reasonedandstrengthened,  in proportion  as  the  rude  and  discouraging  refusals  ofthe Council,  which  felt itself  supported  by the French  ministry,  madethem  feel  more  strongly  the  design  which  had  been  formed  forkeeping  them  in a state  of  subjection.  These  disputes  called  forthvarious  pamphlets,  which  decided  nothing,  until  there  suddenlyappeared  the  “Lettres  écrites  de  la Campagne,”  a  work  written  insupport  of the  Council  with  infinite  skill,  and  which  for  a  time  re-which  they  extended634THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUduced  to  silence  and  crushed  the  party  of  remonstrance.*  Thiswork,  a  lasting  memorial  of the  rare  talents  of  its  author,  was  theproduction  of the  Procureur-général  Tronchin,  an  enlightened  andtalented  man,  who  had  a  profound  knowledge  of the  laws  and  con-stitution  of the  Republic  Silust  terra.[1764.]—The  party  of remonstrance,  recovering  from  their  firstdefeat,  undertook  to  reply,  and  in  time  acquitted  themselves  toler-ably  well.  But  all  turned  their  eyes  towards  me,  as  the  only  personcapable  of  entering  the  lists  against  such  an  adversary,  with  anyhope  of overthrowing  him.  I confess  that  I thought  the  same;  and,urged  on  by my  old  fellow-citizens,  who  represented  it  to  me  asmy  duty  to  assist  them  with  my  pen  in a difficulty  of which  I hadbeen  the  cquse,  I undertook  the  refutation  of the  “Lettres  écrites  dela  Campagne,”  and  parodied  its  title  by that  of  “Lettres  écrites  dela Montagne,”  which  I gave  to  mine.  I conceived  and  carried  out  thisundertaking  so  secretly,  that,  at  a  meeting  which  took  place  atThonon  between  myself  and  the  party  of remonstrance,  in order  todiscuss  their  affairs,  and  at  which  they  showed  me  the  outline  oftheir  reply,  I did  not  say  a  word  about  my  own,  which  was  alreadywritten;  for  I was  afraid  that  some  obstacle  might  be  thrown  inthe  way  of its  being  printed,  if either  the  magistrates  or  my  privateenemies  got  the  least  wind  of it.  I could  not,  however,  prevent  thework  becoming  known  in France  before  it was  published;  but it wasthought  better  to  let it appear  than  to  let me  understand  too  clearlyhow  my  secret  had  been  discovered.  I will  afterwards  state  what  Ihave  been  able  to  learn  positively  about  the  matter,  which  is  notmuch;  I will  say  nothing  about  my  own  conjectures.At  Motiers  I had  almost  as  many  visitors  as  at  the  Hermitage  andMontmorency,  but, for the most  part,  of a very  different  kind.  Thosewho  had  hitherto  come  to  see  me  had  been  people  who,  being  con-nected  with  me  by common  talents,  tastes,  and  principles,  madethem  the  excuse  for their  visits,  and  immediately  introduced  subjectson  which  I was  able  to  converse  with  them.  At  Motiers  this  was  nolonger  the  case,  especially  as  far  as  the  French  were  concerned.  MyVisitors  were  officers  or  others  who  had  no  taste  for  literature,  the’“Le  parti  représentant—The  term  “représentant”  was  specially  applied  tothe  citizens  of  Geneva  who  advocated  public  liberty.MYSTERIOUS  VISITORS635majority  of whom  had  never  eyen‘read  my works,  and  who,  never-theless,  according  to  their  own  account,  had  travelled  thirty,  forty,sixty,  a  hundred  leagues  to  see  me  and  admire  the  illustrious,  fa-mous,  very  famous  man,  the  very  great  man,  and  so  forth.  Fromthat  time  people  never  ceased  to  fling in  my  face  the  coarsest  andmost  shameless  flatteries, from  which  the  esteem  of those  who  cameto  see  me  had  hitherto  protected  me.  As  the  majority  of  these  vis-itors  did  not  condescend  to  mention  their  names  or  position,  as  theirknowledge  and  mine  had  no  common  object,  as  they  had  neitherread  nor  even  glanced  over  my  works,  I did  not  know  what  to  talkto  them  about.  I waited  for  them  to  speak,  since  it was  their  placeto  know  and  to  inform  me  what  was  the  object  of their  visit.  It maybe imagined  that  this  did  not  lead  to  conversations  particularly  in-teresting  to  me,  although  they may  have  been  so  to  them,  accordingto  what  they  wanted  to  know;  for,  as  I was  never  mistrustful,  Jexpressed  myself  without  reserve  upon  all  the  questions  which  theythought  fit  to  put  to  me;  and  they  left  me,  as  a  rule,  quite  as  wellinformed  as  myself  in  regard  to  all  the  details  connected  with  mysituation.Such a visitor,  for instance,  was  M. de Feins,  equerry  to  the Queen.and  a  captain  of cavalry  in the  Queen’s  regiment,  who  was  so  perse-vering  as  to  spend  several  days  at  Motiers,  and  even  to  accompanyme  on  foot  as  far  as  La  Ferriére,  leading  his  horse  by the  bridle,without  having  anything  else  in  common  with  me,  except  that  weboth  knew  Mademoiselle  Fel,  and  both  played  at  cup-and-ball.  Be»fore  and  after  M.  de  Feins,  I received  another  much  more  extra-ordinary  visit.  Two  men  arrived  on  foot,  each  leading  a  mule  carry.ing his  scanty  baggage.  They  put  up  at  the  inn,  and,  after  rubbingdown  their  mules  themselves,  asked  to  see  me.  From  the  generalappearance  of these  muleteers,  the villagers  took  them  for smugglers;and  the  report  immediately  spread  that  some  smugglers  had  cometo  pay  me  a visit.  But  the  manner  in  which  they  accosted  me  atonce  informed  me  that  they  were  persons  of  quite  a  different  sort;but,  although  they  were  certainly  not  smugglers,  they  might  wellhave  been  adventurers,  and  this  uncertainty  kept  me  on  my  guardfor  some  time.  However,  they very  soon  allayed  my  suspicions.  Oneof  them  was  M.  de  Montauban,  called  the  Comte  de  la  Tour  du636THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUPin,  a  gentleman  from  Dauphiné;  the  other  was  M.  Dastier,  fromCarpentras,  an  old  soldier,  who  had  put  his  cross  of  Saint-Louis  inhis pocket,  to  avoid  displaying  it. These  gentlemen,  who  were  bothvery  amiable,  were  also  very  good  company;  their  conversation  wasinteresting  and  agreeable.  Their  manner  of travelling,  so  greatly  tomy  taste,  and  so  little  in  keeping  with  that  of  French  gentlemen,made  me  feel  a  kind  of attachment  for  them  which  intercourse  withthem  could  not  fail  to  strengthen.  The  acquaintance  did  not  evenend  there.  It  still  continues,  and  they  have  paid  me  several  visitssince  then,  but  not  on  foot,  although  that  was  well  enough  for  thefirst  introduction.  But  the  more  I have  seen  of these  gentlemen,  theless  sympathy  I have  found  between  their  tastes  and  mine,  the  lessI have  felt  that  their  principles  were  mine,  that  they  were  familiarwith  my  writings,  or  that  there  was  any  real  sympathy  between  us.What,  then,  did  they want  of me?  Why  did  they visit  me  with  suchan  equipage?  Why  did  they  remain  several  days?  Why  did  theyreturn  several  times?  Why were  they so  anxious  to  have  me  for theirguest?  At  that  time  it never  occurred  to  me  to  ask  myself  all  thesequestions.  I have  often  put  them  to  myself  since.Touched  by their  friendly  advances,  my  heart  surrendered  with-out  reflection,  especially  to  M.  Dastier,  whose  manner,  being  morefrank  and  open,  pleased  me  most.  I even  continued  to  correspondwith  him;  and,  when  I wanted  to  get  the  “Lettres  de la Montagne”printed,  I thought  of  applying  to  him,  in  order  to  put  those,  whowere  waiting  for  my  parcel  on  the  route  to  Holland,  on  the  wrongscent.  He  had  often  spoken  to  me,  and  perhaps  designedly,  of theliberty  enjoyed  by the  press  at  Avignon,  and  had  offered  his  serv-ices,  if  I ever  wanted  to  get anything  printed  there.  I availed  myselfof this  offer,  and  sent  him  my  first  sheets,  one  after  the  other,  bypost.  After  he  had  kept  them  for  a  considerable  time  he  sent  themback,  at  the  same  time  informing  me  that  no  printer  would  ventureto  undertake  the  work;  and  I was  obliged  to  go back  to  Rey,  takingthe  precaution  of  sending  my  sheets  one  after  the  other,  and  notletting  the  succeeding  ones  go until  I had been  advised  of the receiptof  those  which  preceded  them.  Before  the  publication  of the  work,I  learned  that  it  had  been  seen  in  the  ministerial  offices;  andD’Escherny,  of  Neufchâtel,  spoke  to  me  of  a  book  called  “DeSEGUIER  DE  SAINT-BRISSON634PHomme  de  la  Montagne,”  which  he  had  been  told  by Holbachwas  written  by me.  I assured  him,  as  was  quite  true,  that  I hadnever  written  a book  called  by this name.  When  the letters  appearedhe  was  furious,  and  accused  me  of falsehood,  although  I had  toldhim  the  simple  truth.  This  is how  I was  convinced  that  my  manu-script  was  known.  Feeling  sure  of  Rey’s  trustworthiness,  I  wasobliged  to  transfer  my  suspicions  elsewhere;  and  the  most  rationalconjecture,  and  the  one  to  which  I was  most  inclined  to  adhere,was  that  my  packets  had  been  opened  in  the  post.Another  person,  whose  acquaintance  I made  almost  at  the  sametime,  at  first  merely  through  the  medium  of  correspondence,  wasM.  Laliaud,  of Nimes,  who  wrote  to  me  from  Paris,  asking  me  tosend  him  my  profile  in  silhouette,  which  he  said  he  required  for  abust  of myself  in marble,  which  he was  having  made  by Le  Moine,with  the  intention  of placing  it in his  library.  If this  was  a  piece  offlattery,  simply  intended  to  disarm  me,  it was  completely  successful.I imagined  that  a  man  who  desired  to  have  my  bust  in  marble  inhis  library  must  be  full  of  my  works,  and  consequently  of  myprinciples,  and  that  he must  love  me,  because  his  soul  was  in  unisonwith  mine.  This  idea  was  bound  to  attract  me.  I have  seen  M.Laliaud  subsequently.  I have  found  him  eager  to  render  me  severaltrifling  services,  and  to  meddle  with  my  humble  affairs.  But,  beyondthat,  I doubt  whether  any  single  work  of mine  has  been  included  inthe  very  limited  number  of books  which  he  has  read  in  the  courseof his  life.  I am  ignorant  whether  he  has  a  library,  and  whether  itis  a  piece  of  furniture  which  he  is  likely  to  use;  and  as  for  thebust,  it is limited  to  a  poor  figure  in  clay,  executed  by Le  Moine,from  which  he has had a hideous  portrait  engraved,  which  neverthe-less  passes  current  under  my  name,  as  if it had  some  resemblanceto  me.The  only Frenchman  whose  visits  seemed  to  be due  to a partialityfor my  sent#ments  and  writing,  was  a  young  officer  of the  Limousinregiment,  by  name  Séguier  de  Saint-Brisson,  who  cut  a brilliantfigure  in  Paris  and  in  the  world,  and  perhaps  still  does,  throughthe  amiability  of his talents  and  his pretentions  to  wit.  He  had  cometo  see  me  at  Montmorency  during  the winter  preceding  my  catastro-phe.  I found  in  him a liveliness  which  pleased  me.  He  afterwards638THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUwrote  to  me  at  Motiers;  and,  whether  it  was  that  he  wanted  toflatter  me,  or  that  his  head  was  really  turned  by “Emile,”  he  toldme  that  he  intended  to  leave  the  service,  in  order  to  live  independ-ently,  and  that  he was  learning  the  trade  of a  carpenter.  He  had  anelder  brother,  a  captain  in  the  same  regiment,  the  favourite  ofthe  mother,  who,  being  a  violent  devotee,  and  under  the  thumbof some  hypocritical  abbé,  treated  her  younger  son  very  badly,  ac-cusing  him  of  irreligion,  and  even  of  the  unpardonable  offence  ofbeing  intimate  with  myself.  These  were  the  grievances  which  in-duced  him  to  break  with  his  mother,  and  adopt  the  resolution  ofwhich  I have  just  spoken—all,  to  play  the  little  “Emile.”Alarmed  at  this  impetuous  eagerness,  I hastened  to  write  to  him,to  try  and  dissuade  him  from  carrying  out  his  resolution,  and  Imade  my  exhortations  as  forcible  as  I could.  He  listened  to  them;he  returned  to  his  duty  as  a  son,  and  withdrew  from  his  colonel’shands  the  resignation  which  he  had  handed  in,  and  which  theformer  had  prudently  not  accepted,  in  order  to  allow  him  time  tothink  better  of  it.  Saint-Brisson,  cured  of  these  follies,  committedanother,  which  was  not  quite  so  outrageous,  but  which  was  hardlymore  to  my  taste;  he  became  an  author.  He  produced  two  or  threepamphlets  one  after  the  other,  which  showed  a  certain  amount  oftalent,  but  in  regard to which  I shall  never  have  to  reproach  my-self  with  having  praised  them  in  sufficiently  encouraging  terms  toinduce  him  to  follow  such a career.Some  time  afterwards,  he  came  to  see  me,  and  we  made  an  ex-cursion  together  to  the  island  of  Saint-Pierre.  I found  him,  duringthis  journey,  somewhat  different  from  what  he  had  been  at  Mont-morency.  There  was  something  affected  about  him,  which  at  firstdid  not  particularly  offend  me,  but  which  I have  often  thought  ofsince  then.  He  came  to  see  me  once  again  at  the  Hôtel  de  Saint-Simon,  when  I was  passing  through  Paris  on  my  way  to  England.There  I heard—which  he  had  not  told  me  before—that  he  wentinto  fashionable  society,  and  that  he  frequently  saw  Madame  deLuxembourg.  He  gave  no  sign  of  life  when  I was  at  Trye,  anddid  not  send  me  any  message  through  Mademoiselle  Séguier,  whowas  my  neighbour,  and  who  never  seemed  particularly  well  dis-posed  towards  me.  In  a  word,  M.  Saint-Brisson’s  infatuationM.  D’IVERNOIS639suddenly  came to  an  end, like  my  connection  with  M.  de Feins,  but,whereas  the  latter  owed  me  nothing,  the  former  owed  me  some-thing, unless  the follies  which  I had  prevented  him  from  committingwere  only a  joke  on  his  pet which  really  may  very  well  have  beenthe  case.I also  had  as  many  and  even  more  visitors  from  Geneva.  TheDelucs,  father  and  son,  successively  chose  me  for  their  nurse.  Thefather  fell  ill  on  the  road;  the  son  was  already  ill  when  he  startedfrom  Geneva;  both  came  to  recruit  themselves  at  my  house.  Clergy-men,  relatives,  bigots,  persons  of  all  sorts,  came  from  Geneva  andSwitzerland,  not  for  the  purpose  of admiring  or  making  fun  of me,like  those  who  came  from  France,  but to  scold  and  catechise  me.  Theonly  one  whom  I was  glad  to  see  was  Moultou,  who  came  to  spendthree  or  four  days  with  me,  and  whom  I should  have  been  glad  tokeep  longer.  The  most  obstinately  persistent  of  all,  and  the  onewho  finally  conquered  me  by  his  importunities,  was  one  M.d'Ivernois,  a  Genevese  merchant,  a  French  refugee,  and a relativeof  the  procureur-général  of  Neufchâtel.  This  M.  d’Ivernois  cametwice  a  year  from  Geneva  to  Motiers  on  purpose  to  see  me,  stayedwith  me  from  morning  till  evening  several  days  in  succession,  ac-companied  me  on  my  walks,  brought  me  hundreds  of little  presents,wormed  himself  into  my  confidence  in spite  of myself,  interfered  inall  my  affairs,  without  our  having  any  ideas,  tastes,  sentiments,  orknowledge  in  common.  I doubt  whether,  in  the  whole  course  ofhis  life,  he  has  ever  read  through  a  single  book  of  any  kind,  orwhether  he  even  knows  the  subjects  of  which  my  works  treat.When I began  to  collect  plants,  he accompanied  me  on  my  botanicalexcursions,  although  he  had  no  taste  for  such  amusement,  and  wehad  not  a  word  to  say  to  each  other.  He  even  had  the  courage  tospend  three  whole  days  with  me  ¢éte-d-téte  in  a  public-house  at;Goumoins,  from  which  I had  hoped  to  drive  him  away  by dint  ofboring  him  and  making  him  feel  how  greatly  he  bored  me;  but  ]was  never  able  to  discourage  his incredible  persistency,  or  to  discoverthe  reason  of it.Amongst  all  these  acquaintances,  which  I only  made  and  keptup  under  compulsion,  I must  not  omit  the  only one  which  has  beenagreeable  to  me,  and  which  aroused a real  interest  in  my  heart;  I640THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUrefer  to  a young  Hungarian,  who  came  to  reside  at  Neufchâtel,  andafterwards  at  Motiers,  some  months  after  I was  settled  there  myself.In  the  district  he  was  called  the  Baron  de  Sauttern,  under  whichname  he  had  been  accredited  from  Zurich.  He  was  tall  and  well-built,  his  features  were  pleasant,  his  manners  gentle  and  affable.He  told  everybody,  and  also  gave  me  to  understand,  that  he  hadcome  to  Neufchatel  solely  to  see  me,  and  to  train  his youth  to  virtueby  intercourse  with  me.  His  expression,  his  tone,  his  manners,appeared  to  me  in  agreement  with  his  words;  and  I should  haveconsidered  myself  failing  in a  most  important  duty,  if I had  refusedto  receive  a  young  man  in whom I saw  nothing  but  amiability,  andwhose  motive  in seeking  my  acquaintance  was  so  worthy  of respect.My  heart  is  incapable  of  surrendering  itself  by  halves.  He  soonpossessed  my  entire  friendship  and  my entire  confidence;  we  becameinseparable.  He  accompanied  me  on  all  my  walking  excursions,and  greatly  enjoyed  them.  I took  him  to  my  Lord  Marshal,  whoshowed  him  the  greatest  kindness.  As he was  not  yet able  to  expresshimself  in French,  he  spoke  and  wrote  to  me  in  Latin;  I answeredhim  in French,  but  this  mixture  of the  two  languages  did  not  makeour  conversations  less  fluent  or  lively  in  any  respect.  He  spoke  tome  of his family,  his affairs,  his adventures,  and the Court  of Vienna,with  the  domestic  details  of  which  he  appeared  to  be  intimatelyacquainted.  In  short,  for  nearly  two  years,  during  which  we  livedon  terms  of the closest  intimacy,  I invariably  found  in him  a  gentle-ness  of character  which  nothing  could  alter,  manners  not  only politebut  refined,  great  personal  cleanliness,  and  extreme  propriety  oflanguage;  in  short,  all the  characteristics  of a  well-bred  man,  whichmade  me  esteem  him  too  highly  not  to  regard  him  with  affection.At  the  time  of my  greatest  intimacy  with  him,  D’Ivernois  wroteto  me  from  Geneva,  warning  me  against  the  young  Hungarianwho  had  come  to  settle  in  my  neighbourhood;  adding  that  he  hadbeen  assured  that  he  was  a  spy  sent  by  the  French  ministry  towatch  me.  This  warning  was  calculated  to  cause  me  the  more  un-easiness,  since,  in  the  country  where  I was,  everybody  advised  meto  keep  on  my  guard  because  I was  being  watched,  and  it  wasdesigned  to  entice  me  into  French  territory,  and  then  to  pounceupon  me.THE  BARON  DE  SAUTTERN644In  order  to  shut,  once  for  all, the  mouths  of these  silly monitors,I proposed  to  Sauttern,  without  saying  a  word  to  him  beforehand,a walk  to  Pontarlier.  He  agreed  to  go.  When  we  reached  Pontarlier,I gave him  D’Ivernois’  létter  to  read,  and  then,  fervently  embracinghim, said, “Sauttern  needs  no  proof of my  confidence;  but  the publicneeds  a  proof  that  I knéw  who  is worthy  of it.”  This  embrace  wasvery  sweet.  It was  one  of those  enjoyments  of the  soul  which  perse-cutors  can  never  know,  and  of  which  they  cannot  deprive  theoppressed.I will  never  believe  that  Sauttern  was  a  spy,  or  that  he  betrayedme;  but  he  deceived  me.  When  I opened  my  heart  to  him  withoutreserve,  he  was  firm  enough  to  keep  his  own  shut,  and  to  deceiveme  with  his  lies.  He  invented  some  story,  which  caused  me  tobelieve  that his presence  was  required  in his own  country.  I exhortedhim  to  set  out  without  delay.  He  did  so,  and,  when  I thought  hewas  already  in  Hungary,  I heard  that  he was  at  Strasburg.  This  wasnot  the  first  time  that  he  had  been  there.  He  had  caused  dissensionin  a  family in  the  town,  and  the  husband,  knowing  that  I was  inthe  habit  of  seeing  him,  wrote  to  me.  I had  spared  no  efforts  tobring  the  wife  back  to  the  path  of virtue,  and  Sauttern  to  his  duty.When I thought  that  their  separation  was  complete,  they  came  to.gether  again,  and  the  husband  was  obliging  enough  to  take  theyoung  man  into  his  house  again.  After  that  I had  nothing  more  tosay.  I discovered  that  the  pretended  Baron  had  imposed  upon  mewith  a  heap  of lies.. His  name  was  not  Sauttern  at  all, but  Sautter-sheim.  As  for  the  title  of  Baron,  which  had  been  bestowed  uponhim  in  Switzerland,  I could  not  reproach  him  on  that  score,  be-cause  he  had  never  assumed  it.  But  I have  no  doubt  that  he  wayreally  a  gentleman,  and  my  Lord  Marshal,  who  was  a  judge  ofmen,  and  who  had  been  in  his  country,  always  looked  upon  andtreated  him  as  one.As  soon  as  he  had  left,  the. servant  at  the  inn  where  he  took  hismeals  declared  that  she  was  in  the  family  way  by him.  She  was  sodirty  a  slut,  and  Sauttern,  who  was  generally  esteemed  and  lookedup to  in the  district  as  a  well-conducted  and  respectable  young  man,was  known  to  take  such  pride  in  cleanliness,  that  this  impudentassertion  disgusted  everybody.  The  most  attractive  women  in  the642THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUdistrict,  who  had  in vain  lavished  their  fascinations  upon  him,  werefurious.  I was  beside  myself  with  indignation.  I did  all  I could  toget  the  shameless  hussy  arrested,  offering  to  pay  all  expenses  andgo  bail  for  Sauttersheim.  I  wrote  to  him,  firmly  convinced  notonly that  this  pregnancy  was  not  his  work,  but  that it  was  in realityonly pretended,  and  that  the  whole  affair  was  a  joke  on  the  partof his  enemies  and  my  own.  I wanted  him  to  return  to  the  district,to  confound  the  jade,  and  those  who  had  prompted  her.  I was  sur-prised  at  the  feebleness  of his  reply.  He  wrote  to  the  pastor  of thegirl’s  parish,  and  tried  to  hush  up  the  affair.  I accordingly  ceased  totrouble  myself  about  the  matter,  feeling  greatly  astonished  that  aman  whose  tastes  were  so  low  could  have  been  sufficiently  master  ofhimself  to  impose  upon  me  by his  reserve  during  our  closest  inti-macy.From  Strasburg,  Sauttersheim  went  to  Paris  to  seek  his  fortune,but  only  found  misery.  He  wrote  to  me,  confessing  his  sins.  Myheart  was  moved  at  the recollection  of our  old  friendship.  I sent  himsome  money.  The  following  year,  when  passing  through  Paris,  Isaw  him  again.  He  was  in  much  the  same  circumstances,  but  onvery  friendly  terms  with  M.  Laliaud.  I have  never  been  able  tolearn  how  he made  his  acquaintance,  or  whether  it was  recent  or  oflong  standing.  Two  years  later,  Sauttersheim  returned  to  Strasburg,from  which  place  he  wrote  to  me,  and  where  he  died.  Such  is, inbrief,  the  story  of my  connection  with  him,  and  of his  adventures;  .but,  while  deploring  the  unhappy  lot  of  this  unfortunate  youngman,  I shall  always  believe  that  he  was  a  gentleman  by birth,  andthat  his  irregular  life  was  the  result  of  the  situations  to  which  hewas  reduced.Such  were  my  acquisitions,  in the  way  of connections  and  friend-ships,  at  Motiers.  I should  have  needed  many  such  to  compensatefor  the  cruel  losses  which  I suffered  at  the  same  time!First,  I lost M.  de Luxembourg,  who, having  suffered  great tortureat  the  hands  of  his  physicians,  at  last  fell  a  victim  to  them,  whotreated  his  gout,  which  they  persistently  refused  to  acknowledge,as  a  malady  which  they  were  able  to  cure.If  we  can  believe  the  written  account  of  La  Roche,  Madame  laMaréchale’s  confidential  servant,  M.  de  Luxembourg’s  case  is  aDEATH  OF  M.  DE  LUXEMBOURG643cruel  and  memorable  example,  how  deplorable  are  the  miseries  ofgreatness.iI felt  the  loss  of  this  worthy  gentleman  the  more  keenly,  as  hewas  the  only  friend  I had  in  France;  and  the  gentleness  of  hischaracter  was  so  great,  that  it made  me  altogether  forget  his  rankand  associate  with  him  #æs  an  equal.  Our  relations  did  not  come  to‘an  end  after  my  retirement,  and  he  continued  to  write  to  me  asbefore.  I fancied,  however,  that  absence  or  my  misfortunes  hadsomewhat  cooled  his  affections.  It  is  difficult  for  a  courtier  to  pre-serve  the  same  attachment  for  anyone  whom  he  knows  to  be  outof favour  with  the  authorities.  Besides,  I came  to  the conclusion  thatthe  great  influence  which  Madame  de  Luxembourg  possessed  overhim  had  not  been  favourable  to  me,  and  that  she  had  taken  ad-vantage  of my  absence  to  injure  me  in  his  esteem.  She  herself,  inspite  of  affected  demonstrations  of  friendship,  which  became  lessand  less  frequent,  was  at  less  pains  every  day to  conceal  the  altera-tion  in her  feelings  towards  me.  She  wrote  toeme  four  or  five  timesin  Switzerland,  at  intervals,  after  which  she  left  off  writing  alto-gether;  and  it  needed  all  my  preconceived  opinions,  all  my  con.fidence,  all  my  blindness,  which  still  clung  to  me,  to  prevent  mefrom  seeing  that  her  feelings  towards  me  were  something  morethan  simple  coolness.Guy,  the  bookseller,  and  partner  of Duchesne,  who,  after  me,  wasa  frequent  visitor  at  the  Hôtel  de  Luxembourg,  wrote  to  informme  that  my  name  was  down  in M.  le Maréchal’s  will.  In  this  therewas  nothing  singular  or  incredible;  accordingly,  I did  not  doubtwhat  he  said.  This  made  me  deliberate  how  I should  behave  inregard  to  the legacy.  After  careful  consideration,  I decided  to  acceptit, whatever  it might  be,  and  to  pay  this  respect  to  an  honourableman,  who  entertained a true  friendship  for  me,  in  spite  of his  rank,which  is rarely  accessible  to  such a feeling.  I have  been  relieved  ofthis  duty,  since  I have  never  heard  this  legacy,  whether  the  storywas  true  or  false,  mentioned  again;  and,  to  tell  the  truth,  I shouldhave  been  grieved  to  violate  one  of  my  great  moral  principles,  byprofiting  by the  death  of anyone  who  had  been  dear  to  me.  Duringour  friend  Mussard’s  last  illness,  Lenieps  proposed  to  me  that  weshould  take  advantage  of the gratefulness,  which  he showed  for our544THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUattentions  to  him,  to  suggest  to  him  gently  that  he  should  leave  ussomething  in  his  will.  “Ah!  my  dear  Lenieps,”  I said  to  him,  “letus  not  degrade,  by  thoughts  of  self-interest,  the  melancholy  butsacred  duties  which  we  are  discharging  towards  our  dying  friend.”I hope  that  I may  never  be  mentioned  in  anyone’s  will,  least  of all,in that of a friend.  It was  about  the  same  time  that  my  Lord  Marshalspoke  to  me  about  his  will,  and  what  he  intended  to  do  for  me,  onwhich  occasion  I made  the  answer  which  I mentioned  in  the  firstpart  of these  confessions.My second  loss,  more  painful  and  irreparable,  was  that  of the  bestof  women  and  mothers,  who,  already  burdened  with  years,  andoverburdened  with  misery  and  infirmities,  left  this  valley  of  tearsfor  the  abode  of  the  blessed,  where  the  pleasing  recollection  of thegood we  have  done  in this  world  below  is its everlasting  reward.  Go,gentle  and  kindly  soul,  to  join  Fénélon,  Bernex,  Catinat,  and  thosewho,  like  them,  have  opened  their  hearts  to  genuine  charity.  Go,taste  the  fruit  of  youfown,  and  prepare  for  your  pupil  the  placewhich  he one  day hopes  to  occupy  by your  side!  Happy,  amidst  allyour  misfortunes,  since  Heaven,  by putting  an  end  to  them,  hasspared  you  the  cruel  spectacle  of his!  Afraid  of saddening  her  heartby the  narrative  of my  early  disasters,  I had  not  written  to  her  atall  after  my  arrival  in  Switzerland;  but  I wrote  to  M.  de Conzié  fornews  of her,  and  it was  from  him  that  I learned  that  she  had  ceasedto  alleviate  the  sufferings  of others,  and  that  her  own  were  over.  I,also,  shall  soon  cease  to  suffer;  but,  if I did  not  believe  that  I shouldsee  her  again  in the  next  world,  my  feeble  imagination  would  refuseto  entertain  the  idea  of  the  perfect  happiness  to  which  I look  for-ward,  |;My third  and  last  loss—for  I had  then  no  more  friends  to  lose—was  that  of  my  Lord  Marshal.  I did  not  lose  him  by death;  but,tired  of  serving  ungrateful  masters,  he  left  Neufchatel,  and  I have|  never  seen  him  again.  He  still  lives,  and  will,  I hope,  survive  me;  hestill  lives,  and,  thanks  to  him,  all my  ties  upon  earth  are  not  broken;there  is still  left  a  man  worthy  of  my  friendship,  the  real  value  ofwhich  consists  even  more  in  that  friendship  which  one  feels  thanin  that  which  one  inspires;  but  I have  lost  the  delight  with  whichhis  friendship  filled  me,  and  I can  now  do  no  more  than  reckonILL-WILL  OF  ABBE  DE  MABLY645him  amongst  those  whom I still  love,  but  with  whom  I have  nofurther  connection.  He  went  to  England  to  receive  the  King’spardon,  and  to  redeem  his  property  which  had  been  confiscated.We  did  not  separate  without  arranging  to  meet  again,  the  prospectof  which  appeared  to  afford  him  as  much  pleasure  as  myself.  Heintended  to  settle  at  Keigh  Hall,  near  Aberdeen,  and  it was  agreedthat  I should  visit  him  there;  but  the  prospect  was  too  delightfulfor  me  to  hope  that  it would  ever  be  realised.  He  did  not  stay  inScotland.  The  tender  entreaties  of the  King  of Prussia  brought  himback  to  Berlin,  and  it  will  presently  be  seen  how  I was preventedfrom  going  there  to  rejoin  him.Before  his  departure,  foreseeing  the  storm  which  was  about  tobe  raised  against  me,  he  sent  me,  of  his  own  accord,  letters  ofnaturalisation,  which  seemed  to  be  a  very  safe  precautionarymeasure,  to  make  it  impossible  for  me  to  be  driven  out  of  thecountry.  The  Corporation  of  Couvet  in  Val-de-Travers  imitatedthe  Governor’s  example,  and  granted  me  the  rights  of  a  native,free  of  charge,  like  the  first.  Thus,  being a full  citizen  in  everyrespect,  I was  protected  against  legal  expulsion,  even  by the  Prince;but  my  enemies  have  never  been  able  to  use  legal  means  in persecut-ing a  man  who,  more  than  any  other,  has  always  shown  the  greatestrespect  for  the  laws.Amongst  the  losses  which  I suffered  at  this  time,  I do  not  thinkthat  I ought  to  reckon  that  of  the  Abbé  de  Mably.  Having  livedat  his  brother’s  house,  I had  become  slightly  acquainted  with  him,but  never  intimate;  and  I have  some  reason  to  believe  that  hisfeelings  towards  me  had  changed  since  I  had  acquired  greatercelebrity  than  himself.  But  it was  after  the publication  of the  “Lettresde la Montagne”  that  I had  the first  indication  of his ill-will.  A letterto  Madame  Saladin,  which  was  attributed  to  him,  was  circulated  inGeneva,  in which  he  spoke  of the  work  as  the  seditious  vapouringsof  a  violent  demagogue.  My  esteem  for  the  Abbé,  and  the  highopinion  which I entertained  of  his  abilities,  did  not  allow  me  tobelieve  for an  instant  that  this extravagant  letter  was  written  by him.I decided  to  act  as  my  frankness  prompted  me.  I sent  him  a  copyof the  letter,  informing  him  that  it was  attributed  to  him.  He  madeno  reply.  This  silence  on  his  part  surprised  me;  but  my  astonish.46THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUment  may  be  imagined,  when  Madame  de  Chenonceaux  informedme  that he had  really  written  the letter,  and  that  my  own  had  greatlyembarrassed  him.  For,  even  if  he  had  been  right,  that  was  noexcuse  for  a  step  which  was  bound  to  create  a  stir,  and  was  takenpublicly  and  with  a  light  heart,  without  obligation  or  necessity,with  the  sole  object  of  still  further  overwhelming,  at  the  heightof  his  misfortunes,  a  man  towards  whom  he  had  always  showngoodwill,  and  who  had  never  done  him  any  injury.  Some  timeafterwards  appeared  the  “Dialogues  de  Phocion,”  which  appearedto me  a barefaced  and  shameless  compilation  from  my  works.  WhenI read  the  book,  I felt  that  the  author  had  made  up  his  mind  inregard  to  me,  and  that,  from  that  time  forth,  I  should  have  nobitterer  enemy.  I believe  that  he  was  never  able  to  forgive  me  forhaving  written  the  “Contrat  Social,”  which  was  far  above  hispowers,  or  for  the  “Paix  Perpetuelle,”  and  that  he  only  wanted  meto  make a selection  from  the  Abbé  de  Saint-Pierre’s  writings,  be-cause  he  thought  that  I should  not  be  so  successful  in  it.The  further  I  advance  in  my  narrative,  the  less  I am  able  topreserve  its  proper  order  and  sequence.  The  unsettled  condition  ofthe  rest  of  my  life  has  not  left  events  time  to  arrange  themselvesin succession  in  my  head.  They  have  been  too  numerous,  too  mixedup,  too  disagreeable  to  be  able  to  be  related  without  confusion.The  only  strong  impression  which  they  have  left  upon  my  mind  isthat  of the  horrible  mystery  in which  their  causes  are  enveloped,  andof  the  deplorable  condition  to  which  they  have  reduced  me.  Mynarrative  can  only proceed  at  haphazard,  as  the  ideas  come  back  tome.  I remember  that, during  the  time  of which  I am  speaking,  beingabsorbed  in  my  Confessions,  I was  so  imprudent  as  to  talk  about:them  to  everybody,  never  once  imagining  that  anyone  had  anyinterest  or  desire,  and,  still  less,  the  power,  to  throw  obstacles  inthe  way  of this  undertaking;  and,  even  had  I thought  so, I shouldnot  have  shown  any  greater  discretion,  since  my  disposition  rendersit  absolutely  impossible  for  me  to  conceal  any  of  my  thoughts  orfeelings.  As  far  as  I can  judge,  the  fact  of this  undertaking  becom-ing  known  was  the  real  cause  of the  storm  which  was  raised  withthe  object  of driving  me  out  of Switzerland,  and  delivering  me  intothe  hands  of those  who  might  prevent  me  from  carrying  it out.COMPLETE  EDITION  OF  HIS  WORx«S647I had  another  work  in  view,  which  was  regarded  with  little  lessdisfavour  by those  who  were  afraid  of  the  first:  this  was  a  generaledition  of  my  works.  Such  an  edition  appeared  ta  me  necessary,  inorder  to  establish  the  authenticity  of  the  books  bearing  my  name,which  were  really  by me,  and  to  put  the  public  jn  a  position  to  beable  to  distinguish  then? from  the  pseudonymous  writings,  whichmy  enemies  attributed  to  me,  in order  to  discredit  and  degrade  me.In  addition  to  that,  this  edition  would  be  a  simple  and  honourableway  of insuring  a  means  of subsistence;  in fact,  it was  the  only  one,for  I had  abandoned  bookmaking,  my  Memoirs  could  not  be  pub-lished  during  my  lifetime,  I did  not  earn  a  penny  in any  other  man-ner,  and  was  always  spending  money;  so  that I saw  that  I should  beat  the  end  of my  resources  as  soon  as  the  profits  of my  last  writingswere  exhausted.  These  considerations  had  strongly  inclined  me  tobring  out  my  “Dictionnaire  de  Musique,”  which  was  as  yet  incom-plete. It had  brought  me  in  100  louis  in ready  money  and  an  annuityof  100  crowns;  but  it was  easy  to  see  that  100  louis  would  not  longlast  a  man,  who  spent  more  than  sixty  every  year;  and  an  income  of100  crowns  was  nothing  for  one,  upon  whom  beggars  and  othersswooped  down  incessantly  like  a  flock  of  starlings.A company  of Neufchatel  business-men  offered  to  undertake  thecollected  edition,  and  a  printer  or  bookseller  of  Lyons,  namedReguillat,  somehow  or  other  managed  to  thrust  himself  among  themin  the  capacity  of  manager.  An  agreement  was  concluded  on  rea-sonable  and  satisfactory  terms,  considering  the  object  I had  in view,My printed  works  and  others  still  in manuscript  were  enough  to  fillsix  volumes  quarto.  I further  agreed  to  exercise  a  general  supervi-sion  over  the edition,  in return  for which  I was  to  receive  an  annuityof  1,600  French  livres,  and  1,000  crowns  down.[1765.]—The  agreement  was  concluded,  but  not  signed,  whenthe  “Lettres  écrites  de la Montagne”  appeared.  The  terrible  outburstagainst  this  infernal  work  and  its  abominable  author  alarmed  thecompany,  and  the  enterprise  fell  through.  I should  compare  theeffect  of this  last  work  to  that  of the  “Lettre  sur  la Musique  Fran-çaise,”  only  that  this  letter,  while  bringing  hatred  upon  me  and  ex.posing  me  to  danger,  at  least  left  me  in possession  of esteem  and  respect.  But,  after  this  last  work,  the  inhabitants  of Geneva  and  Ver.648THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsailles  seemed  to  be  astonished  that  a  monster  like  myself  was  per-mitted  to  live.  The  Little  Council,  egged  on  by the  French  Resident,and  instructed  by the  Procureur-général,  issued  a  declaration  con-cerning  my  work,  in which,  after  stigmatising  it in most  outrageousterms,  that  body  declared  that  it  was  not  even  worthy  of  beingburned  by the  hands  of  the  executioner,  and  added,  with a clever-ness  bordering  on  burlesque,  that  it would  be impossible  for  anyoneto  answer  it  without  disgracing  himself,  or  even  to  mention  it.  Iwish  I could  give  a  copy  of  this  curious  document,  but,  unfortu-nately,  I have  not  got  it, and  I do not  remember a single  word  of it.I sincerely  wish  that  some  one  of my  readers,  animated  by a  desirefor truth  and  justice,  would  read  the  whole  of the  “Lettres  écrites  dela Montagne”  over  again.  I venture  to  assert  that  he  will  recognisethe  stoical  moderation  which  characterises  this  work,  after  the  vio-lent  and  cruel  insults  which  people  had  just  vied  with  one  anotherin heaping  upon  the  author.  But,  being  unable  to  reply  to  the  abuse,because  it contained  none,  or  to  the  arguments,  because  they  wereunanswerable,  my  enemies  had  recourse  to  the  expedient  of pretend-ing  to  be  too  indignant  to  answer;  and  it  is  certainly  true  that,  ifthey  took  irrefutable  arguments  for  insults,  they  must  have  feltthemselves  greatly  insulted!The  party  of remonstrance,  far  from  complaining  of this  hatefuldeclaration,  followed  the  path  which  it marked  out  for  them,  and,instead  of glorying  in  the  “Lettres  de  la Montagne”  as  a  trophy  ofvictory,  they  covered  them  up  to  serve  as  a  shield,  and  were  toocowardly  to  render  either  honour  or  justice  to  this  work,  which  waswritten  in  their  defence  and  at  their  solicitation,  or  even  to  quote  ormention  it, although  they  secretly  drew  all  their  arguments  from  it,and  the careful  manner  in which  they have  followed  the advice  givenat  the  end  of the  work  has  been  the  sole  cause  of their  salvation  andtheir  victory.  They  had  imposed  this  duty  upon  me:  I had  fulflledit.  I had  served  the  country  and  their  cause  to  the  end.  I beggedthem  to  abandon  mine,  and  only  think  of themselves  in their  quar-rels.  They  took  me  at  my  word,  and I interfered  no  further  in theiraffairs,  except  to  exhort  them  without  ceasing  to  make  peace,  as  Ihad  no  doubt  that,  if  they  persisted,  they  would  be  crushed  byEFFECT  OF  THE  “LETTRES”649.+France.  This  has  not  happened.  I understand  the  reason,  but  this  is`not  the  place  to  mention  it.The  effect  of the  “Lettres  de  la Montagne”  at  Neufchatel  was  atfirst  insignificant.  I sent  a  copy  of it to  M.  de  Montmollin.  He  wasglad to  have  it, and  read  it without  finding  any  fault  with  it. He  wasill like  myself;  he  paidgne  a  friendly  visit  when  his  health  was  re-established,  and  said  nothing  about  the  book.  However,  the  excite-ment  was  beginning.  The  book  was  publicly  burnt—I  do not  knowwhere.!®  From  Geneva,  from  Berne,  and,  perhaps,  from  Versailles,the  focus  of disturbance  soon  shifted  to  Neufchâtel,  especially  Val:de-Travers,  where,  even  before  the  clerical  party  had  given  any  signsof movement,  they had  begun  to  hound  on  the people  by underhandmeans.  I venture  to  say  that  I ought  to  have  been  loved  by the  peo-ple of that country,  as  I have  been  by all those  amongst  whom  I havelived.  I bestowed  alms  freely,  left  none  of  the  needy  in  my  neigh-bourhood  without  assistance,  never  refused  to  render  any  servicewithin  my  power  which  was  consistent  with  justice,  perhaps  evenmaking  myself  too  familiar  with  everybody,  and,  as  far  as  I wasable,  I refused  every  distinction  which  might  have  aroused  jealousy.All  this,  however,  did  not  prevent  the  people,  secretly  stirred  up  bysomeone  unknown  to  me,  from  gradually  becoming  infuriatedagainst  me,  and  publicly  insulting  me  in broad  daylight,  not  only inthe country  and  on  the  roads,  but in the  open  street.  Those  to  whomI had  rendered  the  greatest  services  were  the most  virulent;  and  evenpeople  to  whom  I continued  to  render  them,  although  they  did  notventure  to  show  themselves,  urged  on  the  rest,  and  seemed  anxiousto  avenge  themselves  in  this  manner  for  the  humiliation  of  beingunder  an  obligation  to  me.  Montmollin  seemed  to  see  nothing  anddid  not  as  yet show  himself;  but, as  a celebration  of the  Communionwas  close  at  hand,  he paid me a visit  to  advise  me  not  to  present  my-self,  at  the  same  time  assuring  me  that  he  was  not  at  all  angry  withme,  and  that  he  would  leave  me  undisturbed.  I thought  this  a  curi-ous  kind  of compliment.  It reminded  me  of  Madame  de  Boufflers’letter,  and  I could  not  imagine  to  whom  it could  be a  matter  of suchimportance  whether  I  communicated  or  not.  As  I considered  it15  At  Paris,  together  with  Voltaire’s  “Dictionnaire  Philosophique.”650THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUwould  be an  act  of cowardice  to  give  way  to  him,  and,  besides,  didnot  desire  to  give  the  people  a  fresh  excuse  to  raise  the  cry  of “infi-del”  against  me,  I bluntly  refused  to  do what  he asked,  and  he wenthome  highly  displeased,  at  the  same  time  giving  me  to  understandthat  I should  be  sorry  for  it.He  could  not  refuse  to  admit  me  to  Communion  on  his  authorityalone;  that  of  the  Consistory,  which  had  admitted  me,  was  alsonecessary:  and,  as  long  as  the  Consistory  had  said  nothing,  I couldpresent  myself  boldly,  without  fear  of  being  refused.  Montmollinprocured  from  the  clergy  the  commission  of summoning  me  beforethe  Consistory  to  give  an  account  of my  belief,  and  of excommunt-cating  me,  in case  I refused  to  appear.  This  excommunication,  again,could  only  be  pronounced  by a  majority  of  the  votes  of  the  Con-sistory.  But  the  peasants  who,  under  the  name  of Elders,  composedthis  assembly,  being  under  the  presidency  and,  as  may  be  supposed,the  rule  of their  minister,  would  naturally  have  no  other  opinion  buthis,  especially  upon  theological  questions,  which  they  understoodstill  less  than  he  did.  I was  accordingly  summoned,  and  decided  toappear.What  a  lucky  circumstance,  and  what  a  triumph  would  it havebeen  for  me,  if I had  been  able  to  speak,  and,  so  to  say,  had  carriedmy  pen  in  my  mouth!  With  what  overwhelming  superiority,  withwhat  ease  should  I have  overthrown  the  poor  minister  in  the  midstof  his  six  peasants!  Greed  of  authority  had  caused  the  Protestantclergy  to  forget  all  the  principles  of  the  Reformation:  all  that  Ineeded,  in order  to  remind  him  of this, and  to  reduce  him  to  silence,was  to  explain  my first  “Lettres  de la Montagne,”  for which  they hadbeen  foolish  enough  to censure  me.  My text  was  ready,  I had  only toexpand  it, and  my  enemy  was  reduced  to  silence.  I should  not  havebeen  so  silly as  to  confine  myself  to  the defensive:  it was  easy  enoughfor  me  to  take  the  offensive  without  his  even  perceiving  it, or  beingable  to  protect  himself  against  it.  The  wretched  persons  who  com-posed  the  clerical  caste,  as  thoughtless  as  they  were  ignorant,  hadthemselves  placed  me  in  the  most  favourable  position  I could  havedesired,  for  crushing  them  as  I pleased.  But—I  should  have  beenobliged  to  speak,  and  to  speak  on  the  spot,  to  find  ideas,  turns  of ex-pression,  and  suitable  words  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  never  toATTEMPTS  AT  EXCOMMUNICATION651lose  my  presence  of mind  or  coolness,  never  to  be flustered  for  a mo-ment.  What  could  I hope  fronr  myself—I  who  felt  so  strongly  myinability  to  express  myself  impromptu?  I had  been  most  humiliat-ingly  reduced  to  silence  at  Geneva,  in  the  presence  of  an  assemblywhich  was  entirely  favourable  to  me,  and  had  made  up  its mind  be-forehand  to  approve  of eerything  that  I said.  Here,  it was  quite thecontrary:  I had  to  do  with  a  person  who  was  prepared  to  cavil,  whosubstituted  cunning  for  knowledge,  who  would  lay a  hundred  trapsfor  me  before  I perceived  one,  and  was  fully  determined  to  put  mein the  wrong,  at  whatever  cost.  The  more  I considered  my  position,the  more  perilous  it seemed  to  me;  and,  convinced  that  it would  beimpossible  for  me  to  extricate  myself  with  success,  I bethought  my-self  of  another  expedient.  I pondered  over  a  speech  which  I pro-posed  to  deliver  before  the  Consistory,  in  order  to  challenge  its  authority  and  to relieve  myself  from  the necessity  of replying.  The  matter  was  very  simple:  I wrote  the  speech,  and  proceeded  to  learn  it byheart  with  unequalled  enthusiasm.  Thérése,  hearing  me  mutteringand  incessantly  repeating  the  same  phrases,  in  the  endeavour  tocram  them  into  my  head,  laughed  at  me.  I hoped  in the  end  to  knowmy  speech  by  heart.  I  knew  that  the  lord  of  the  manor,  as  thePrince’s  official,  would  be  present  at  the  meeting  of the  Consistory,and  that,  in  spite  of the  bottles  of wine  distributed  by Montmollin,and  his intrigues,  most  of the  Elders  were  well  disposed  towards  me,I had  on  my  side  reason,  truth, justice,  the  King’s  protection,  the  au»thority  of the  Council  of  State,  and  the  wishes  of  all  good  patriotswho  were  affected  by the  establishment  of this  inquisition;  in  fact,everything  contributed  to  my  encouragement._The  day before  the  time  appointed,  I knew  my  speech  by heart;  Irecited  it without  a  mistake.  I went  over  it  again  all  night  in  myhead:  in  the  morning  I had  forgotten  it:  I hesitated  at  each  word,  Ifancied  myself  already  in  the  presence  of the  illustrious  assembly;  Iwas  confused,  I stammered,  I lost  my  head;  at  last,  almost  at  the  mo-ment  of starting,  my  courage  failed  me  entirely.  I remained  at  home,I determined  to  write  to  the  Consistory,  hastily  giving  my  reasonsfor  not  appearing,  and  alleging  as  an  excuse  my  ill-health,  which,considering  the  state  I was  in, would  really  have  made  it almost  im»possible  for me  to  go  through  the  whole  sitting.|652THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUThe  minister,  embarrassed  by my  letter,  put  off the  matter  to  an-other  sitting.  In  the  meantime,  he and  his  creatures  made  every  ef-fort  to  seduce  those  of the Elders  who, following  the  dictates  of theirown  conscience  rather  than  his, were  not  of the  same  opinion  as  heand  the clergy  were.  However  powerful  his  arguments  drawn  fromhis cellar  must  have  been  for  people  of this  kind,  he could  not  winover  any  others  except  the two  or  three  who  were  already  devoted  to.him, and  who  were  called  his dmes  damnées.  The  Prince’s  officer  andColonel  de  Pury,  who  was  very  energetic  in  the  matter,  kept  theothers  to  their  duty;  and,  when  Montmollin  wanted  to  proceed  tothe  excommunication,  the  Consistory,  by a  majority  of  votes,  flatlyvetoed  it.  Reduced  to  the  last resource  of stirring  up  the  people,  heproceeded,  with  the  aid  of his colleagues  and  others,  to  work  openlyand  with  such  success,  that,  in  spite  of  the  frequent  and  strongly-worded  rescripts  of the  King,  in  spite  of all  the  orders  of the  Coun-cil  of  State,  I was  at  last  obliged  to  leave  the  country,  to  avoid  ex-posing  the  Prince’s  officer  to  the  risk  of being  assassinated,  in conse-quence  of his  efforts  to  defend  me.My only recollections  of the  whole  affair  are  so  confused,  that  it isimpossible  for me  to introduce  any  order  or  connection  into the ideas.which  come  back  to  me;  I can  only produce  them,  scattered  and  iso-lated,  as  they present  themselves  to  my  mind.  I remember  that  somesort  of negotiations  had  taken  place with  the clergy,  in which  Mont-mollin  had  been  the mediator.  He  had  pretended  that  it was  fearedthat, by my  writings,  I should  disturb  the tranquillity  of the country,which  would  be held  responsible  for  allowing  me  to  write.  He  hadgiven  me  to  understand  that,  if I undertook  to  lay aside  my  pen,  thepast  would  be winked  at.  I had  already  made  this  engagement  withmyself,  and  I had  no  hesitation  in making  it with  the  clerical  party,but  conditionally,  and  only  as  far  as  matters  of  religion  were  con-cerned.  He  managed  to  get  two  copies  of  the  agreement  made,  inconsequence  of  some  alteration  which  he  required.  The  conditionwas  rejected,  and  I demanded  the  return  of what  I had  written;  hegave  me  back  one  of the  duplicates,  and  kept the  other,  pretendingthat  he  had  lost  it.  After  this,  the  people,  openly  egged  on  by theclergy,  laughed  the  King’s  rescripts  and  the orders  of the Council  ofState  to  scorn,  and  became  utterly  uncontrollable.  I was  preached  atATTEMPTS  AT  PROTECTION653from  the  pulpit,  called  the  Antichrist,  and  chased  in  the  countrylike  a  were-wolf.  My  Armenian  costume  ‘was  sufficient  descriptionfor the people:  I felt the disadvantage  of it cruelly,  but  to  abandon itunder  the circumstances  appeared  to  me  an  act  of cowardice.  I couldnot  make  up  my  mind  to  do  this,  and  I calmly  walked  about  thecountry  in my  caftan  and  fur cap,  pursued  by the  hue  and  cry  of therabble,  and  sometimes  by their  stones.  Several  times,  when  passingin front  of the  houses,  I heard  those  inside  say,  “Bring  me  my  gun:let me  fire at  him.”  I did  not  walk  any  faster,  and  this  only increasedtheir  fury;  but  they always  confined  themselves  to  threats,  at least  asfar as  firearms  were  concerned.During  the  whole  time  of this  excitement,  I nevertheless,  on  twooccasions,  had  great  cause  for  satisfaction,  which  afforded  me  genu-ine  pleasure.  The  first  was,  that,  through  my  Lord  Marshal,  I wasenabled  to  perform  an  act  of gratitude.  All  the  respectable  inhabitants  of Neufchâtel,  indignant  at  the  treatment  which I received  andthe intrigues  of which  I was  the victim,  were  greatly  incensed  againstthe  clerical  party,  being  well  aware  that  it was  under  foreign  influ-ence,  and  that it  was  merely  the  tool  of others,  who  kept themselvesin the  background  while  urging  it on  to  act;  and  they began  to  fearthat  the precedent  established  in  my  case  might  result  in  the  estab-lishment  of a veritable  inquisition.  The  magistrates,  and  particularlyM.  Meuron,  who  had  succeeded  M.  d’Ivernois  in  the  office  ofprocureur-général,  did  all they could  to  protect  me.  Colonel  de Pury,although  merely  a  private  individual,  did  even  more  and  succeededbetter.  It was  he who  found  the  means  of making  Montmollin  knock“under  in his  Consistory,  by keeping  the  Elders  to  their  duty.  As  hehad  considerable  reputation,  he made  the  most  use  of it to  check  theoutbreak;  but  he only had  the authority  of the laws,  justice,  and  rea-son,  to  oppose  to  that  of  money  and  wine.  The  odds  were  againsthim,  and  in  this  respect  Montmollin  triumphed.  However,  appreciating  his  zeal  and  efforts  on  my  behalf,  I was  anxious,  if possible,  todo him a service  in return,  and  in  some  degree  to  discharge  my  ob-ligations  to  him.  I knew  that  he was  very  anxious  to  become  a coun-cillor  of  State;  but,  having  offended  the  Court  in  the  matter  of theminister  Petitpierre,  he  was  out  of favour  with  the  Prince  and  theGovernor.  However,  I ventured  to  write  on  his  behalf  to  my  Lord654THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUMarshal;  I ven  mentioned  the position  which  he was  anxious  to  ob-tain,  and  ny  efforts  were  so  successful  that,  contrary  to  general  ex-pectation,  it  was  almost  immediately  bestowed  upon  him  by  theKing.  Thus  destiny,  which  has  always  placed  me  too  high  and  toolow  at  the  same  time,  continued  to  toss  me  from  one  extreme  to  theother;  and,  while  the  people  covered  me  with  mud,  I appointed  acouncillor  of State.Another  thing  that  caused  me  great  pleasure  was  a  visit  fromMadame  de  Verdelin  and  her  daughter,  whom  she  had  brought  tothe  baths  of Bourbonne,  whence  she  came  on  to  Motiers,  and  spenttwo  or  three  days with  me.  By her constant  attentions  and  trouble  onmy  behalf,  she  had  finally  overcome  the  feelings  of dislike  which  Ihad  so  long entertained  towards  her;  and  my  heart,  vanquished  byher  tenderness,  returned  to  the  full  the  friendship  which  she  had  solong exhibited  towards  me.  I felt touched  by this  visit,  especially  con-sidering  my  circumstances  at  the  time,  when  I greatly  needed  theconsolations  of friendship,  to  support  my  courage.  I was  afraid  thatshe  would  feel  deeply  the  insults  which  I suffered  from  the  people,and  I should  have  liked  to  spare  her  the  sight  of them,  to  avoid  dis-tressing  her;  but  this  was  impossible;  and,  although  her  presenceput  some  check  upon  their  insolence  during  our  walks,  she  sawenough  to be able  to  judge what  took  place on  other  occasions.  It wasduring  her  stay,  in  fact,  that  I began  to  be  subjected  to  nightly  at-tacks  in my  own  house.  One  morning,  her  lady’s-maid  found  a num-ber  of  stones  in  front  of  my  window  which  had  been  thrown  at  itduring  the  night.  A  large,  heavy  bench,  which  stood  in  the  streetby the  side  of my  door  and  was  securely  fixed,  was  torn  up,  removed,and  set  up  on  end  against  the  door;  so  that, unless  someone  had  seenit, the  first  person  who  had  opened  the  door  to  go  out  would  havebeen  knocked  down.  Madame  de  Verdelin  knew  all that  was  goingon;  for, in addition  to  what  she could  see  for herself,  her confidentialservant  made  himself  very  well  known  in  the  village,  talked  toeverybody,  and  was  even  seen  in  conversation  with  Montmollin.However,  she did  not  appear  to take  any  notice  of anything  that hap-pened, never  mentioned  Montmollin  or  anyone  else, and  only repliedbriefly  to  remarks  which  I sometimes  made  about  him.  She  onlyseemed  to  be convinced  that England  would  be the best  place for meHUME655to  stay  in.  She  spoke  much  of Hume,  who  was  in Paris  at  the  time,of his friendship  for me,  and  of his desire  to be of service  to  me  in hiscountry.  It is time  to  say  something  about  M.  Hume.He  had  acquired  a  great  reputation  in France,  especially  amongstthe  Encyclopaedists,  through  his  commercial  and  political  treatises,and,  lastly,  by his  “History  of the  House  of Stuart,”  the  only  one  ofhis  writings  of  which  I had  read  something  in  the  Abbé  Prévost’stranslation.  Not  having  read  his other  works,  I felt  convinced,  fromwhat  I had  heard  of him,  that  he united  a  genuine  republican  spiritwith  the  paradoxical  English  prejudices  in  favour  of  luxury.  In  ac-cordance  with  this  opinion,  I looked  upon  the  whole  of  his  apologyfor  Charles  I. as  a  marvel  of impartiality,  and  I entertained  as  highan  opinion  of his  virtue  as  of his  genius.  The  desire  of making  theacquaintance  of this  singular  man  and  gaining  his  friendship,  hadgreatly  increased  the  temptation  to  cross  over  to  England,  which  theearnest  entreaties  of  Madame  de  Boufflers,  his  intimate  friend,  hadaroused  in me.  On  my  arrival  in  Switzerland,  I received  from  him,through  her,  an  extremely  flattering  letter,  in  which  after  praisingmy  talents  most  highly,  he gave  me a pressing  invitation  to cross  overto England,  and  offered  to use  all his influence  and  that of his friendsto  make  my  stay  agreeable.  I went  on  the  spot  to  my  Lord  Marshal,Hume’s  friend  and  fellow-countryman,  who  confirmed  my  goodopinion  of him,  and  told  me a literary  anecdote  about  him,  whichstruck  me  as  much  as  it had  struck  him.  Wallace,  who  had  writtenagainst  Hume  on  the  subject  of the  population  of the  ancient  world,was  absent  while  his  book  was  being  printed.  Hume  undertook  torevise  the  proofs  and  superintend  the  publication  of the  work.  Suchconduct  was  after  my  own  heart.  In  the  same  manner,  I had  soldcopies  of a  song  which  had  been  written  against  me,  at  six  sous  each.I accordingly  had  every  reason  to  be prejudiced  in favour  of Hume,when  Madame  de  Verdelin  came  and  spoke  strongly  of the  friend-ship which  he professed  to  entertain  for  me,  and  of his  eagerness  todo  me  the  honours  of  England,  to  use  her  own  expression.  Shestrongly  urged  me  to  take  advantage  of Hume’s  enthusiasm  and  towrite  to  him.  As  I had  no  liking  for  England,  and  did  not  wish  toadopt  this  course  until  I was  actually  obliged,  I refused  either  towrite  or  to  make  any  promise;  but I left  it to  her  discretion  to  do656THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUwhatever  she thought  fit, to  keep Hume  favourably  disposed  towardsme.  When  she left Motiers,  she left me  fully persuaded,  from  all thatshe  had  said  to  me  concerning  this  famous  man,  that  he was  one  ofmy  friends,  and  that  she  was a still  greater  friend  of his.After  her  departure,  Montmollin  pushed  on  his intrigues,  and  thepeople  became  uncontrollable.  However,  I continued  to  take  mywalks  quietly,  undisturbed  by their  hue  and  cry;  the taste  for botany,which  I had  begun  to acquire  through  Doctor  d’Ivernois,  gave  a newinterest  to  my  walks,  and  made  me  roam  the  country  collectingplants,  undisturbed  by. the  shouts  of the  rabble,  whose  fury  was  onlyincreased  by my  indifference.  One  of the  things  which  most  affectedme  was,  to  see  the  families  of  my  friends,1®  or  people  who  calledthemselves  such,  openly join the  ranks  of my  persecutors;  such  as  theD’Ivernois,  even  the  father  and  brother  of my  Isabelle  not  excepted;Boy  de  la Tour,  a  relation  of the  lady  friend  with  whom  I lodged,and  Madame  Girardier,  her  sister-in-law.  This  Pierre  Boy was  such  abooby,  so  stupid,  and  behaved  so  brutally  that,  to  avoid  getting  in arage,  I took  it upon  myself  to  treat  him  with  ridicule.  I wrote,  in thestyle  of the  “Petit  Prophète,”  a  little  pamphlet  of  a  few  pages,  en-titled  “The  Vision  of  Peter  of  the  Mountain,  named  the  Seer,”  inwhich  I found  opportunities  of humorously  attacking  the  miracleswhich  at  that  time  formed  the  chief  excuse  for  my  persecution.  DuPeyrou  had  this  fragment,  which  only met  with  moderate  success  inthe  district,  printed  at  Geneva;  since  the  inhabitants  of Neufchâtel,with  all  their  wit,  are  little  able  to  appreciate  Attic  salt  or  humour,as  soon  as  it becomes  at  all  refined.I took  more  pains  about  another  composition,  which  belongs  to*  This  fatality  had  commenced  from  the  time  of  my  stay  at  Yverdun;  forwhen  Roguin,  the  banneret,  died,  a  year  or  two  after  I left  that  town,  old  PapaRoguin  was  honest  enough  to  inform  me,  with  regret,  that  it had  been  proved,from  his  relation’s  papers,  that  he  had  entered  into  the  plot  to  expel  me  fromYverdun  and  the  State  of  Berne.  This  clearly  proved  that  the  plot  was  not,  aspeople  wished  it to  be  believed,  a  matter  of hypocrisy,  since  Roguin  the  banneret,far  from  being  a  devotee,  pushed  his  materialism  and  unbelief  even  to  intoler-ance  and  fanaticism.  Besides,  no  one  at  Yverdun  had  so  completely  taken  posses-sion  of  me,  or  lavished  upon  me,  in  such  an  abundance,  affection,  praise,  andflattery,  as  this  same  Roguin.  He  loyally  followed  the  favourite  system  of  mypersecutors.LIBEL  BY  M.  VERNES657ithe same  period,  the manuscript  of which  will  be found  amongst  mypapers.  I must  here  give  some account  of the  subject  of it.When  the  fury  of decrees  and  persecutions  was  at  its  height,  theGenevese  had  particularly  distinguished  themselves  by joining  in thehue  and  cry  with  all their  might.  My friend  Vernes,  amongst  others,with  a  truly  theological, generosity,  chose  just  this  moment  to  pub-lish  some  letters  against me,  in which  he claimed  to  prove  that  I wasnot  a  Christian.  These  letters,  written  in a conceited  style, were  nonethe  better  for  it, although  it  was  stated  positively  that  Bonnet,  thenaturalist,  had  assisted  in  their  composition,  for  the  said  Bonnet,  al-though  a  materialist,  is notwithstanding  most  intolerantly  orthodox,the moment  it is a  question  of myself.  I certainly  did not  feel temptedto  answer  this  production;  but, as  the opportunity  presented  itself  ofsaying  a  few  words  about  it in  the  “Lettres  de  Ja Montagne,”  I in-serted  a  somewhat  contemptuous  note,  which  made  Vernes  furious.He filled  Geneva  with  his cries  of rage,  and  D’Ivernois  informed  methat  he  was  out  of his  mind.  Some  time  afterwards  an  anonymouspamphlet  appeared,  which  seemed  to  be  written  with  the  water  ofPhlegethon?  instead  of ink.  In  this  letter  I was  accused  of havingexposed  my  children  in  the  streets,  of taking  about  with  me a sol-diers’  trollop,  of being  worn  out  by debauchery,  rotten  with  the  pox,and  similar  politenesses.  It was  easy  for me  to  recognise  my  man.  Onreading  this  libellous  production,  my  first  thought  was  to  estimateat  its  true  value  everything  that  is  called  renown  and  reputationamongst  men;  when  I saw  a  man  treated  as  a whoremonger  who  hadnever  been  in  a  brothel  in  his  life,  and  whose  greatest  fault  was  aconstant  timidity  and  shyness,  like  that  of a  virgin;  when  I saw  thatI was  supposed  to  be eaten  up by the pox—I,  who  had  not  only neverhad  the  slightest  attack  of any  venereal  disease,  but  who,  accordingto  the  physicians,  was  so  formed  that  it would  have  been  impossiblefor  me  to  contract  it. After  careful  consideration,  I came  to  the  con-clusion  that  I could  not  better  refute  this  libel  than  by having  itprinted  in  the  town  in  which  I had  lived  longest.  I sent  it to  Du-chesne  to  be printed  just as  it was,  with  a  prefatory  notice,  in  whichI mentioned  M.  Vernes,  and a few brief  notes,  in order  to  explain  thefacts.  Not  content  with  having  this  pamphlet  printed,  I sent  it to17 One  of the  rivers  of  the  infernal  regions.658THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUseveral  persons,  amongst  others  to  Prince  Louis  of  Wurtemburg,who  had  shown  great  civility  to  me,  and  with  whom  I was  in cor-respondence  at  the time.  The  Prince,  Du  Peyrou,  and  others,  seemedto  doubt  whether  Vernes  was  the author  of the libel,  and  blamed  mefor  having  mentioned  his  name  without  due  investigation.  In  con-sequence  of  their  remonstrances,  I regretted  what  I had  done,  andwrote  to  Duchesne  to  suppress  the  pamphlet.  Guy  wrote  to  me  thatthis  had  been  done.  I do  not  know  whether  this  was  true- I havefound  him  out  in  so  many  lies  on  so  many  occasions,  that  one  morewould  be nothing  surprising;  and  at  that  time  I was  surrounded  bythat  profound  darkness,  which  it is impossible  for  me  to  penetrate,so  as  to  arrive  at  any  kind  of truth.M.  Vernes  bore  the  imputation  with  an  equanimity  which  wasmore  than  surprising  in  a  man,  if he  had  not  deserved  it, after  hisprevious  outburst  of  rage.  He  wrote  to  me  two  or  three  cautiouslyworded  letters,  the  object of which  seemed  to me  to  be, to  endeavourto  find  out,  from  my  answers,  how  much  I knew,  and  whether  I hadany  proof against  him.  I wrote  two  short  answers,  dry, and  severe  inthe  meaning  they  conveyed,  but  couched  in  most  polite  terms,  atwhich  he was  not  at  all annoyed.  I did  not  answer  his third  letter  atall, since  I saw  that  he wanted  to  draw  me  into  correspondence;  andhe  sent  D’Ivernois  to  speak  to  me.  Madame  Cramer  wrote  to  DuPeyrou  that  she was  certain  that  the libel  was  not  the work  of Vernes.All  this  failed  to  shake  my  own  conviction;  but,  since  it was  possiblethat  I was  mistaken,  and  in this case  owed  Vernes  an  apology,  I senthim  a  message  by D’Ivernois  that  I would  make  him  a  most  hand-some  one,  if he could  inform  me  of the real  author  of the  libel,  or,  atleast,  prove  to  me  that  it was  not  himself.  I did  more,  feeling  that,after  all,  if he  was  not  guilty,  I had  no  right  to  demand  that  heshould  prove  anything  to  me;  I resolved  to  explain,  in a tolerablylengthy  memoir,  the  reasons  for  my  conviction,  and  to  submit  themto  the  decision  of  an  umpire,  whem  Vernes  could  not  refuse.  Noone  would  guess  who  was  the umpire  that I chose:  it was  the Councilof Geneva.  I declared,  at  the end  of the  memoir,  that  if the  Council,after  having  examined  it and  made  such  inquiries  as  it might  con-sider  necessary,  and  which  it was  easy  for it to  carry  out  successfully,ACTS  OF  VIOLENCE659was  of the  opinion  that  M.  Vernes  was  not  the  author  of the libel,  Iwould  from  that  moment  sincerely  abandon  my  belief  that  he  was,and  would  go  and  throw  myself  at  his feet, and  ask  his pardon  untilI had  obtained  it. I venture  to  say,  that  never  did  the  ardour  of myzeal  for justice,  never  did  the  uprightness  and  generosity  of my  soul,never  did  my  confidemce  in  this  love  of justice,  which  is natural  tothe  hearts  of all, display  themselves  more  fully  or  more  clearly  thanin this  memoir,  at  the  same  time  prudent  and  affecting,  in  which  Iunhtesitatingly  accepted  my  most  implacable  enemies  as  umpires  be-tween  the  slanderer  and  myself.  I read  the  pamphlet  to  Du  Peyrou;he advised  me  to  suppress  it, and  I suppressed  it. He  recommendedme  to  wait  for  the  proofs  which  Vernes  promised.  I waited,  and  amstill  waiting  for  them;  he  advised  me  to  remain  silent  while  I waswaiting;  I remained  silent,  and  shall  remain  silent  for the rest  of mylife, blamed  for  having  brought  against  Vernes  a  serious  imputation,that  was  false  and  not  proved,  although,  in my  own  mind,  I am  asfirmly  convinced  and  persuaded  that  he is the  author  of the  libel  asof my  own  existence.  My memoir  is in Du  Peyrou’s  hands.  If it eversees  the  light,  my  reasons  for  thinking  so  will  be  found  there,  andthe soul  of Jean  Jacques,  which  my  contemporaries  refused  to  under-:stand,  will  then,  I hope,  be  understood.It is time  to  proceed  to  the  final catastrophe  at  Motiers,  and  my  de-parture  from  Val-de-Travers,  after  a  residence  of  two  years  and  ahalf,  and  eight  months  of unshaken  firmness  in enduring  most  un-worthy  treatment.  It is impossible  for  me  to  recall  clearly  the  detailsof  this  unpleasant  period  of  my  life;  but  they  will  be  found  in  theaccount  of it published  by Du  Peyrou,  of which I shall  have  to  speaklater.After  Madame  de  Verdelin’s  departure,  the  excitement  becamemore  violent;  and,  in  spite  of the  repeated  rescripts  of the  King,  inspite  of the  frequent  orders  of the  Council  of State,  in  spite  of theefforts  of the lord  of the  manor  and  the  magistrates  of the place,  thepeople  seriously  regarded  me  as  the  Antichrist;  and, finding  all theirclamours  useless,  seemed  at  last  inclined  to  proceed  to  acts  of  vio-lence.  In the  streets,  stones  already  began  to  roll  after  me,  which  hadbeen  thrown  from  too  great  a distance  to be able  to reach  me.  At last,660THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUon  the night after  the fair  at  Motiers,  at  the beginning  of September,I was  attacked  in  the  house  where  I lived  in  a  manner  which  im-perilled  the lives  of the  inmates.At midnight,  I heard  a  loud  noise  in the  gallery  which  ran  alongthe  back  part  of the  house.  A shower  of stones,  thrown  against  thewindow  and  the  door  which  led to  this gallery,  fell into  it with  sucha noise that my  dog, who  slept in the gallery,  and  at first commencedto  bark,  was  terrified  into  silence,  and  ran  into  a  corner,  where  hescratched  and  gnawed  the  boards  in his  endeavours  to  escape.  Hear-ing the  noise,  I got up.  I was  on  the  point  of leaving  my  room  to  gointo  the  kitchen,  when  a  stone  thrown  by a  powerful  hand,  smashedthe  window  of the  kitchen,  flew  across  it, burst  open  the  door  of myroom,  and  fell  at  the  foot  of  my  bed;  and,  if I had  been  a  secondsooner,  I should  have  had  it  in  my  stomach.  I concluded  that  thenoise  had  been  made  in order  to  attract  my  attention,  and  the  stonethrown  to receive  me  when I left my room.  I dashed  into  the kitchen.There  I found  Thérése,  who  had  also  got  up  and  ran  trembling  to-wards  me.  We  stood  close  against  a  wall,  out  of the  line  of the  win-dow, to  avoid  being hit by the stones,  and  to  think  of what  we  shoulddo;  for  to  go  out  to  call  for  help  would  have  been  certain  death.Fortunately,  the servant  of a worthy  old man,  who  lodged  below  me,got  up  at  the  noise,  and  ran  to  cal]  the  lord  of  the  manor,  wholived  next  door.  He jumped  out  of bed, threw  on  his  dressing-gown,and  immediately  came  with  the  watch,  who,  on  account  of the  fair,were  making  the  round,  and  were  close  at  hand.  When  he  saw  thehavoc,  he grew  pale with  affright;  and,  at  the  sight of the  stones,  ofwhich  the  gallery  was  full,  he exclaimed,  “Good  God!  it is a  regularquarry!”  On  going  below,  we  found  that  the  door  of a  small  yardhad  been  broken  open,  and  that  an  attempt  had  been  made  to  getinto  the  house  through  the  gallery.  When  inquiry  was  made,  whythe  watchmen  had  neither  perceived  nor  prevented  the  disturbance,it was  found  that,  although  those  of another  village  ought  properlyto  have  done  duty,  those  from  Motiers  had  persisted  in  taking  thiswatch  out  of their  turn.  On  the following  day, the lord  of the manorsent  in his report  to  the  Council  of State,  who,  two  days afterwards,commissioned  him  to  institute  an  inquiry  into  the  matter,  and  tooffer  a  reward,  under  promise  of  secrecy,  to  those  who  informedWALPOLE661against  the guilty  parties.  In the  meantime,  he was  to  set  a  guard,  atthe  Government  expense,  to  protect  my  house  and  his  own,  whichadjoined  it. The  next  day, Colonel  de Pury;  Meuron,  the  procureur-général;  Martinet,  the  lord  of  the  manor;  Guyenet,  the  receiver  oftaxes;  D’Ivernois,  the  treasurer,  and  his  father—in  a  word,  all  thepersons  of  importancegsin  the. district,  came  to  see  me,  and  unitedtheir  entreaties  to  induce  me  to  bow  to  the  storm,  and  to  leave,  atleast  for  a  time,  a  parish  in which  I could  no  longer  live  with  safetyor  honour.  I even  noticed  that  the  lord  of the  manor,  terrified  by thefury  of the  frenzied  populace,  and  alarmed  lest  it might  extend  tohim,  would  have  been  very  glad  to  see  me  leave  at  once,  that  hemight  be  relieved  from  the  responsibility  of  protecting  me,  andmight  be able  to  leave  the  place  himself,  as  in  fact  he  did,  after  myown  departure.  I accordingly  yielded,  and  even  with  little  reluctance;for  the  sight  of  the  hatred  of  the  people  caused  me  such  heart-breaking  anguish,  that  I could  no  longer  endure  it.1®More  than  one  place of refuge  was  open  to  me.  Madame  de Verde-lin, after  her  return  to Paris,  had  mentioned,  in several  of her letters,a  certain  M.  Walpole,  whom  she  called  My Lord,  who  took  a  greatinterest  in me,  and  offered  me  a  refuge  on  one  of his estates,  of whichshe  gave  me  a  most  delightful  description,  and  entered  into  details,in regard  to  board  and  lodging,  which  showed  me  how  far  my  LordWalpole  had  interested  himself  together  with  her  in  this  plan.  MyLord  Marshal  had  always  recommended  to  me  England  or  Scot-land,  where  he also  offered  me  a  refuge  on  his estates,  but  he offeredme  another,  which  tempted  me  far  more,  at  Potsdam,  in  his  neigh-bourhood.  He  had  recently  informed  me  of a conversation  which  theKing had  held  with  him  concerning  me,  and  which  amounted  to  aninvitation;  and  Madame  la  Duchesse  de  Saxe-Gotha  felt  so  sure  ofmy  accepting  it, that  she  wrote  to  me,  pressing  me  to  pay  her  a  visiron  the  way,  and  to  stay  a  few  days with  her;  but  I felt  so  strongly  at.tached  to  Switzerland,  that  I could  not  make  up  my  mind  to  leave  ir;as  long as  it was  possible  for  me  to  live  there,  and  I took  advantage.of this opportunity  to  carry  out  a plan which  had  occupied  my  atten-Tt  is said  that  Thérèse  was  really  responsible  for  this  disturbance;  and  that,being  tired  of the  place,  it was  got  up  by her  to  bring  about  Rousseau’s  removalfrom  it.662THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUtion  for  several  months,  and  which  I have  hitherto  been  unable  tomention,  for  fear  of interrupting  the  thread  of my  narrative.This  plan  was,  to  go  and  settle  in  the  island  of  Saint-Pierre,  adomain  belonging  to  the hospital  of Berne,  in the middle  of the Lakeof Bienne.  During  a walking  tour,  which  I had  taken  the year  beforewith  Du  Peyrou,  we  had  visited  this  island,  and  I had  been  so  de-lighted  with  it, that,  since  then,  I had  never  ceased  to  think  how  Imight contrive  to  fix my abode  there.  The  chief  obstacle  was,  that  theisland  belonged  to the Bernese,  who, three  years  before,  had disgrace-fully  driven  me  from  their  territory;  and,  not  to  mention  that  mypride  would  have  been  hurt  by going  back  to  live  amongst  peoplewho  had  received  me  so  ill,  I had  reason  to  fear  that  they would  notleave  me  undisturbed  on  this  island  any  more  than  at  Yverdun.  Ihad  consulted  my  Lord  Marshal  on  the matter;  he  thought,  like  my-self, that  the  Bernese  would  be only too  pleased  to  see  me  banished  tothis  island,  and  to  keep  me  there  as  a  hostage  for  any  further  worksI might  be tempted  to  write,  and  had  sounded  them  through a cer-tain  M.  Sturler,  his  former  neighbour  at  Colombier.  This  gentlemanmade  inquiries  of several  of the  chief  men  of the  State,  and, in con-sequence  of the  answer  he  received,  assured  my  Lord  Marshal  thatthe  Bernese,  ashamed  of their  former  behaviour,  would  be delightedto  see  me  domiciled  in  the  island  of Saint-Pierre,  and  to  leave  me  inpeace  there.  By way  of further  precaution,  before  venturing  to go andreside  there,  I procured  further  information  through  Colonel  Chail-let,  who  gave  me  the  same  assurances;  and,  as  the  receiver  of taxesof the  island  had  obtained  permission  from  his  superiors  to  receiveme  in his own  house,  I thought  I ran  no  risk  in going  there,  with  thetacit  consent  both  of the  supreme  authority  and  the owners;  for I didnot  venture  to  hope  that  the  gentlemen  of  Berne  would  openly  ac-knowledge  the  injustice  they  had  done  me,  and  offend  against  themost  inviolable  principle  of all  supreme  authorities.The  island  of Saint-Pierre,  called  the Ile de la Motte  at Neufchâtel,in the  middle  of the  Lake  of Bienne,  is only  about  half  a  league  incircumference;  but  within  this  small  space  it produces  all  the  chiefnecessaries  of existence.  It contains  fields,  meadows,  orchards,  woods,and  vineyards;  the whole,  thanks  to the diversified  and  mountainousnature  of  the  ground,  exhibits  a  variety  that  is the  more  agreeable,THE  ISLAND  OF  SAINT-PIERRE663since  its  different  aspects,  not  disclosing  themselves  all  at  the  sametime,  mutually  set  each  other  off, afid  cause  the island  to  seem  largerthan  it really  is. The  western  portion  of it, which  faces  Gleresse  andBonneville,  is formed  by a  very  lofty  terrace.  This  terrace  has  beenplanted  with  a  long row  of trees,  intersected  in the middle  by a  largesalon,  where,  during  the e  vintage, the  inhabitants  assemble  on  Sun-days  from  the  neighbouting  shores,  to  dance  and  enjoy themselves.There is  only  one  house in  the  island,  where  the  receiver  of  taxeslives;  but it is large and  commodious,  and  situated  in a  recess,  whichshelters it  from  the  wind.Five  or  six  hundred  yards  from  Saint-Pierre, in  a  southerly  direc-tion, is another  island,  much  smaller, uncultivated,  and  uninhabited,which  appears  to  have  been  at  some  time  separated  from  the  largerone  by the  violence  of the  storms;  its gravelly  soil  produces  nothingbut  willows  and  persicaria,  but  it contains  some  rising  ground,  cowered  with  turf  and  very  pleasant.  The  shape  of the  lake  is almost  aperfect  oval.  Its shores,  not  so  fertile  as  those  of the Lakes  of Genevaand  Neufchatel,  nevertheless  form  a  most  ornamental  scene,  espe-cially  on  the  west  side,  which  is very  populous,  and,  at  the  foot  of achain  of  hills,  has  a  border  of  vines  which  are  like  those  of  Côte-Rotie,!®  but do not  produce  such  good  wine.  On  the  way  from  southto  north,  is  the  bailiwick  of  Saint-Jean,  Bonneville,  Bienne,  andNidau,  at the end  of the lake, the whole  being  dotted  with  a numberof pleasant  villages.Such  was  the refuge  which  I had  secured  for myself,  where  I madeup  my  mind  to  settle  on  leaving  Val-de-Travers.*®  This  choice  wasso  entirely  suited  to  my  quiet  tastes  and  to  my  solitary  and  indolentdisposition,  that  I reckon  it as  one  of the delightful  dreams  for whichI have  conceived  a most  passionate  affection.  It seemed  to me  that, in19  A noted  vineyard  in  the  département  of the  Rhône.2  Tt is perhaps  not  irrelevant  to  observe  that  I left  behind  me  a  personal  enemyin  a  certain  M.  de  Terraux,  maire  of  Verrières,  who  was  not  held  in  particularesteem  in  the  country,  but  who  has  a  brother,  who  is said  to  be  an  honourableman,  in M.  de  Saint-Florentin’s  offices.  The  matre  had  paid  him a visit  some  timebefore  my  adventure.  Little  remarks  of  this  kind,  which  in  themselves  are  quiteinsignificant,  may  subsequently  assist  in  the  discovery  of  many  underhand  pro-ceedings..664THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthis  island,  I should  be more  removed  from  the  society  of men,  moresheltered  from  their  insults,  more  completely  forgotten  by them,and, in a  word,  more  at  liberty  to  abandon  myself  to  the  delights  ofidleness  and-a  life  of contemplation.  I should  have  liked  to  be  shutup in this  island  so  completely  as  to  have  no  further  intercourse  withany  living  man;  and  I undoubtedly  took  all  possible  steps  to  relievemyself  of the necessity  of keeping  it up  any  longer.It was  necessary  to  live,  and,  in consequence  of the  high price  ofprovisions  and  the  difficulty  of transport,  living  was  very  expensivein this  island;  in addition  to  this,  one  is at  the mercy  of the  receiver.This  difficulty  was  removed  by an  arrangement  which  Du  Peyrouwas  good  enough  to  make  with  me,  by which  he  took  the  place  ofthe company  which  had  undertaken  and  abandoned  the  productionof a  complete  edition  of my  works.  I put into  his  hands  all the neces-sary  materials.  I undertook  the  arrangement  and  distribution  of it.I also  bound  myself  to  hand  over  to him  the Memoirs  of my  life, andI made  him  the general  trustee  of all my  papers,  expressly  stipulatingthat  he  should  make  no  use  of them  until  after  my  death,  as  I hadset  my  heart  upon  ending  my  career  peacefully,  without  remindingthe  public  of my  existence.  The  annuity  which  he undertook  to  payme  in  return  was  sufficient  for  my  wants.  My  Lord  Marshal,  whohad  recovered  all  his  property,  had  also  offered  me  an  annuity  of1,200  francs,  of  which  I only  accepted  half.  He  wanted  to  send  methe  capital,  which  I refused,  since  I should  not  have  known  how  toinvest  it. He  accordingly  sent  it to  Du  Peyrou,  in whose  hands  it hasremained,  and  he  hands  me  over  the  interest  accruing  from  it in  ac-cordance  with  the  terms  agreed  upon  between  him  and  my  patron.?+Including  my  agreement  with  Du  Peyrou,  my  Lord  Marshal’s  pen-sion,  two-thirds  of  which  was  to  revert  to  Thérèse  after  my  death,and  the  yearly  sum  of 300  francs  which  I received  from  Duchesne,  Iwas  able  to  count  upon  a  respectable  income,  both  for  myself  and,after  my  death,  for  Thérèse,  to  whom I left  an  income  of 700  francs,from  Rey’s  pension  as  well  as  my  Lord  Marshal’s;  so  that  I had  nolonger  any  fear  that  she  would  ever  want  for  bread,  any  more  thanmyself.  But  it was  written,  that  honour  should  compel  me  to  reject"l  Constituant:  a  term  specially  applied  to  one  who  settles  an  annuity  on  an-other.FAREWELL  TO  THE  WORLD665all the resources  which  fortune  or  my  own  labours  placed  within  myreach,  and  that  I should  die  as  poor.as  I have  lived.  The reader  willbe  able  to  judge  whether,  without  degrading  myself  to  the  lowestdepths  of  infamy,  I could  have  adhered  to  arrangements  whichothers  have  always  been  eareful  to  make  disgraceful  for  me,  by atthe same  time  depriving  me  of all other  resources,  in order  to compelme  to consent  to  my  dish®nour.  How  could  they have  felt  any  doubtas  to  my  course  of action  in such  an  alternative?  They  have  alwaysjudged  my  heart  by their  own.My mind  being  easy  in  regard  to  my  means  of livelihood,  I had~  no  other  anxiety.  Although,  in the  world,  I left  the field  free  for myenemies,  I was  leaving  behind  me,  in  the  noble  enthusiasm  whichhad  prompted  all  my  writings,  and  in  the  consistent  uniformity  ofmy  principles,  a  testimony  on  behalf  of my  soul  which  correspondedto  that  which  my’ whole  course  of behaviour  rendered  to  my  char-acter.  I needed  no  other  defence  against  my  calumniators.  Theymight,  under  my  name,  represent a totally  different  man;  but  theycould  only  deceive  those  who  wanted  to  be  deceived.  I could  leavethem  my  life  to  criticise,  from  one  end  to  the  other;  I felt  certainthat,  amidst  all my  faults  and  weaknesses,  and  my  unfitness  for  sub-mitting  to  any  yoke,  they  would  always  find  a  man  who  was  just,good,  free  from  bitterness,  hatred  and  jealousy,  ever  ready  to  ac-knowledge  his  own  injustice,  and  still  more  ready  to  forget  that  ofothers,  who  sought  all  his  happiness  in  loving  and  gentle  emotions,and  displayed  in  everything  sincerity  even  to  the  extent  of  impru-dence  and  the most  incredible  disinterestedness.eAccordingly,  I in  a  measure  took  leave  of my  generation  and  mycontemporaries,  and  said  farewell  to  the  world,  by confining  myselfwithin  this  island  for  the  remainder  of my  days;  for  such  was  myresolution,  and  it was  there  that  I hoped  at  last  to  be  able  to  carryout  the  grand  scheme  of a  life  of idleness,  to  which  I had  hithertodevoted  in  vain  all  the  little  energy  which  Heaven  had  bestowedupon  me.  This  island  should  be my  Papimania,”*  that  happy countrywhere  one  sleeps:“Where  one  does  something  more,  where  one  does  nothing.”2  A name  invented  by Rabelais  for  the  retreat  of the  Court  of the  Pope.666THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUThis  “something  more”  was  everything  for  me;  for  I have  nevermuch  regretted  the loss  of sleep;  idleness  is enough  for me.  Providedthat  I have  nothing  to do, I much  prefer  to  dream  awake  than  asleep.As  the  age  for  romantic  schemes  was  over,  and  the  incense  of vain-glory  had  rather  made  me  giddy  than  flattered  me,  there  remainednothing  for me,  as  a  last hope,  but a life  free  from  restraint,  spent  inperpetual  leisure.  This  is the  life  of  the  blessed  in  the  next  world,and,  from  this  time  forth,  I fixed  upon  it my  supreme  happiness  inthis.Those  who  reproach  me  with  so  many  inconsistencies,  will  notfail  here  to  reproach  me  with  another.  I have  said  that  the  idlenessof society  made  it unendurable  to  me;  and  yet,  here  was  I seekingsolitude  with  the  sole  object  of abandoning  myself  to  idleness.  Andyet  such  is my  disposition;  if there  is any  inconsistency  in  this,  thefault  is in nature  and  not  in me;  but it is so  trifling, that  it is just thatwhich  makes  me  always consistent.  The  idleness  of society  is tedious,because  it is obligatory;  that  of  solitude  is  delightful,  because  it  isfree  and  voluntary.  In company  it is a  cruel  task  for  me  to  do noth-ing, because  I am  under  compulsion.  I am  obliged  to  remain  there,nailed  to  my  chair,  or  standing  bolt  upright  like  a  sentinel,  withoutmoving  hand  or  foot,  afraid  to  run,  to  jump,  to  sing,  to  cry  out,  orgesticulate  when  I have  a  mind  to,  afraid  even  to  dream. I feel  atonce  all  the  weariness  of idleness  and  all  the  torture  of constraint.  Iam  obliged  to  listen  attentively  to  all  the  silly  things  that  are  saidand  the compliments  that  are  interchanged,  and to rack  my brains  in-cessantly,  that  I may  not  fail  in my  turn  to  bring  in  my  pun  or  mylie. And  that  is called  idleness!  It is the  work  of a  galley-slave!The  idleness  that  I love  is not  that  of an  idler  who  remains  withfolded  arms  in a state  of total  inactivity,  no  more  thinking  than  act-ing. That  which  I love  is the combined  idleness  of a  child  who  is in-cessantly  in  motion  without  ever  doing  anything,  and  that  of  adotard,  who  wanders  from  one  thing  to  another  while  his  arms  arestill.  I love  to  busy  myself  about  trifles,  to  begin  a  hundred  thingsand  finish  none,  to come  and  go as  the fancy  takes  me,  to  change  myplans  every  moment,  to  follow a fly in all its movements,  to  try  andpull  up  a  rock  to  see  what  is underneath,  to  undertake  with  eager-ness  a  work  that  would  last  ten  years,  and  to  abandon  it without  re-BOTANY667gret  at the end  of ten  minutes—in  a word,  to  spend the day in triflingwithout  order  or  sequence,  and, in everything,  to  follow  nothing  butthe caprice  of the moment.Botany,  such  as  I have  already  regarded  it, and  such  as  it began tobe a  passion  for  me,  was  exactly  the  kind  of idle  study  which  wascalculated  to  fill  up  thg void  of  my  leisure  time,  without  leavingroom  for  the extravagances  of imagination  or  the  weariness  of abso-lute  idleness.  To  wander  carélessly  in the  woods  and  in the country,to  pluck  mechanically,  here  and  there,  sometimes  a  flower,  some-times  a  branch,  to  munch  my  food  almost  haphazard,  to  observe  thesame  things  thousands  and  thousands  of times,  and  always  with  thesame  interest,  because  I always  forgot  them—that  was  the  way  tospend  eternity  without  a  moment’s  weariness.  However  delicate,however  admirable,  however  different  the  structure  of  plants.maybe, it never  strikes  an  ignorant  eye  sufficiently  to  interest  it. The  con.sistent  analogy  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  enormeus  variety  whichcharacterises  their  organism,  only  delights  those  who  already  havesome  idea  of the  system  of the  vegetable  world.  Others,  when  theybehold  all  these  treasures  of nature,  only  feel  a  stupid  and  monot-onous  admiration.  They  see  nothing  in  detail,  because  they  do  noteven  know  what  they are  to  look  at:  they  see  the  whole  as  little, be-cause  they  have  no  idea  of the  chain  of relations  and  combinationswhich  overwhelms  with  its marvels  the  mind  of the  observer.  I my-self  was,  and  my  bad  memory  was  always  destined  to  keep  me,  inthe  happy  condition  of knowing  little  enough  for  everything  to  ap-pear  new  to  me,  and  yet  enough  to  make  everything  intelligible  tome.  The  different  kinds  of soil  distributed  over  the island,  in spite ofits small  size,  afforded  me  a  sufficient  variety  of plants  for  study  andamusement  during  the rest  of  my  life.  I did  not  intend  to  leave  ablade  of grass  unexamined,  and  I already  began  to  make  arrange-ments  to  write  an  account  of the  “Flora  Petrinsularis,’”  with  a  hugecollection  of curious  observations.I sent  for  Thérése  with  my  books  and  belongings.  We  boardedwith  the receiver  of the island.  His  wife’s  sisters,  who  lived  at Nidau,came  to  see  her  in turns,  and  this  was  company  for  Thérése.  Here  Ifirst  experienced  the  pleasures  of a  life  which  I could  have  wishedmight  last  out  my  own;  but  the  taste  which  I acquired  for  it only668THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUserved  to  make  me  feel  more  keenly  the  bitterness  of that  life  whichwas  so  soon  to  succeed  it.I have  always  been  passionately  fond  of the water,  and  the sight ofit throws  me  into  a  delightful  state  of  dreaminess,  although  oftenwithout  any  definite  object.  When  it was  fine  weather,  I always  has-tened  to  the  terrace  as  soon  as  I was  up,  to  inhale  the  fresh  andhealthy  morning  air,  and  let  my  eyes  roam  over  the  horizon  of thisbeautiful  lake,  the  shores  of  which,  surrounded  by  mountains,formed  an  enchanting  prospect.  I can  think  of no  worthier  homageto  the  Divinity  than  the  mute  admiration  which  is aroused  by thecontemplation  of  His  works,  and  does  not  find  expression  in  out-ward  acts.  I can  understand  how  it is that  the  inhabitants  of cities,who  see  nothing  but  walls,  streets  and  crimes,  have  so  little  religiousbelief;  but  I cannot  understand  how  those  who  live  in  the  country,especially  in solitude,  can  have  none.  How  is it that  their  sou]  is notlifted  up  in ecstasy  a  hundred  times  a  day to  the  Author  of the  won-ders  which  strike  them?  As  far  as I am  concerned,  it is  especiallyafter  rising,  weakened  by a  night  of  sleeplessness,  that  I am  led  bylong-standing  habit  to  those  upliftings  of the heart,  which  do not  im-pose  upon  me  the trouble  of thinking.  But,  for this  to  take  place,  myeyes  must  be  smitten  by the  enchanting  spectacle  of nature.  In  myroom,  my  prayers  are  not  so  frequent  or  so  fervent;  but, at  the  sightof a  beautiful  landscape,  I feel  myself  moved  without  knowing  why.I remember  reading  of a  wise  bishop,  who,  during a visit  to  his  dio-cese,  came  upon  an  old  woman:  who,  by way  of  prayer,  could  saynothing  but  “Oh!”  “Good  mother,”  said  the  bishop,  “continue  topray  in  this  manner;  your  prayer  is better  than  ours.”  This  betterprayer  is also  mine.After  breakfast  I hastily  wrote  a  few  miserable  letters,  with  a sulkyair,  longing  eagerly  for  the  happy  moment  when  I need  write  nomore.  I bustled  about  my  books  and  papers  for a few  moments,  morefor  the  sake  of unpacking  and  arranging  than  of reading  them;  andthis,  which  became  for  me  the  task  of  Penelope,  afforded  me  thepleasure  of idling  away  my  time  for  a  few  moments,  after  which  Ibecame  tired  of the  task, and  spent  the three  or  four  remaining  hoursof the  morning  in the  study  of botany,  especially  the  system  of Lin-naeus,  of which  I became  so  passionately  fond  that  I have never  beenHIS  LOVE  OF  THE  COUNTRY669able  to  give it up entirely,  even  after  discovering  its deficiencies.  Thisgreat  observer  is, in my  opinion,  with  the  exception  of Ludwig,  theonly man  who  has  as  yet  considered  botany  from  the  point  of viewof a  naturalist  and  a  philosopher;  but  he has  studied  too  much  fromgardens  and  collections  of dried  plants,  and  too  little  from  natureherself.  I, whose  garden was  the  whole  island,  as  soon  as  I requiredto  make  or  verify  some  Observation,  ran  into  the  woods  or  meadowswith  a  book  under  my  arm:  there,  I threw  myself  on  the  ground  bythe  side  of the plant in question,  to  examine  it, where  it stood,  at  myleisure.  This  method  has  greatly  assisted  me  in acquiring  a  knowl-edge of plants  in their  natural  state,  before  they have  been  cultivatedand  disfigured  by the hand  of man.  It is said  that  Fagon,  chief  physi-cian  to  Louis  XIV.,  who  was  thoroughly  familiar  with,  and  able  toname  all  the plants  in the Jardin  Royal,  was  so  ignorant  in the coun-try,  that  he  was  no  longer  able  to  recognise  them.  It  is exactly  theopposite  with  me:  I know  something  of the  work  of nature,  nothingof that  of the  gardener.In  the  afternoon  I abandoned  myself  entirely  to  my  idle  and  care-less  disposition,  and  followed,  without  any  system,  the  impulse  ofthe  moment.  Frequently,  when  the  weather  was  calm,  immediatelyafter  dinner,  I jumped  by myself  into a little  boat,  which  the  receiverhad  taught  me  how  to  manage  with a single oar,  and  rowed  out  intothe  middle  of the  lake.  The  moment  at  which I left  the  bank,  I feltready to leap for joy. It is impossible  for me  to  explain  or  understandthe reason  of this  feeling,  unless  it was  a  secret  self-congratulation  onbeing  thus  out  of the  reach  of the  wicked.  I rowed  by myself  all overthe  lake,  sometimes  near  the  bank,  but  never  landing.  Frequently,leaving  my  boat  at  the  mercy  of the  wind  and  water,  I abandonedmyself  to  aimless  reveries,  which,  although  foolish,  were  none  theless  delightful.  I sometimes  exclaimed  with  emotion,  “O  Nature!  Omy  mother!  behold  me  under  thy protection  alone!  Here  there  is nocunning  or  knavish  mortal  to  thrust  himself  between  me  and  thee.”In this manner I got out  half  a league from  land.  I could  have  wishedthat  this  lake  had  been  the  ocean.  However,  in  order  to  please  mypoor  dog, who  was  not  so  fond  of long excursions  on  the  water  as  Iwas,  as  a rule  I followed  a  definite  plan.  I landed  on  the  small  island,walked  about  for an  hour  or  two,  or  stretched  myself  on  the  grass  at670THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthe  top  of the  rising  ground,  to  sate  myself  with  the  pleasure  of ad-miring  this  lake  and  its  surroundings,  to  examine  and  anatomise  allthe  plants  within  my  reach,  and  to  build  for  myself,  like  a  secondRobinson,  an  imaginary  dwelling  on  this  little  island.  I became  pas-sionately  attached  to  this  hillock.  When  I was  able  to  take  Thérése,the receiver’s  wife  and  her  sisters,  for  a walk  there,  how  proud I feltto  be their  pilot  and their  guide!  We  solemnly  took  some  rabbits  toit, to  stock  it.  Another  gala  for  Jean  Jacques!  This  colony  made  thelittle  island  still  more  interesting  to  me.  I visited  it more  frequentlyand  with  greater  pleasure  from  that  time,  to  look  for  signs  of  theprogress  of the  new  inhabitants.To these  amusements  I united  another,  which  reminded  me  of thedelightful  life  at  Les  Charmettes,  and  for  which  the  season  was  par-ticularly  suitable.  This  was  the  occupations  of a  country  life; and  wegathered  in the fruit  and  vegetables,  which  Thérése  and  myself  weredelighted  to  share  with  the  receiver  and  his family.  I remember  thata  Bernese,  named  M.  Kirchberger,  when  he came  to  see  me,  foundme  perched  on  the  branches  of a tall  tree,  with  a  bag tied  round  mywaist,  so  full  of apples  that  I could  not  move.  I was  not  at  all  sorrythat  he  and  others  should  find  me  thus.  I hoped  that  the  Bernese,seeing  how  I employed  my  leisure  time,  would  no  longer think  aboutdisturbing  its  tranquillity,  and  would  leave  me  in  peace  in my  soli-tude.  I should  have  preferred  to  be  shut  up  there  by their  will  thanby my  own;  for, in  that  case,  I should  have  felt  more  certain  of notseeing  my  rest  disturbed.I am  now  again  coming  to  one  of those  confessions,  in  regard  towhich I feel  sure  beforehand  that  those  readers  will  be  incredulous,who  are  always  determined  to  judge  me  by their  own  standard,  al-though  they  have  been  compelled  to  see,  throughout  the  wholecourse  of my  life,  a thousand  inner  emotions  which  have  not  the leastresemblance  to  their  own.  The  most  extraordinary  thing  is  that,while  denying  to  me  all  the  good  or  indifferent  feelings  which  theydo not  themselves  possess,  they  are  always  ready  to  attribute  to  meothers  so  utterly  bad  that  they could  not  even  enter  into  the  heart  ofa  man.  They  find  it perfectly  simple  to  put  me  into  contradictionwith  nature,  and  to  make  me  out  a  monster  such  as  cannot  possiblyNo  absurdity  appears  incredible  to them,  if only it is calculatedexist.HIS  ISLAND  LIFE671to  blacken  me;  nothing  that  is at  all  out  of  the  common  seems  tethem  possible,  if only  it is calculated  to  bring  honour  upon  me.But,  whatever  they  may  believe  or  say,  I will  none  the  less  con-tinue  faithfully  to  set  forth  what  Jean  Jacques  Rosseau  was,  did, andthought,  without  either  explaining  or  justifying  the  singularity  ofhis  sentiments  and  ideas,  or  inquiring  whether  others  have  thoughtas  he.  I took  such  a  fan€y  to  the  island  of  Saint-Pierre,  and  was  socomfortable  there,  that,  from  continually  concentrating  all  my  de-sires  upon  this  island,  I formed  the  design  of never  leaving  it.  Thevisits  which  I had  to pay  in the neighbourhood,  the excursions  whichI should  have  been  obliged  to  make  to  Neufchatel,  Bienne,  Yverdun,and  Nidau,  already  wearied  me  in  imagination.  A  day  to  be  spentout  of the  island  seemed  to  me  a  curtailment  of my  happiness;  andto  go  beyond  the  circumference  of the  lake  was,  for  me,  to  leave  myelement.  Besides,  my  experience  of the  past  had  made  me  timid.  Itonly  needed  something  to  make  me  happy  and  soothe  my  heart,  tomake  me  expect  to  lose  it; and  my  ardent  desire  of ending  my  days inthis  island  was  inseparably  united  with  the  fear  of being  compelledto  leave  it. I was  in  the  habit  of going  every  evening  to  sit upon  theshore,  especially  when  the  lake  was  rough.  | felt  a  singular  pleasurein  seeing  the  waves  break  at  my  feet.  They  represented  to  me  thetumult  of the  world  and  the  peacefulness  of my  own  abode;  and  Iwas  sometimes  so  touched  by this  delightful  idea,  that  I felt  the  tearstrickling  down  from  my  eyes.  This  repose,  which  I passionately  en-joyed,  was  only  troubled  by the  apprehension  of losing  it; but  thisfeeling  of uneasiness  spoilt  its charm.  I felt  my  position  to  be so  pre-carious  that  I could  not  reckon  upon  its  continuance.  Ah!  said  I tomyself,  how  gladly  would  I exchange  the  permission  to  leave  theisland,  for  which  I do not  care  at  all, for  the  assurance  of being  ableto remain  there  always!  Instead  of being  allowed  here  by sufferance,why am  I not  kept here  by force?  Those  who  only leave  me  here  onsufferance,  can  drive  me  away  at  any  moment;  can  I venture  to  hopethat my persecutors,  seeing me  happy here, will  allow  me  to  continueto  be so?  It is little  enough  that  I am  permitted  to  live  here;  I couldwish  to  be  condemned,  to  be  forced  to  remain  in  this  island,  so  asnot  to  be forced  to  leave  it. I regarded  with  envy  the  happy  MicheliDucret,  who,  quietly  resting  in the  fortress  at  Arberg,  in order  to  be672THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUhappy,  had  only  needed  to  wish  to  be  so.  At  last,  from  constantlyabandoning  myself  to  these  reflections,  and  to  the  disquieting  fore-bodings  of  fresh  storms  always  ready  to  burst  upon  my  head,  I atlast  came  to  wish,  with  incredible  eagerness,  that,  instead  of merelytolerating  my  stay  in  the  island,  my  persecutors  would  assign  it tome  as  a prison  for  life;  and  I can  swear  that,  if it had  only  restedwith  myself  to  secure  my  condemnation  to  that  effect,  I would  havedone  so  with  the  greatest  delight,  since  I preferred  a  thousand  timesthe necessity  of spending  the  rest  of my  life  there  to  the danger  of be-ing driven  out  of it.My  apprehensions  did  not  long  remain  unfulfilled.  At  the  mo-ment  when I least  expected  it, I received  a  letter  from  the  Bailli  ofNidau,  within  whose  jurisdiction  the  island  of  Saint-Pierre  was  in-cluded;  in  this  letter  he  conveyed  to  me,  on  the  part  of their  Excel-lencies,  the  order  to  leave  the  island  and  their  States.  I thought  Iwas  dreaming  when I read  it. Nothing  could  have  been  less  natural,less  reasonable,  less  expected  than  such  an  order;  for  I had  ratherlooked  upon  my  forebodings  as  the  uneasiness  of  a man  alarmed  byhis misfortunes,  than  as  a  presentiment  which  rested  upon  the  slight-est  foundation.  The  steps  which  I had  taken  to  assure  myself  of thetacit  consent  of the  Sovereign,  the  peaceful  manner  in  which  I hadbeen  permitted  to  establish  myself  on  the  island,  the visits  of severalBernese  and  the Bailli  himself,  who  had  overwhelmed  me  with  dem-onstrations  of friendship  and  attention,  the  severity  of the  weather,which  made  it absolutely  barbarous  to  drive  out  a  man  in ill-health—all  these  considerations  caused  me  and  many  others  to  believe  thatthere  was  some  misunderstanding  about  the  order,  and  that  thosewho  were  ill-disposed  towards  me  had  purposely  chosen  the  timewhen  the  grapes  were  being  gathered  and  when  several  members  ofthe  Senate  were  absent,  to  deal  me  this  blow  unexpectedly.If I had  listened  to  the  first  impulse  of my  indignation,  I shouldhave  set  out  at  once.  But  where  was  I to  go?  what  was  to become  ofme,  at  the  beginning  of winter,  when  I had  made  no  plans or  prep-arations,  and  was  without  a  guide  or  conveyance.  Unless  I was  pre-pared  to  leave  everything  in confusion,  my  papers,  belongings,  andaffairs  generally,  I required  time  to  see  to  them,  and  it was  not  men-tioned  in  the  order  whether  this  was  to  be  allowed  me  or  not.  MyEXPELLED  FROM  THE  ISLAND673continued  misfortunes  began  to  weaken  my  courage.  For  the  firsttime  in  my  life,  I felt  my  natural  ‘pride  bend  beneath  the  yoke  ofnecessity;  and, in spite of the murmurings  of my  heart,  I was  obligedto humiliate  myself  by asking  for delay.  It was  to  M.  de Graffenried,who  had  sent  me  the  order,  that  I addressed  myself  for  an  explana-tion  of it.  In his letter,  he ¢  expressed  strong  disapproval  of this  order,which  he  had  only  communicated  to  me  with  the  greatest  regret;and  the evidences  of sorrow  and  esteem,  of which it was  full, seemedto  me  a  kindly  invitation  to  speak  to  him  with  perfect  frankness,which IJ did.  I had  no  doubt  that  my  letter  would  open  the  eyes  ofthese  unjust  men  to  their  barbarous  conduct,  and  that,  even  if theydid  not  revoke  so  cruel  an  order,  they  would  at  least  grant  me  a  rea-sonable  delay,  perhaps  the  whole  winter,  to  make  preparations  forretreat,  and  to  select  another  place  of refuge.While  awaiting  their  reply,  I began  to  consider  my  situation,  andto  reflect  upon  the  course  of action  which  I had  to  adopt.  I saw  somany  difficulties  on  all  sides,  my  sorrow  had  so  greatly  affected  me,and  my  health,  at  this  moment,  was  so  bad,  that  I allowed  myself  tegive way  altogether,  and  the  effect  of my  despair  was,  to  deprive  meof the  few  expedients,  which  might  possibly  remain  in my  head,  forgetting  out  of  my  melancholy  situation  as  successfully  as  was  pos-sible.  In  whatever  asylum  I might  take  refuge,  it  was  clear  that  Icould  not  avoid  being  exposed  to  the  two  methods  which  had  beenemployed  in  order  to  drive  me  out;  the  one,  to  stir  up  the  peopleagainst  me  by underhand  intrigues;  the  other,  to  expel  me  by openforce,  without  assigning  any  reason  for  it. Thus,  I could  not  reckomupon  any  refuge  where  I should  be  safe  from  attack,  without  goingfurther  to  look  for  it than  my  own  strength  and  the  weather  seemedto  permit  me.  All  these  considerations  led  me  back  to  the  ideas  withwhich  I had  just  been  busying  myself;  I ventured  to  desire  and  topropose  that  I should  rather  be  imprisoned  for  life  than  driven  in-cessantly  as  a wanderer  over  the  face  of the  earth,  expelled  in succes-sion  from  all  the  places  of refuge  which  I might  choose.  Two  daysafter  my  first  letter,  I wrote  a  second  to  M.  de  Graffenried,  askingThe  reply  fromhim  to  lay my  proposal  before  their  Excellencies.Berne  to  both  these  letters  was  an  order,  couched  in most  harsh  andformal  terms,  to  leave  the  island  and  all  the  territory  belonging674THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUdirectly  or  indirectly?*  to  the  Republic  within  the  space  of twenty-four  hours,  and  never  to  enter  it again,  under  pain  of  the  severestpenalties.It was  a  terrible  moment.  Since  then  I have  often  been  in greaterdistress,  never  in greater  embarrassment.  But  what  afflicted  me  mostwas,  to  be obliged  to  give up the scheme  which  had made  me  wish  tospend  the  winter  in the  island.  It is now  time  to  relate  the  fatal  cir-cumstance  which  has  crowned  my  disasters,  and  which  has  involvedin  my  ruin  an  unfortunate  people,  whose  growing  virtues  alreadygave  promise  of some  day equalling  those  of  Sparta  and  Rome.  Inthe  “Contrat  Social”  I had  spoken  of the  Corsicans  as  a  new  people,the only one  in Europe  which  had  not  yet been  ruined  by legislation;and  I had  pointed  out  the  great  hopes  which  might  be  entertainedof such  a  people,  if it should  be  fortunate  to  find  a  wise  instructor.My work  was  read  by some  Corsicans,  who  appreciated  the  terms  ofrespect  in  which  I had  spoken  of  them;  and,  finding  themselvesobliged  to  devote  their  energies  to the  establishment  of their  repub-lic, some  of their  chiefs  bethought  themselves  of asking  my  opinionupon  this  important  work.  A certain  M.  Buttafuoco,  who  belongedto  one  of the  chief  families  of the  country  and  was  a  captain  in theFrench  Royal  Italian  regiment,  wrote  to  me  on  the  subject  and  fur-nished  me  with  a  number  of documents,  which  I had  asked  him  for,to  make  myself  acquaiated  with  the  history  of  the  nation  and  thestate  of the country.  M.  Paoli  also  wrote  to  me  several  times;  and, al-though I felt  that  such  an  undertaking  was  beyond  my  strength,  Ithought  that  I could  not  refuse  my  assistance  in  so  great  and  noblea  task,  after  I had  procured  all  the  information  which I required.  Itwas  to  this  effect  that  I replied  to  both;  and  this  correspondence  con-tinued  until  my  departure  from  Saint-Pierre.Exactly  at  the  same  time,  I  heard  that  France  was  sendingtroops  to  Corsica,  and  had  concluded  a  treaty  with  the  Genoese.This  treaty  and  this  despatch  of troops  made  me  uneasy,  and,  with-out  imagining  that  I was  in any  way  connected  with  it, I consideredthat  it would  be  impossible,  and  even  absurd,  to  devote  my  atten-tion  to  a  work,  which  requires  such  profound  tranquillity—the  or-Médiats  et  immédiats:  terms  used  of  fiefs  held,  or  persons  holding  fiefs  di-rectly  or  indirectly  from.  the-King  or  Emperor.CORSICA675ganisation  of a  people,  at  the  moment  when  it was  perhaps  on  thepoint of being brought  under  the  yoke. I did  not  conceal  my  uneasi-ness  from  M.  Buttafuoco,  who-calmed  me  by the  assurance  that,  ifthis  treaty  had  contained  anything  detrimental  to  the  liberty  of hiscountry,  a  good  citizen  like himself  would  not  remain,  as  he did, inthe service  of France.  In fact, his zeal  for the legislative  arrangementsof Corsica,  and  his intimate  connection  with  M.  Paoli,  prevented  mefrom  entertaining  any  suspicions  in  regard  to  him;  and,  when  Iheard  that  he  made  frequent  journeys  to  Versailles  and  Fontaine-bleau, and  had interviews  with  M. de Choiseul,  I could only concludethat  he had  assurances  in  regard  to  the real  intentions  of the  FrenchCourt,  which  he left  me  to  understand,  but  about  which  he did  notdesire  to  express  himself  openly  in a letter.All  this  to  some  extent  reassured  me.  However,  as  I could  notunderstand  the meaning  of the despatch  of French  troops,  and  couldnot,  with  any  show  of reason,  think  that  they  were  there  in order  toprotect  the  liberty  of the  Corsicans,  which  they  were  very  well  ableby themselves  to  defend  against  the Genoese,  I was  unable  to feel  per-fectly  easy  or  to  devote  my  attention  seriously  to  the  proposed  workof legislation,  until  I had  eonvincing  proof that  it was  not  all a  merejoke  at  my  expense.  I should  have  greatly  liked  an  interview  withM.  Buttafuoco,  which  was  the  only  means  of getting  from  him  theexplanations  which  I  wanted.  He  held  out  hopes  of  one,  and  Iawaited  it with  the  utmost  impatience.  I do  not  know  whether  hereally  intended  to  grant  me  one;  but  even  if this  had  been  the  case,my  misfortunes  would  have  prevented  me  from  taking  advantage  ofit.The  longer  I thought  over  the  proposed  undertaking,  and  themore  I studied  the  documents  I had  in my  hands,  the  more I felt  thenecessity  of studying  on  the  spot  both  the people  who  were  to  be leg-islated  for, and  the country  which  they inhabited,  and  of examining,in all  their  relations,  the  circumstances,  the  aid  of which  was  neces-sary  for  them,  in order  to  adopt  such  legislation.  I understood  moreclearly  every  day, that  it was  impossible  for me  to  acquire  from a dis-tance  all the  information  necessary  for  my  guidance.  I wrote  to  thiseffect  to  Buttafuoco:  he  agreed  with  me,  and,  if I did  not  exactlymake  up my  mind  to go over  to  Corsica,  I thought  a good deal  about676THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUthe  means  of undertaking  the  journey.  I spoke  of it to  M.  Dastier,who,  having  formerly  served  in  the  island  under  M.  de  Maillebois,"was,  of course,  well  acquainted  with  it.  He  spared  no  effort  to  dis-suade  me  from  my  intention;  and  I confess  that  the  frightful  picture,which  he drew  of the  Corsicans  and  their  country,  greatly cooled  myardent  desire  to  go and  live  amongst  them.But,  when  the  persecutions  to  which  I was  subjected  at  Motiersmade  me  think  of leaving  Switzerland,  this desire  was  revived  by thehope of at  last finding  amongst  those  islanders  the tranquillity  which  ~was  denied  me  everywhere  else.  One  thing  only  alarmed  me  in  re-gard to  the journéy—my  unfitness  for, and  the  aversion  which  I hadalways  felt to,  the active  life to which  I should  be condemned.  Fittedby nature  to  meditate  at  leisure  by myself,  I was  utterly  unfitted  tospeak,  act,  and  conduct  affairs  amongst  men.  Nature,  who  had  en-dowed  me  with  a  capacity  for  the  former,  had  refused  it for  the  lat-ter.  However,  I felt  that,  without  directly  taking  part  in  public  af-fairs,  I should  be  obliged,  as  soon  as  I arrived  in  Corsica,  to  throwmyself  into  the  eagerness  of the  people,  and  to  hold  frequent  confer-ences  with  the  chief  personages  of the  island.  The  object  of my  jour-ney  itself  required  that, instead  of seeking  retirement,  I should  seek,in  the  midst  of the  nation,  the  information  which  I needed.  It  wasclear  that  I should  no  longer  be my  own  master;  that,  hurried  along,in  spite  of  myself,  into  a  whirl  of  activity,  for  which  I was  notadapted  by nature,  I should  lead a life  utterly  opposed  to  my  tastes,and  should  only be seen  at a  disadvantage.  I foresaw  that, ill-sustain-ing by my  presence  the  opinion  of my  capabilities  which  they  mighthave  formed  from  my  books,  I should  lose  credit  with  the Corsicans,and,  in  addition,  as  much  to  their  detriment  as  my  own,  the  confi-dence  which  they had  bestowed  upon  me,  and  without  which  I couldnot  successfully  carry  out  the  work  which  they  expected  from  me.  Ifelt  sure  that  in thus  going  beyond  my  own  sphere  I should  only be-come  useless  to  them  and  make  myself  unhappy.Tormented,  buffeted  by storms  of every  kind,  worn  out  by jour-neys  and  persecutions  for many  years  past,  I strongly  felt  the  need  ofthe repose  of which  my  barbarous  enemies,  by way  of amusing  them-selves,  deprived  me.  I sighed  more  than  ever  for  the  delightful  idle-ness,  for  the  sweet  repose  of  body  and  soul,  which  I had  so  longedCONTEMPLATES  GOING  TO  CORSICA677for,  to  which  the  supreme  happiness  of my  heart,  now  cured  of itsidle  dreams  of love  and  friendship,  was  limited.  I only regarded  withalarm  the  task  which  I was  on  the point  of undertaking,  the  stormylife  to  which  I proposed  to  abandon  myself;  and  if the  greatness,  thebeauty,  and  the usefulness of the  object in view  inspired  my courage,the  impossibility  of exposing  myself  to  risk  with  any  chance  of suc-cess  completely  deprived-me  of  it.  Twenty  years  of  profound  andsolitary  meditation  would  have  been  less  painful  to  me  than  sixmonths  of an  active  life  in the  midst  of men  and  public  affairs  withthe  certainty  of failure.I thought  of  an  expedient,  which  seemed  to  me  well  adapted  tosettle  everything.  Pursued,  wherever  I took  shelter,  by the  under-hand  intrigues  of my  secret  persecutors,  and  seeing  no  other  placebut Corsica  where  I could  look  forward,  in my  old  age,  to  the repose.which  they  refused  to  allow  me  anywhere,  I decided  to  go  there,  inaccordance  with  the  instructions  of Buttafuoco,  as  soon  as  it shouldbe possible  for me  to  do so;  but, in order  to  live  quietly  there,  I madeup my  mind  to  abandon,  at least  to  all appearance,  the  work  of legis-lation,  and  in order  to  repay  my  hosts  in some  measure  for  their  hos-pitality,  to  confine  myself  to  writing  their  history  on  the  spot,  withthe  reservation  of  quietly  acquiring  the  information  necessary  tomake  me  of greater  use  to  them,  if I saw  any  prospect  of success.  Bythus  binding  myself  to  nothing  at  first,  I hoped  to  be able  to  think,by myself  and  at  greater  leisure,  of  a  suitable  plan,  without  eitherabandoning  my  cherished  hopes of solitude,  or  adopting  the  kind  oflife which  was  unendurable  to  me,  and  for which  I had  no  qualifica-tions.SBut  in my  position,  this  journey  was  not  easy  of accomplishment.To judge from  what  M. Dastier  had  told  me  about  Corsica,  I did  notexpect  to  find  there  the  simplest  comforts  of life,  unless  I took  themwith  me:  linen,  clothes,  plates  and  dishes,  kitchen  utensils,  paper,books—all  these  would  have  to  be taken  with  me.  In order  to  removethither  with  Thérèse,  it would  be necessary  to  cross  the  Alps,  and  todrag  after  me,  for  two  hundred  leagues,  a  houseful  of baggage;  itwould  be  necessary  to  pass  through  the  territories  of  several  differ-ent  princes;  and, considering  the attitude  adopted  towards  me  by thewhole  of Europe,  I should  naturally  have  to  be prepared,  after  myr678THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUmisfortunes,  to  meet  with  obstacles  everywhere,  and  to  find  every-one  proud  to  overwhelm  me  with  some  fresh  misfortune,  and  to  vio-late, in my  person,  all the  rights  of nations  and  humanity.  The  enor-mous  expense,  the  fatigues,  the  risks  of such  a  journey  compelled  meto  consider  in  advance  and  carefully  weigh  all  its  difficulties.  Theidea  of at  last  finding  myself  alone,  without  rescurces,  at  my  time  oflife,  far  from  all my  acquaintances,  at  the  mercy  of a  barbarous  andferocious  people, such  as  M.  Dastier  represented  the  Corsicans  to  be,was  well  calculated  to  make  me  ponder  such a resolution  carefullybefore  I carried  it  out.  I was  passionately  eager  for  the  interviewwhich  Buttafuoco  had  led  me  to  hope  for,  and  I awaited  the  resultof it, before  finally  making  up  my  mind.While  I was  thus  hesitating,  the  persecutions  at  Motiers  occurred,which  forced  me  to  withdraw.  I was  not  prepared  for a long journey,especially  to  Corsica.  I was  waiting  to  hear  from  Buttafuoco:  I tookrefuge in the  island  of Saint-Pierre,  whence  I was  driven  at  the com-mencement  of winter,  as  I have  already  said.  The  snow,  with  whichthe  Alps were  covered,  made  it impossible  for  me  to  leave  the coun-try  by that  route,  especially  at  such  short  notice.  It is true  that  theextravagance  of such  an  order  made  it an  impossibility  to  obey it; for,in  the  midst  of this  lonely  retreat  surrounded  by water,  with  onlytwenty-four  hours  allowed  me,  from  the  time  of the  notification  ofthe  order,  to  make  preparations  for  my  departure  and  to  procureboats  and  conveyances  in which  to  leave  the  island  and  the district—even  if I had  had  wings,  I should  hardly  have  been  able  to  obey.  Itold  the  Baill:  of  Nidau  this  in  my  answer  to  his  letter,  and  thenmade  all haste  to  leave  this land  of unrighteousness.  Thus  I was  com-pelled  to  abandon  ‘my  cherished  scheme,  and  having  been  unable,  inmy  discouragement,  to  prevail  upon  my  enemies  to  dispose  of me  asthey thought  fit, I decided,  at  the  invitation  of my  Lord  Marshal,  togo to  Berlin,  leaving  Thérèse  behind  to  spend the winter  in the islandwith  my  books  and  belongings,  and  depositing  my  papers  in  thehands  of Du  Peyrou.  I made  such  haste  that, on  the  next  morning,  Ileft  the  island  and  reached  Bienne  before  noon.  My  journey  wasnearly  terminated  by an  incident  which  I must  not  omit  to  describe.As  soon  as  the  report  spread  that  I had  been  ordered  to  leave  myrefuge,  I had  a  crowd  of visitors  from  the neighbourhood,  especiallyPERSUADED  TO  STAY,  AT  BIENNE679Bernese,  who,  with  the  most  detestable  falseness,  came  to  flatter  andsoothe  me,  and  to  assure  me  that  advantage  had  been  taken  of  theholidays  and  the  absence  of several  members  of the  Senate,  to  drawup  and  send  me  notice  of this  order,  at  which,  so  they  declared,  allthe  “Two  Hundred”  were  indignant.  Amongst  this  crowd  of  con-solers  were  certain  persons  from  the  town  of  Bienne,  a little  freeState,  included  in  that  “of  Berne;  amongst  others,  a  young  mannamed  Wildremet,  whose  family  held the  first  rank  and  enjoyed  thehighest  reputation  in that  little  town.  Wildremet  earnestly  entreatedme,  in the  name  of his  fellow-citizens,  to  take  shelter  amongst  them,assuring  me  that  they  were  eager  and  anxious  to  receive  me;  thatthey would  consider  it an  honour  and  a  duty to  help me  to  forget thepersecutions  which  I had  suffered;  that  amongst  them  I had  nothingto fear  from  the influence  of the  Bernese;  that  Bienne  was a free  city,which  was  under  no  one’s  jurisdiction;  and  that  all its  citizens  wereunanimously  resolved  to  listen  to  no  request  which  was  prejudicialto  myself.When  Wildremet  saw  that  he  could  not  shake  my  resolution,  heappealed  for  support  to  several  other  persans  from  Bienne  and  theneighbourhood,  and  even  from  Berne  itself,  amongst  others,  thesame  Kirchberger  of whom  J have  spoken,  who  had  sought  me  outafter  my  retirement  to  Switzerland  and  interested  me  by his abilitiesand  principles.  More  unexpected  and  more  weighty  were  the  en-treaties  of M.  Barthés,  secretary  to  the  French  Embassy,  who  calledupon  me  with  Wildremet,  strongly  advised  me  to  accept  his  invita-tion,  and  surprised  me  by the  lively  and  tender  interest  which  heseemed  to  take  in me.  I did  not  know  M.  Barthès  at  all; nevertheless,I recognised  in his words  the warmth  and  fervour  of friendship,  andI saw  that  he  was  really  anxious  to  persuade  me  to  settle  at  Bienne.He  praised,  in  most  high-flown  language,  the  town  and  its  inhabit-ants,  with  whom  he appeared  on  such  intimate  terms,  that  on  severaloccasions,  he called  them,  in my  presence,  his patrons  and  fathers.This  behaviour  on  the  part  of Barthès  upset  all  my  conjectures.  Ihad  always  suspected  M. de Choiseul  of being  the  secret  author  of allthe persecutions  to  which  I had  been  subjected  in  Switzerland.  Thebehaviour  of the  French  Resident  at  Geneva  and  of the  ambassadorat  Soleure  confirmed  these  suspicions  only  too  strongly.  I saw  the680THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUsecret  influence  of France  in  all  that  had  happened  to  me  at  Berne,Geneva  and  Neufchâtel,  and  I thought  that  the only powerful  enemyl had  in France  was  the  Duc  de Choiseul.  What,  then,  was  I to  thinkof the  visit  of Barthés  and  of the  tender  interest  which  he seemed  totake  in my  destiny?  My misfortunes  had  not  yet destroyed  my  natu-ral trustfulness,  and  experience  had  not  yet taught  me  to  see  a  snarein every  demonstration  of affection.  Greatly  surprised,  I tried  to  dis-cover  the  cause  of  this  kindness  on  the  part  of  Barthés.  I was  notfoolish  enough  to  believe  that  he was  acting  on  his  own  initiative.  Isaw  in  his  behaviour  an  ostentation  and  even  an  air  of  affectation,which  was  evidence  of  some  hidden  purpose,  and  I was  far  fromever  having  found  in  these  inferior  agents  that  high-spirited  intre-pidity,  which,  when  I held  a  similar  position,  had  often  made  myblood  boil.aneI had  formerly  had  some  slight  acquaintance  with  the  Chevalierde  Beauteville  at  M.  de  Luxembourg’s  house,  where  he  had  shownme  some  kindness.  Since  his  appointment  to  the  embassy,  he  hadshown  that  he had  not  forgotten  me,  and  had  even  invited  me  to  goand  see  him  at  Soleure;  although  I did  not  accept  the  invitation,  Ihad  felt  touched  by it, as  I was  not  accustomed  to  be  treated  so  po-litely by those  in high places.  I accordingly  assumed  that  M.  de Beau-teville,  although  he  had  been  obliged  to  obey  instructions  in  whatconcerned  the  affairs  of Geneva,  nevertheless  pitied  me  in  my  mis-fortune,  and  had  procured  me,  by his  private  exertions,  this  refugeat  Bienne,  that  I might  be able  to  live  there  at  peace  under  his  aus-pices.  I was  grateful  for  this  mark  of attention,  although  I did  notintend  to  take  advantage  of it; and, having  quite  made  up  my  mindto  go  to  Berlin,  I eagerly  awaited  the  moment  when I should  rejoinmy  Lord  Marshal,  convinced  that  only  with  him  should  I be able  tofind  true  repose  and  lasting  happiness.When I left  the  island,  Kirchberger  accompanied  me  as  far  asBienne,  where  I found  Wildremet  and  some  other  Biennese  waitingfor me.  We  all dined  together  at  the inn; and  the first  thing I did,  onarriving,  was  to  order  a  conveyance,  as  I intended  to  set  out  on  thefollowing  morning.  During  dinner,  these  gentlemen  renewed  theirentreaties  to  me,  to  remain  amongst  them,  with  such  warmth  andsuch  touching  assurances,  that,  in  spite  of  all  my  resolutions,  myPERSECUTED  IN  BIENNE68 ¢heart,  which  has  never  been  able  to  resist  affection,  felt  moved  bytheirs.  As  soon  as  they  saw  that  I began  to hesitate,  they  redoubledtheir  efforts,  and  with  such  success  that  I finally  allowed  myself  tabe  overcome,  and  consented  to  remain  at  Bienne,  at  any  rate  untilthe  following  spring.Wildremet  immediately  made  haste  to  find  me  a  lodging,  andhighly  recommended  to  me,  as  a  great  find,  a  wretched  little  room,on  the  third  floor  back,  looking  upon  a  yard,  where  I could  feast  myeyes  upon  the  stinking  skins  of  a  leather-dresser’s  establishmentwhich  were  displayed  there.  My  landlord  was a little,  low-lookingman,  a  tolerable  rascal,  of whom  I heard  the  next  day, that  he was  arake  and  a  gambler,  and  in  very  bad  repute  in  the  district.  He  hadneither  wife  nor  children  nor  servants;  and  I, shut  up  in melancholy:confinement  in  my  solitary  room,  and  in  the  most  pleasant  countryin the  world,  was  lodged  in a  manner  calculated  to  make  a  man  dieof melancholy  in  a  few  days.  What  affected  me  most,  in  spite  of allthat  I had  been  told  as  to  the eagerness  of the  inhabitants  to  have  meamongst  them,  was,  that  I did  not  observe,  when  walking  throughthe  streets,  any  politeness  in  their  behaviour,  or  friendliness  in  theirlooks.  However,  I had  quite  made  up  my  mind  to  remain  there,when,  even  on  the  next  day,  I learned,  saw,  and  perceived  myself,that  the  town  was  in a terrible  state  of  excitement  on  my  account.Several  persons  were  obliging  enough  to  hasten  to  inform  me  that,on  the  next  day, I should  be told,  as  harshly  as  possible,  to  leave  theState,  that  is to  say,  the  town,  immediately.  I had  no  one  in  whomI could  trust;  all  those  who  had  urged  me  to  stay  had  dispersed.Wildremet  had  disappeared;  I heard  nothing  more  of Barthès,  and  itdid  not  seem  as  if his  recommendation  had  done  much  to  ingratiateme  with  the  “patrons”  and  “fathers”  of whom  he had  boasted  to  me.A certain  M.  de  Vau-Travers,  however,  a  Bernese,  who  had a nicehouse  near  the  town,  offered  me  a  refuge  in  the  meantime,  in  thehope,  as  he  said,  that I might  escape  being  stoned.  This  recommen-dation  did  not  seem  to  me  sufficiently  enticing  to  tempt  me  to  pro-long  my  stay  amongst  this  hospitable  people.Having  lost  three  days  by this  delay,  I had  already  considerablyexceeded  the  twenty-four  hours  which  the  Bernese  had  allowed  meto  leave  their  States,  and,  as  I knew  their  harshness,  I was  not  free682THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ROUSSEAUfrom  some  anxiety  as  to  the  manner  in  which  they  would  allow  meto  pass  through  them,  when  the  Bailli  of Nidau  most  opportunelyrelieved  me  of  embarrassment.  As  he  had  openly  expressed  his  dis-approval  of  the  violent  measures  adopted  by their  Excellencies,  hebelieved,  in his generosity,  that it was  his duty to  testify  publicly,  thathe had  nothing  to  do with  them,  and  he had  the  courage  to  leave  hisbailiwick  and  pay  me a visit  at  Bienne.  He came  the day before I left,by no  means  incognito,  but  even  with  a certain  amount  of ceremony;he came  in state?*  in his  carriage,  accompanied  by his  secretary,  andbrought  me a passport  in his name,  which  would  enable  me  to  crossthe  State  of Berne  without  fear  of being  molested.  The  visit  touchedme  more  than  the  passport.  I should  have  been  equally  sensible  of it,if it had  been  paid to  anyone  else.  I know  nothing  which  exercises  amore  powerful  influence  upon  my  heart  than  an  act  of courage,  per-formed  at  an  opportune  moment,  on  behalf  of the  weak  who  are  un-justly  oppressed.At  last,  having  with  difficulty  procured  a  conveyance,  I set  out  onthe  following  morning  from  this  murderous  land,  before  the  arrivalof the  deputation,  with  which  it was  proposed  to  honour  me,  evenbefore  I was  able  to  see  Thérèse  again,  to  whom,  when  I thought thatI was  going  to  stay  in  Berne,  I had  written  to  join  me,  and  whom  Ihad  hardly  time  enough  to  put  off  by a  few  lines,  in  which  I in-formed  her  of my  fresh  misfortune.  It will  be seen,  in the  third  partof my  Confessions,  if I ever  have  strength  to  write  it, how,  when  Ithought  that  I was  setting  out  for  Berlin,  I was  really  setting  out  forEngland,  and  how  the  two  ladies  who  were  anxious  to  control  mymovements,  after  having  driven  me  by  their  continued  intriguesfrom  Switzerland,  where  I was  not  sufficiently  in  their  power,  atlast  succeeded  in  delivering  me  into  the  hands  of their  friend.I added  what  follows  on  the occasion  of my  reading  these  Confes-sions  to  M.  and  Madame  la Comtesse  d’Egmont,  M. le Prince  Pigna-telli, Madame  la Marquise  de Mesmes,  and  M. le Marquis  de Juigné.“T  have  told  the  truth;  if anyone  knows  things  that  contradictwhat  I have  just  related,  even  though  they  be  proved  a  thousandtimes  over,  he knows  what  is false  and  an  imposture;  and,  if he de-clines  to  investigate  and  inquire  into  them  together  with  me  whileIn  fiocchi:  lit.,  the  tufts  or  tassels  on  a  cardinal’s  hat.FINISHES  READING  THE  CONFESSIONS683T am  still  in the  land  of the  living,  he loves  neither  justice  nor  truth.As for myself,  I declare  openly  and  fearlessly:  whosoever,  even  with-out  having  read  my  writings,  after  examining  with  his  own  eyes  mydisposition,  my  character,  my  manners,  my  inclinations,  my  pleas-ures,  and  my  habits,  can  believe  me  to  be  a  dishonourable  man,  is,himself  a  man  who  deserves  to  be choked.”Thus  I concluded  thegreading  of  my  Confessions,  and  everyonewas  silent.  Madame  d’Egmont  was  the  only  person  who  appearedto be affected;  she trembled  visibly,  but  she quickly  recovered  herselfand  remained  silent,  like  the  rest  of the  company.  Such  were  the  re-sults  of this  reading  and  my  declaration.=See Ei:Ta eee ENEE=LEET,SEes beeSstaieBAtet5EEAirLAAiereKEEAasEEEENSEER  aSiareasrers=eARTESaseissue Hey SIEISER aeBeereaseNR eeEpea  GEREG