IX 


THE CONSTITUTIONAL REVOLUTION OF 1908 

O N the morning of July 11, 1908, I was sitting 
in the spacious hall of Antigone, with my old 
friends from Beshiktash, Auntie Peyker and 
her husband Hamdi Effendi. Their son was the young 
officer who had escaped to Europe and joined the Young 
Turks, and they often came to me to talk of him and to 
get his letters, for they corresponded with him through 
an American friend of mine. They had no hope of 
ever seeing their son alive. Hamidian rule had a 
finality and inevitability which made one almost laugh 
at the idea that it could he changed by a few pamphlets 
published occasionally in Paris and sent to Constanti- 
nople in secret. 

I well remember the silence before Salih Zeki Bey 
came into the hall with the morning paper open in his 
hands. Granny, wdio lived with me at the time, was 
peacefully settled on the corner .sofa. 

Salih Zeki Bey walked .slowdy, his eyes on the first 
page of the paper, and with a strange look of surprise 
on his face. Then he read aloud the imperial com- 
munique of four lines. The cringing prai.se of the sul- 
tan was even more exaggerated than usual, but the 

2,52 



the constitutional revolution of 1908 

communique was written in concise terms and said that 
his Majesty the sultan was to restore the constitution 
of 1876. 

As we listened in the old-fashioned hall, with the 
wide stretch of wonderful blue sea expanding behind 
a line of dark green pines, consternation overcame us. 

The old pair sat in silence, the tears rolling down 
their wrinkled cheeks. Laconic as were those lines, they 
transfigured the minds of these old people with the 
radiant hope that they might see their son again. 
Granny, who hardly understood the meaning, looked 
over her spectacles as she asked: 

“What does it mean. Halide?” 

What did it mean? I hai’dly realized that a long 
scene of heaven and hell was to be enacted in the 
smothered land of Turkey and that I was to be called 
to act, to suffer, to knock my foolish young head against ^ 
the realities of life, struggling endlessly, watching the 
interminable tragedy to its bitter end. This was to be 
my education in life after my education in school. 

But now to return to our little group. The subject 
seemed alien and hard to discuss. The word “consti- 
tution,” after its exile from the dictionary, was now 
suddenly used again in an imperial communique. The 
indestructibility of thought is marvelous; it is always 
there, blind to individual suffering and cost, boring its 
way from mind to mind, leaping large gaps and periods; 
but triumphant always, it marches on regardless of 
time, ceaselessly developing and maturing in the mind 
of man. 


253 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Here is a short resume of the events which had led 
to the communique of July 11, 1908. 

Abdul Hamid, in the sham trial and assassination of 
Midhat Pasha, had dealt a heavy blow to the constitu- 
tional ideal in Turkey. His thirty years’ reig^n was a 
systematic suppression of all hopes of reform , free 
thought, and speech. Still desire for representative 
government flickered in individual minds but with no 
elfective I’esult, The Young Turks continued their or- 
ganization in Paris; but with divided leadership, and 
with their inability to take any positive action in Turkey, 
all their labors failed to help the sorry state of things in 
that country’. 

Only Salf)niki, the central city’ of Macedonia, which 
had a special administrative sy’stein of its own that 
was superior to any'^ other in the empire, seemed at all 
favorable to the expression of freer thought. In fact it 
W’as here that the constitutional ideal found its first 
serious organization in 1900. 

It W’as the secret organization of the freemasons 
w’hich served the revolutionaries as a model, 'ralaat, 
IManiassi Zade Refik, Djavid, Kahmi, Midhat Shnkri 
Bey’S are some of the best known names of the men 
who started the secret revolutionary society under the 
name of Ijiberty in 1900. The liaison between the 
Young Turks in Paris and the Young 'furks in Mace- 
donia was to be maintained by Dr. Nazim. On his 
arrival the name of the society was changed to Union 
and Progress. Some of the y’oung officers of the Third 
Army Corps joined it immediately and became the vital 

254 



the constitutional, revolution of 1908 

force of the organization; among the most active of 
these vrere Enver, Ismail Hakki, Eyoub Sabri, Kiazim 
Karabekir, Fethi, Niazi, Moustafa Kemal, Djafer 
Tayyar, and Djemal Beys. But the names which were 
most celebrated at the time were those of Fethi, Niazi, 
and Enver. The only woman member was Emine 
Seniie Hanum, the daughter of the famous historian 
Djevdet Pasha, and a well known woman writer. 

From 1906 to 1907 it passed through a feverish 
propaganda period, enlisting new members and organ- 
izing its centers in Monastir, Euskub, Resne, and some 
other towns in Macedonia. The Central Committee 
was in Saloniki, and the first members included Talaat 
and Djemal, the two most important figures of the 
party. 

Abdul Hamid heard of it in 1907 and began imme- 
diate steps, trying to remove the suspected officers from 
Saloniki, and sending in his spies, as well as also some 
regiments from Smyrna, to crush the organization. 

The Young Turks immediately passed to action by 
.shooting Shemsi Pasha, who seemed determined and 
able to fight them; it was also desirable to remove 
Marshal Osman Pasha from the scene of action, but 
the fact that he w'as a national hero and a genuinely 
fine commander made them wish to s])are his life; he 
Was therefore kidnapped and kept out of the way. 
When the regiments from Smyrna also passed over to 
the revolutionary camj), things looked serious. 

On July 10, 1908, Resne, Euskub, and IMonastir 
declared the constitution under Niazi and Enver, and 

2.15 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDi EDIB 

telegraphed to Abdul Hamid demanding the official 
declaration of the constitution and threatening a march 
on Constantinople with the Third Army Corps in case 
of refusal. The short communique of July 11, 1908. 
was its outcome. 

The history of the first two years of Union and Pro- 
gress deserves to be carefully written. Its spirit and 
its message to Turkey, which turned the tide of events 
for good and evil, must be recorded in its own virile 
and forcible tones. Although I have known most of 
the leading figures well and for a long time, and some 
have told me its early history, still in 1908 I was totally 
ignorant of its existence. It is for them to tell the 
story of their pioneer years. I go back to my hall in 
Antigone and take up the moment when Salih /eki 
Bey read the communique. 

What was the effect of this thunderbolt in the city 
of Istamboul? How would the city act, or how had it 
already acted? These were the enigmas we tried to 
solve that morning. 

It was IIus.sein Jahid who brought us the news in 
the evening. The city had looked hesitatingly at the 
constitution so suddenly and simply announced. 'I’he 
people gathered at street corners and tried to talk in 
undertones, but there was a feeling of uncertainty, even 
of distrust, a vague questioning as to the meaning ot 
this sudden change; some went so far as to take it tor 
a trap in which to catch the people of Istainbonl. 
Hussein Jahid had written enthusiastic editorials lor 

256 





THE CONSTITUTIONAL REVOLUTION OF 1908 

“Sabah” and, “Ikdam,” the two prominent papers of 
the capital, for the next morning. 

We had a sleepless night, sometimes talking but 
mostly thinking. I wandered restlessly in the large 
hall, walking out into the warm July night that was 
so sweet and balmy. Something invisible and new in 
the air haunted us. We had queer dreams and visions 
about the terror and blood which accompany revolutions, 
but we did not allow them utterance. 

The words “equality, liberty, justice, and fraternity” 
sounded most strange. Fraternity was added on 
account of the Christians. The great ideals of Tanzi- 
mat, expressed as the Union of the Elements, had taken 
this familiar form. There had never been a more 
passionate desire in the peoples of Turkey to love each 
other, to work for the realization of this new Turkey, 
where a free government and a free life was to start. 

Poor granny was restless. “No good comes out of 
new things. What you call constitution was given at 
the time of Midhat Pasha, and he lost his head for it,” 
she said. 

In the evening of July 12, Hussein Jahid brought us 
news from the city once more. Usually so impassive 
and calm, he also seemed affected by the enthusiasm of 
the city. The papers might have been printed on gold- 
kaf, so high were the prices paid for them. People 
Were embracing each other in the streets in mad re- 
joicing. Hussein Jahid smilingly added, “I had to 
"'ash my face well in the evening, for hundreds who did 

257 



MEMOIRS OP HALIDE FJ)IB 

not know me from Adam, hundreds whom I have never 
seen, kissed me as I walked down the road of the Sub- 
lime Porte ; the ugly sides of revolution, vengeance and 
murder, will not stain ours.” 

The next day I went down to see Istamboul. The 
scene on the bridge caught me at once. There was a 
sea of men and women all cockaded in red and white, 
flowing like a vast human tide from one side to the 
other. The tradition of centuries seemed to have lost 
its effect. There was no such thing as sex or personal 
feeling. IMen and women in a common wave of en- 
thusiasm moved on, radiating something extraordinary, 
laughing, weeping in such intense emotion that luunan 
deficiency and ugliness were for tlie time completely 
obliterated. Thousands swayed and moved on. be- 
fore each official building there was an enormous crowd 
calling to the minister to come out and take the oath of 
allegiance to the new regime. 

As I drove along the Sublime Porte the butchers of 
Istamboul were leaving its austere portals in their white 
chemises. They also had come to get assurance from 
the highest that this new joy was to be safeguarded 
and that they% the butchers, also were going to share in 
this great task. 

In three days the whole empire had caught the fever 
of ecstasy. Xo one seemed clear about its meaning- 
The news of the change had come from Saloniki 
through several young officers whose names were 
shouted as its symbol. To the crowd the change in ds 
clearest sense spelled the pulling down of a regime wliieli 

258 



the constitutional revolution oe 1908 

meant oppression, corruption, and tyranny, while the 
new, whatever it was, spelled happiness and freedom. 

I went down to the city twice that week and came 
back stirred to the very depths of my being. The mot- 
ley rabble, the lowest pariahs, were going about in a 
sublime emotion, with tears running down their un- 
washed faces, the shopkeepers joining the procession 
without any concern for their goods. There seemed to 
be no thieves and no criminals. Dr. Riza Tewfik and 
Selim Sirry paraded their handsome figures on horse- 
back, solving the judicial difficulties of the people with 
long speeches. It looked like the millennium. 

In every street corner some one stood up on a chair 
or on the box of a carriage and made a speech to an ad- 
miring crowd. One man with a long red beard har- 
angued the people near the bridge with those words: 

“1 have a beloved wife and five children. I swear 
that I am ready to cut them to pieces for the sacred 
cause as 1 would have done for his Majesty.” 

1 wondered ivhy he did not cut himself rather than 
his wife and children and why he felt so deeply in love 
with his Majesty at this particular moment. The man 
was our neighbor and became a deputy for Siverek in 
the elections. 1 believe that it ivas sheer hysteria which 
made him speak so at the moment. Rut the most popu- 
lar speaker of the day was Riza Tewfik. As the Ha- 
midian police ivere entirely cowed by the fear of the 
mob and did not dare to interfere, it was Riza Tewfik 
"^ho marched on horsehack and kept in order the mob 
''^hieh followed him, by speaking all the time. He was 

209 



MEMOmS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

perfectly hoarse at the end of the week, so much so 
that when he came to see us in Antigone he spoke in 
whispers. A young friend of Salih Zeki Bey’s who had 
heard him speak to a crowd of Kurdish porters in Istam- 
boul used to mimic this whole scene with great effect. 
Here is some of the speech as he purported to have 
heard it: 

“Tell us what constitution means,” the porters had 
shouted. 

“Constitution is such a great thing that those who do 
not know it are donkeys,” answered the speaker. 

“We are donkeys,” roared the porters. 

“Your fathers also did not know it. Say that you are 
the sons of donkeys,” added Dr. Riza Tewfik. 

“We are the sons of donkeys,” roared the porters 
again. 

In the general enthusiasm and rebirth I became a 
writer. Istamboul in the enchantment and beauty of 
the first days reminded me of a line of ’rewfik Fikret, 
from his “Mist.” He had written it in secret, and it 
had circulated from hand to hand in the old days. The 
poet, looking through the enchanted mist of Istamboul, 
had seen all that was incurable, unclean, and evil in the 
hearts and lives of its dwellers, and painting it in lurid 
word-coloring, he had asked, “Among the millions who 
live in thy heart, how many spirits will rise pure and 
luminous?” 

The mist with all the evil and unclean spirit had dis- 
persed, and the people were in the throes of a marvelous 
spiritual rebirth. 


260 



the constitutional eevolution of 1908 

The newspaper “Tanine” appeared on July 20, 1908. 
Tewfik Fikret and Hussein Jahid edited it together, and 
they had a staff composed of the ablest and best known 
writers of the day. Salih Zeki Bey was to collaborate in 
its scientific departments, and I was to write in its 
literary columns. 

The paper had almost all the writers of the Edebiati- 
Djedide (New Literature) school. They were consid- 
ered the great writers of the period, and their greatest 
figure as man and poet was Tewfik Fikret. 

Edebiati-Djedide, which arose in the worst part of 
Abdul Hamid’s reign, when the very words with which 
to express free ideas could not be used, was still in 
spirit a continuation of the Namik Kemal and Tanzi- 
mat schools. They continued transfusing Western cul- 
ture into Turkish ideas as best they could. Halid Zia, 
the first modern Turkish novelist, a follower of Paul 
Bourget but an original and pow'erful short story writer, 
and Jenab Shehabbeddine, a clever prose writer and a 
remarkable lyric poet, w'ere in the staff of “Tanine.” 

Riza Tewfik had read and made me acquainted with 
the school, through their writings in “Servet-Funoun,” 
a popular literary magazine of the time. Hussein Ja- 
bid as the strongest and most powerful critic, indeed 
the unique critic of the last twenty years, was also one 
of the personalities of the literary school. Although 
his prose was considered in the first rank, he appeared 
to me in his literary attempts to be either too sentimen- 
||ai or too didactic. Hampered in his style and fettered 
in his thoughts by the censor, as he himself expressed 

261 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

it, he realized his powers fully in his political writings 
during the Unionist regime after 1908. The school was 
fiercely attacked by the old writers for its imitation of 
European culture, and had been equally criticized by 
my contemporaries for lack of personality. But it must 
have succeeded in transmitting a new message and a 
new life in its work, for the new age looked up to it 
as the intellectual representative of the day. 

To my mind neither Edebiati-Djedide nor the 
younger writers of whom I shall speak more fully later 
have recreated, in their writings, the Turkish life of 
the times and its inner psychology, so well as some of 
the oldest Turkish chroniclers had done of their own 
time. Naima shows in one single revolutionary scene 
a singular power of representing the setting as w'ell as 
the thoughts and the feelings of his time, with an un- 
derstanding which would sound true and real in any 
age, although the Turkish prose of the period in its 
loose and primitive form of the day was hardly a tit in- 
strument to express such a perfect picture of real life. 
Both Edebiati-Djedide and iny own contemporaries 
lacked that supreme genius which creates life from 
within without binding itself to .schools, .styles, or ten- 
dencies in fashion. 

To me, at the time of which I spe.'ik, it was flattering 
to collaborate with the famous writers of the day; 1 was 
entirely unknown and was just at the beginning of 
career as a writer. 

“Tanine” appeared as an event in the country, 
other paper had such a brilliant position, such an cnoi- 

202 



THE CONSTITUTIONAL REVOLUTION OF 1908 

nious sale and popularity; but before three months had 
passed the entire hatred of the opposition focused 
against it. The reading of the consecutive issues of 
“Tanine” in 1908 and 1909 would give one a very fair 
idea of the new life, the good and the bad tendencies 
wliich started with the revolution. 

Tcwfik Fikret and Hussein Jahid were the leading 
forces of the paper in the first years. It sounds strange 
to write in 1925 that I have never seen Tewfik Fikret. 
I was not emancipated enougli to go to the newspaper 
offices, and I saw only a few men among the most in- 
timate friends of Salih Zeki Bey and my father; but 
1 have carefully followed Fikret’s career, which had 
throughout an important effect upon the currents of 
thought in Turkey. 

Tlie personality of Tewfik Fikret was that of an 
a])ostle. His passionate belief in luimanity and inter- 
national understanding allied him more with the first 
promoters of the constitution and with the Tanzimatists 
rather than with the Young Turks of 1908. He stood 
for the Ottoman ideal of the Fnion of the Elements, 
or tlie fraternity doctrine. He was a great patriot and 
believed in a high standard of Ottoman citizenship; he 
never fell under the inlluence of the nationalist tend- 
encies which, from different causes and events, shaped 
Turkey in the later years. Tewtik Fikret’s personal 
austerity and lofty morality made him a very effective 
exiuuple for the youth of 'rurkey. He [)resented the 
spectacle of a clean and very moral man ivithout reli- 
gion. which is a rarity in Thirkey. 

208 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Tewfik Fikret attacked above all else these two 
things: tyranny and religion. Being a man sans peur 
et sans reproche, he did not realize the social and indi- 
vidual value of religion, its importance in human morals 
and culture, its historic necessity to complete the social 
evolution in the early stages of human society. lie saw 
only how men in general suffered from the tyranny and 
the narrow rule of the churches, how men rent each 
other in the name of religion all over the world, and 
what political use they made of creeds and of their gods. 
His famous attack on religion called “History” aroused 
a tremendous storm in religious circles, and he was 
mercilessly attacked by the clericals, both during his 
life and after his death. 

He shared, liowever, one trait with the Unionists 
and the reactionaries. lie was as narrow and as 
merciless as they were to those who deviated from his 
owm line in politics and in principles of every kind, 
and he fought them down as ferociou.sly as did his 
opponents. The inflexibility and the rocky resistance 
of the man constituted both his force and his weak- 
ness. 

His later attacks on the Unionists, formerly his 
friends, were quietly received. They had indeed de- 
served his bitter reproaches after the Galata Serai affair 
of which I shall speak later, and the personal respect 
which the Unionists had for 'him, both as an old 
comrade and as a great man, made them tolerant of 
everything he wrote or said. 

So we see that “Tanine” had the benefit of tliis 

264 



the constitutional revolution or 1908 

gigantic energy to fight down the old state of things 
in 1908 and partly in 1909. 

After Fikret had left “Tanine” the second living 
force was Hussein J ahid. An ardent admirer and dis- 
ciple of Fikret in his philosophical tendencies, and a 
fanatical believer in the necessity of the westernization 
of Turkey, he put forth all his intellectual forces in the 
cause of progress. Personally calm, well balanced, 
and reserved, he became ferocious in his polemics against 
the conservatives during the first period of Unionist 
power. His ardent advocacy of the new life and prog- 
ress developed in him to the utmost degree the power 
for sharpness of attack. The antagonistic tone of his 
writings has since mellowed dow'ii to a more moderate 
and calmer but much more elfective pitch. 

He had the same intense feeling against the separatist 
influence of religion that Fikret had. He seriously be- 
lieved in the sejiaration of church and state but was not 
able to stand up for it in his paper on account of the 
immense reactionary passion which his publications and 
the revolution aroused. ..After the Balkan War he 
showed decided nationalistic tendencies which separated 
him from Fikret. 

The Unionists had come to a superficial understand- 
ing wdth two different minority revolutionary societies: 
the Tashnaks, the Armenian revolutionary leaders ; and 
the Macedonians, led by their famous chiefs, Sandoski 
and Panitcha.^ The Albanian and the various Arabic 

^ He was recently killed by a Bulgarian girl in Vienna during a theatrical 

performance. 


2G5 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

revolutionary societies were in the making and had not 
been considered at all. In fact the active and vital ele- 
ments of the Unionists were largely influenced by the 
narrow and somewhat violent principles of the Tashnaks 
and the Macedonians. The Armenians massacring the 
Turks in Eastern Anatolia and ^Vdana, the Turks mas- 
sacring the Armenians in the same regions, the Bul- 
garians massacring the Turks in the Balkans were 
animated by the same spirit. On the other hand, Russia 
or any other imjierialistic power of the AVest that needed 
free and unoccupied ground for economic and political 
penetration inflamed and encouraged the conflicts of 
the Near-Eastern races with all the means at its com- 
mand. 

The Young Tui*ks stepped into power without having 
studied the strength of the separatist tendencies, or the 
way to deal ivith them in case the constitution of 1870, 
which they were restoring, shoidd fail to solve the fear- 
fully complicated Ottoman dilemma. Turkey was an 
empire; the new leaders were at heart imcojisciously 
empire men with a moderate constitutional ideal which 
accorded representation to all; and they did not rcali/.c 
their responsibilitiy in any other important issue. 'I’he 
fixed idea, that once repre.sentative government is es- 
tablished all the old evils will be cured, blinded tlicia 
to a clear study of the political situation in Europe and 
in their own country. The enthusiastic wave of ap- 
proval and sympathy which the ])eoples of Eui’ope sent 
us created a sense of security at first, and no one saw 
that behind the generosity of peoples there is 

200 



the constitutional eevolution of 1908 

rapacity of governments, till Turkey began to be at- 
tacked on all sides in the very midst of her reform 
struggles. The annexations of Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Crete, and the Rumelian provinces and the invasion of 
Tripoli succeeded each other in a bewilderingly short 
time. 

During the first weeks of the revolution a large num- 
ber of newspapers appeared, each jjutting forth a new 
idea at random and each fighting the ideas of another 
pai)er. It was almost impossible to disentangle and 
detach ideas clearly and analyze their significance. 
Some hav'e developed into forces for good and evil, and 
others have disappeared e&lt;pially for good or evil. 

Among the progressive thoughts which “Tanine” 
advocated and which aroused the bitterest oi)position 
was that of emancipation of woman. The very men- 
tion of giving her an eciual chance in education and of 
elevating her social status enraged the conservatives. 
'I'hey did not realize that “Tanine” was not yet a party 
organ and that its ideas about the emancipation of 
women and the complete westernization of all the Turk- 
ish institutions W'cre put forth on its own responsibility. 

The young leaders of the revolution on the other hand 
Were politically occupied, struggling to change the 
cabinets which ditl not suit them and spreading their 
organization all over the empire in a way which was 
changing the center of the executive power, taking it 
Irom the government organizations and passing it on to 
the party centers. 


•207 



MEMOIRS OF HALmi: EDIB 

It is important to note that the duality of the execu- 
tive power, only the semblance of which was in the gov- 
ernment while the reality was in the hands of the party 
centers, was heading Turkey for the first time toward 
a party dictatorship. A very old and ardent Unionist 
returning from Russia in 1922 told me humorously tliat 
the Union and Progress was copied in Russia. “Noth- 
ing new in Russia,” he said. “The system is ours what- 
ever the principles are. Except that they have added 
the Clieka and do not j^ossess our governing capacity.” 

The Fascist system in Italy and the People’s party 
in Turkey are now two rather violent types of the 
Unionist system, with a single man at the head of each, 
instead of the triumvirate and the immediate circle 
around it which ruled the Unionist regime. 

The purely Unionist publications of the party had 
a military and primitive character, and they^ consisted 
of violent papers with very destructive names; “The 
Thunderbolt,” “The Gun,” “The Rayonet,” etc. 

The elements of the opposition, which started within 
a few months after the revolution, w'ere these: the con- 
servatives, who sincerely feared a radical change wliich 
might entirely upset the old social order and tear the 
country to pieces; the clericals, who sensed a lay ten- 
dency in the new order of things; the political institu- 
tions of the minorities, including the patriarchate, which 
feared the complete loss of their authority if the [inion 
of the Elements principle w'ere realized ; and the powers, 
who, having made their spoliation plans, feared the loss 
of their strategic grounds, if a serious parliamentary 

208 



the constitutional revolution of 1908 

government were established and the minorities were 
satisfied. The common and the most explosive 
weapons they used were reactionary, women and reli- 
gion being the supreme ones. Every politician who 
wanted to arouse popular feeling against the new re- 
gime, and all the interests which were concerned to fight 
down the spirit of the revolution, united in playing on 
the fanatical fervor and the reactionary tendencies of 
the Moslem communities. There were, however, a few 
useful tendencies in the opposition, the most important 
being that of Prince Sebahheddine’s Decentralization, 
but it got lost in the general whirlpool of ideas and the 
conflict of the newspapers.^ 

The classification of the Unionist forces at the time 
would he something like this: writers like Fikret or 
Jahid who either belonged or did not belong to the 
Union and Progress hut stood up for the new order of 
things on account of their progressive ideals; the or- 
ganizers of the Union and Progress, military or civil 
leaders who did not occupy important posts officially 
but interfered in the operation of the government and 
did not allow it to function independently ; a spontane- 
ous propagandist class moving all over the country, 
giving lectures, opening schools and night classes for 
the people, and literary clubs; finally, the floating class 
of men who w'cre spies under Abdid Hamid hut liberals 
and business men under the Unionist regime — in short 
men with no color or conviction who pass from one party 

“The spirit of his program was partial autonomy for different races of 
the empire. 


2(39 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

in power to another so long as there is some material 
interest to be gained. 

In October we returned to the city. We took a house 
in Istamboul near Nouri-Osmanie, which is central and 
near the schools and the university where Salih Zeki 
Bey taught. As all the printing houses and the news- 
paper offices as well as all the intellectual institutions 
were there, one felt the immense throbbing moments of 
Turkish life ai’ound one. I had become a very busy 
journalist and writer in three months. I received a 
great many letters on widely varied subjects. Some- 
times my correspondents asked social questions, some- 
times political ones, but each took care to send me a 
long exposition of his own views. Some of the letters 
were about family problems and secrets; no Catliolic 
priest could have received fuller and more candid con- 
fessions than I did during those months. I carefully 
burned them with professional discretion. ^Vll my cor- 
respondents may be assured that their personal secrets 
are safe. 

Besides these letters I received visits from a great 
many women belonging to different classes who came 
to me with their personal troubles and asked advice. 
It was through the.se visits that I first became aware 
of some of the tragic problems of the old .social order. 
I am indeed grateful to those humble women who 
brought to me their difficulties in their relations to their 
families and to society. I got much wiluable life ma- 
terial from their stories. The surface of the political 

270 



THE CONSTITUTIONAL REVOLUTION OF 1908 

revolution was of passing interest, but the under- 
currents of life, which started in the social depths of 
Turkey, drew me irresistibly into its whirliiool. 

October saw the beginning of the elections, and the 
elections were the panacea put forth by the new system 
for holding the empire together, and for silencing the 
far-off voices of danger which thundered on the horizon. 

I’lie leading figures of all the national grouj)s were 
chosen as deputies in the new parliament. We never 
had an assembly composed of so many daring and 
famous men; when they gathered together, the atmos- 
])here thus created lacked harmony. Ideals and per- 
sonalities clashed immediately and inevitably. All 
that was alive, vital, and energetic in the country had 
hecn hurled into the parliament. Though there was 
good will and simplicity in the power which sent them 
there, there was also ignorance about their conflicting 
properties. The ^"oung Turks had every intention of 
creating a series of columns to hold the structure of the 
empire up, but the columns were so varied in size that 
they finally permitted the complete crumbling away of 
the imperial edifice tliey had sought to uphold. 

“O country, O mother, be thou happy and joyful to- 
day,” sang the large and mixed crowd, passing from 
under the windows of my house in Xouri-Osmanie. 
No one who heard it sung in the ecstatic tones of the 
crowds could keep back his tears, so much did it express 
of sincerity and jo}', IMasses of people followed the 
election urns, decked in flowers and flags. In carriages 

•271 



MEMOISS OF HALIDii EDIB 

sat the Moslem and Christian priests, hand in hand. 
Christian and Moslem maidens, dressed in white, locked 
in childish embrace, passed on, while the crowd that 
followed sang enthusiastically, “O country, O mother, 
be thou joyful and happy to-day.” 

The memory is so intense that to this day I cannot 
think of it unmoved. I think of it as a final embrace of 
love between the simple peoples of Turkey before they 
should be led to exterminate each other for the political 
adv'antage of foreign powers and their own leaders. 

I found granny crying each time the weird music, 
the singing, ecstatic crowd, passed, and each time she 
shook her head and said: 

“It means the end of everything. No good will come 
out of it; I cannot help crying. It gives me a cree])y 
feeling down my spine as if I heard the Mevloud” 
(the sacred poem of Mohammed’s birth chanted in 
religious ceremonies). 

I felt exactly the same religious emotion as if I too 
heard the Mevloud chanted. But, alas, the holy babe 
was destined to turn into a monster before it could stand 
on its feet. 

The election quarrels stormed high and low, black- 
mail tainted the opposition, while the Unionist press 
took a truculent and threatening tone. The voices of 
discord were shrieking their loudest while the rep- 
resentatives elected by the peoples and the national 
groups assembled for the parliament — a parliament 
consisting of the most revolutionary spirits of the time, 
and opened by one of the greatest despots in history. 

272 





