VII 


THE PEBIOl) OE POLITICAL EEl’ORM: THE 
TANZIilAT, 1839-76 

F rom the eleventh century to the fourteenth the 
new Turkish Pjmpire produced extraordinary 
sultans, men of great ability and organizing 
capacity. The fact that the empire governed more 
justly and humanely than its predecessors, and than the 
neighboring powers, gave it stability and insured its 
continuance in a region where the native population 
much outnumbered the rulers. Able administrators, 
austere and clean fighters, makers of law, patrons of 
art, the Ottoman Turks created an Ottoman citizen- 
ship which was envied by the members of the neighbor- 
ing states; and they created an art and a life which have 
left as much of a mark on the world as any ancient em- 
pire, and a greater otie than any medieval state. 

It is no wonder that the divine right of sultans turned 
the heads of the ruling dynasty and that they degener- 
ated into tyrants with no ideals except those of personal 
glory and pomp. The em])ire lasted for centuries, how- 
ever, thanks to occasional able leaders and to some wise 
sultans, and to the vitality of the Ottoman nation. 

llesides the internal causes of decay and perpetual 
"ars of aggression so ruinous for the empire, Europe in 

‘_&gt; 3 ') 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

her feverish progress after the fifteenth century was 
gaining at a tremendous pace over the Ottoman Empire, 
for which the seventeenth century saw internal deteri- 
oration of every kind, a condition of anarchy at frequent 
intervals; in the eighteenth century there were feeble 
attempts to better the conditions of the empire, while 
its statesmen seemed aghast at the distance gained over 
it by Europe. 

In addition to the serious causes of anxiety which the 
failing condition of the empire aroused, the French 
Revolution, which shook political institutions all over 
the world, quickly sent its loud echo to Turkey. 

Selim III (1789-1809), the most progressive sultan 
in Ottoman history, first declared the desire and neces- 
sity for a change, and paid with his life. Gentle and 
good beyond his time, perhaps beyond ours as well, he 
was powerless to resist the tremendous momentum of an 
old and gigantic empire which finally crushed him and 
his reform. Although his successor, Mahmoud 11 
(1808-39), wrote Selim’s progressive ideas in blood and 
terrorized opposition into mute obedience before he 
started his reforms, still it took a hundred years more to 
put reform, even political reform, into shape. 

The necessity of reform, born at first in the minds of 
the few, showed at the same time to these minds the 
tremendous distance between the Ottoman Empii’e and 
the European states, a distance which the empire had to 
cover as fast as possible. She was so placed geograph- 
ically that she was pressed by the surplus energies of the 
Mediterranean peoples and by the growth and upheaval 

236 



THE PERIOD OF POLITICAL REFORM 

of the Slavs. There is no nation in the world more in 
need of a cool head, a strong power of defense, and a 
pacific development of its internal resources. 

Change and reform in nations follow two courses: 
first, the speedy and bloody course of revolution; second, 
a gradual growth from within, with little apparent dis- 
turbance and bloodshed, although the struggle may be 
long and painful. 

The first demands revolutionaries who pull down the 
entire edifice of a country, who in their bloody rage 
destroy useful institutions as well as those that are cor- 
rupt and decayed. Revolution is the speediest way, it 
takes a long time to set up a better state in a place which 
revolution has ravaged. The supreme example of re- 
form by revolution was set by France. 

The second, the way of gradual growth from within, 
is the happier way for a nation which can gradually 
evolve her reforms, before new ideas take destructive 
forms or fall into the hands of unscrupulous and ambi- 
tious leaders. England has provided the supreme ex- 
ample of gradual reform and change. 

Mahmoud II, cruel in temperament, influenced by the 
French Revolution, frightened by the tragie end of his 
predecessor, haunted by the vision of the Ottoman Em- 
pire crushed between the East and the West, and torn 
by internal disorder and decay, was naturally led to 
take the most destructive methods. He therefore 
began by massacring a whole army of janizaries, who 
seemed the only obvious obstacle to change. 

^lahmoud II is called the Peter the Great of the 

237 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 


Turks, but he deserves as much criticism as praise. Un- 
fortunately he applied the new spirit with the methods of 
his bloodiest and most tyrannical ancestors. His reign 
is one of the most disastrous in our history. 

It was Abdul Medjid (18.S9-56) and his remarkable 
trio of premiers who started a newer and more modern 
reform. 

Abdul jMedjid, who was very much like Selim III in 
desire for reform and in humane temperament, was 
first helped by Reshid Pasha, a man who had been 
premier, minister of foreign aflfairs, anil several times 
ambassador to Paris and Ijondon. Reshid Pasha 
showed himself modern in method as well as in spirit 
when he instituted his political reform of 1839, the Tan- 
zimat. 

Its fundamental principles w'ere the security of life 
and property, the supremacy of the law, the organiza- 
tion of taxes, the eipiality of rights of all the citizens. 
Thei’e is a strong and sincere note in the Tanziinat edict, 
although it is clumsily written, and ends with a naive 
cur.se against those who contravene it. 

The Tanziinat was evolutionary and progressive in 
spirit rather than radical, and it is the sole reform in 
the history of Turkey which was not only pacific but 
constructive and effective. Strange to say the edict’s 
final curse seems to have affected all the leaders who 
have departed from its liberal spirit and have adopted 
Mahmoud’s radical and bloody method. 

The first principle of the Tanzimat, security of life, 
of supreme importance to the Turkish people- 
238 


was 



THE PERIOD OF POLITICAL REFORM 

After the time of the wise early rulers who obeyed the 
law, and who realized the necessity of respecting human 
life, the people suffered cruelly under later rulers who 
were intoxicated with power, and wasted human life and 
property. In addition to the royal caprices whiah made 
the finest and best lose their lives by the mere order of 
the sultan, ministers and governors carelessly and cal- 
lously wasted human life in Turkey. There are signif- 
icant anecdotes ^ that illustrate the continual horror 
which the people felt at the insecurity of life. At last, 
however, the realization came to the sultan that, no 
growth or stability w'as possible without security of life, 
and this was no\v insured by the Tanzimat. 

The ecpiality of non-Moslems appears at first to have 
been provided for more because of ])olitical reasons than 
of urgent necessity. The non-jMoslems had rather en- 
joyed privileges than suffered from the general social 
and political disorder of the INIoslem communities. 
Omar," the third calif after the Prophet, at his 

f A kadi appointed to a provinee went to make his formal visit to the 
g(»vemor. During tlu* visit the attendants of the governor brought in a 
man’s liead freshly cut off and reported that the governor's order to behead 
his housekeeper had been carried out. The kadi inquired about tlie man's 
eriiiie. "'The fellow frightened me in my dream last night," was the an- 
swer. q’he next day the kadi gathered his b&lt;‘longing.s and made ha.ste to 
&lt;lej){Lrt. When the reas&lt;»n was asked he said, "‘I cannot prevent myself from 
appearing in the governor's dream." 

A vizir going through the streets incognito was accidentally splashed 
hy some drops of dirty water from a barber shop. He ordered the barber 
to he p»it to d(‘ath instantly. When he was told that the man was his 
Own barber, "Kill some other barber instead," he said; "a vizir's order 
nmst he carried out." 

Ihe califate, which was in a sense a religious republic during the first 
Cfntiiry of the Hejira, showed great toleration for tho non-Moslems of the 
t^onquered lands. Omar’s entry into Jerusalem and his treatment of the 

239 



MEMOIRS OF HALmi: EDIB 

conquest of Jerusalem had issued an edict giving to 
all the non-Moslems security of life and property and 
freedom with two restrictions: they were required to 
adopt a special costume, and were not allowed to ride 
on horseback in the city. Mohammed the Conqueror 
(1453) after his conquest of Constantinople had con- 
firmed Christian rights and recognized the liberty of the 
Christians as a community apart. As the Christians 
were exempt from military service, the}' held in their 
hands the commerce of the empire, so that they continu- 
ally multiplied and grew, for the edicts of the Con- 
queror and the traditions of Omar were respected. I 
know of no other country where the minorities were so 
safe and prosperous during the centuries before they 
had so-called equal rights. 

I have already mentioned that the second part of the 
reform was of political necessity. When tlie em])ire 
became weak, when it became bewildered with internal 
and external difficulties, greedy eyes from outside 
turned to Turkey and found a loophole in the nominal 

non-Moslems is one of the most beautiful and humane episodes in history, 
especially when one compares it with the wholesale massacre of the .Mosltdiis 
by the Crusaders; accordin^^ to the “New Tnt(‘rnational Encyclopaedia,’' vol, 
6, p. 385, “Neither aj&lt;e nor sex could mollify their irnpl.acablc rape: they 
indulged themselves three days in a j&gt;romiscuous massacre; seventy thou- 
sand Moslems were put to the sword ” 

On the other hand, a remarkable story' told of Omar illustrates the kiial* 
ness and simplicity of the man and the spirit of Islam at the period. 
When the Saracen army entered Jerusalem the patriarch took the key of 
the city and walked out in order to pay his respects and offer the key to 
the commander-in-chief. As he approached the camel of the commander- 
in-chief, the man whom he took for Ornar addressed him, saying: “Tins 
is Omar’s camel, but I am his slave. He has one single camel, and we t'lkc 
turns. It is his turn to walk. Walk on; you will sec him coining on foot. 

240 






. \ N DIXC l‘I I' IV &gt;(• l"r VKI 





THE PERIOD OF POLITICAL REFORM 

inequality of the Christian minorities. Russia’s pre- 
text was found in the Orthodox Christians, as England’s 
was the Armenians later on. 

At the time of the Tanzimat, Russia, as the protector 
of the Orthodox Christians, was pressing Turkey ; Eng- 
land, which was at the other side of the political bal- 
ances, wanted Turkey to hold her own against Russia. 

Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, the English ambassador 
to Turkey, now played an important part in Turkish 
politics. lie influenced Reshid Pasha on many points 
of policy, and probably the provision of equality of 
rights for Christians was due to him. The Turkish peo- 
ple w'ere used to respecting the lives and the property 
of a minority, who were almost like religious trusts to 
them and who went their way without sharing the mil- 
itary burdens of the ruling race. This tolerance had 
its roots in the chivalrous attitude of the master to the 
inferior as well as in the broad spirit of Islam toward 
alien religions. But the moment the Christians w^ere 
granted equality by an edict, without sharing responsi- 
bility as the soldier citizens of the state, the social order 
and the old tolerant tradition was upset. Reshid Pasha, 
knowing all this clearly, evidently undertook the pre- 
mature consolidation of the external policy of the em- 
pire. As I have already said, it was due to the influence 
of Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, the English ambassador 
of the time; I will add that he also represented the best 
and the most lasting impressions of England in the 
minds of the general Turkish public. lie created such 
a sincere trust and admiration for the justice and the 

241 



MEMOraS OF HALIDE FJ)IB 

nobility of the English character that neither Abdul 
Hamid’s anti-British policy nor the World War could 
efface it till the English army occupation, short as its 
duration was, erased the good impression from the pop- 
ular mind. 

Abdul IMedjid was almost alone when he put forth 
his ideas of reform. The men who stood by him. 
though few, were strong and determined. Reshid 
Pasha especially, striving superhumanly to effect the 
change, knew very well the difficulty, indeed almost the 
impossibility, of making the masses understand the 
necessiW of the new order of things. As individuals 
and as classes the Turks were to leap into an entirely 
different order of things, socially and mentally; and this 
was not to be done by the old method of bloody terror. 
In Abdul Med j id, for the first time a sultan of ’furkey 
was going to use moral authority to persuade his sub- 
jects. With the example of Selim II before his eyes, 
Reshid Pasha, on whose shoulders the whole responsibil- 
ity of the reform rested, was aware of the immediate 
personal danger in which he stood, for failure would at 
once have caused the nation to demand his head. On 
the memorable morning of the daj^ he had to read the 
edict, he answered his steward, who tried to consult him 
about household affairs, in this vtfi'v sentence: “If 1 
return alive in the evening thou canst ask me.” 

Reshid Pasha and his successors, Ali and Fuad 
Pashas, all spent their life energy and their extraor- 
dinary power of mind and will into converting these 
edicts of reform and progress into actual fact. It was 

242 



THE PERIOD OF POLITICAL REFORM 

a hard fight, but all three were men of unflinching cour- 
age and tenacity, all three were men of unyielding ideal 
and honesty, all three died, spent and exhausted before 
their time. 

As progressives rather than as radicals, determined to 
carry out the reform without the usual method of terror, 
their difficulties were enormous. Besides internal re- 
sistance from privileged classes and persons, they had to 
face externally the Egyptian question, the Syrian revo- 
lution, and the Russian wars. To crown it all, the sul- 
tan, although sincere in his desire for progress, objected 
to the transfer of power from the palace to the Porte, 
and many were the old pashas who influenced the sul- 
tan’s mind against the powerful trio. Yet the royal 
edict worked its way gradually. Half a century later, 
far on in my childhood, I clearly remember that the 
e(iuality of races was realized despite the despotic reign 
of Abdul Hamid. 

The Tanzimat period, which brought the first serious 
political reforms, also produced a wide change in the 
language, literature, and thought of the country. 
Modern Europe was furnishing a new current of 
thought and was creating a new spirit in Turkish want- 
ing. The European culture which was most influential 
in Turkey was decidedly French, the poetes philoso plies. 
The nightingale and the eternal rose, the spring, and 
nature themes of literature were giving way to a wider 
range of subjects and a new way of looking at man 
and nature, while the inward change in all direc- 
tions was leading writers to search for directer and 

243 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE FJIIB 

clearer expression in language. Translations from tlie 
French were introducing models of French art and 
thought. It was Shinassi, a poet and author of the 
time, who first brought to modern Turkish prose a' com- 
plete change, making it very different from the loose 
form of the old prose. A younger generation — Namik 
Kemal, Abdul Hak Hamid, Zia Pasha — blossomed out 
with a series of dramas, poems, stories, and satires whiclt 
are considered classical in the Turkish literature of 
to-day. 

This tardy renaissance has not produced masterpieces 
of world renown in Turkey, hut it has produced works 
which are regarded as great. Besides it represented 
an admirable effort of human thought and a conscious 
break from the old in form and spirit, as well as a highly 
constructive period in Turkish language. There is 
nothing nebulous or incomplete about the work of these 
writers. They Avrote Avith a masterly touch and with 
extraordinary finish; the Aery translations are a con- 
tinuous source of surprise to me, so brand-new are they, 
and yet so Turkish and perfect. 

The adaptations, especially that of Moliere’s “Hari- 
age Force,” havT so recreated the art of Molicre that for 
once a great artist Avould liaAX' been pleased at the ])or- 
fect shape his masterpieces have taken in an alien cul- 
ture and language, Ahmed Vefik Pasha, besides being 
a famous figure of the Tanzimat as a statesman and ad- 
ministrator, is also notable for having most beautifully 
rendered ISIoliere’s work and spirit into Turkish, 

Ahmed Vefik Pasha as governor of Broussa put forth 

244 



THE PERIOD OF POLITICAL REFORM 

his constructive ability, literary capacity, and adminis- 
trative genius. He not only conducted the administra- 
tion so well that the people of Broussa attributed super- 
human qualities and loved him as only Turks can love, 
with a mixture of idolatrous belief and reverence ; ^ he 
also built the great hospital of the town and endowed it 
with funds, created a theater, becoming its manager, 
writing the plays, training the actors, and forcing the 
notables of the town to attend. Through him Moliere 
became the leading influence in the development of the 
comedy side of the Turkish theater. Molicre’s spirit, 
so different from that of the other French classical 
writers, so human and full of common sense, made an 
immediate appeal to the simple and sound humor of the 
ordinary Turk, for not only in “Orta Oyoun” l)ut even 
in the “Karaguez” one finds the traces of his wit and 
spirit. 

3 A peasant woman who had lost a watch came to Vefik Pasha. She had 
lieard that the governor could find out anything when he put on his monocle. 
The jiasha, after (|ucstioninji: the woman about the size and appearance of 
the watch, sent some one to buy a watch from the market. As he handed 
the watch to the pea.sant w'onian he said .sohaimly, *Tt is true that I can see 
everything that hapjiens in this ])rovince when 1 jnit on my single glass, 
but the next time you lose something you must come and see me immedi- 
ately.” 


245 



