XVII 


HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

I N 1916 Djemal Pasha and Rahmi Bey were the 
two most talked-of personalities; they were both 
criticized and praised for different reasons. Both 
very influential figures among the Unionists, they had 
taken personal views about the administration of the 
provinces which were under their control. Rahmi Bey 
was the governor of Smyrna; he had refused to deport 
the Christians and had guaranteed to keep order in his 
province. As the area under his administration was out 
of the war zone he managed to keep order, although 
there were very serious espionage centers around and in 
Smyrna, among the very people he protected and kept. 

Djemal Pasha in Syria had taken a similarly pro- 
tective attitude toward the Armenians exiled there. 
'I’hey were not to be molested in any way in the lands 
under his control. He had hanged two rather notorious 
old Unionists, Cherkess Ahmed and his companion, for 
daring to try to start a massacre in Syria. His great 
difficulty was the famine, from ivhich the Turkish army, 
the Arab population, and the Armenians suffered 
ccjually. It is to his honor that he helped all the char- 
itable organizations for children, for Armenians or 
Arabs alike, with what he could spare from the army 
supplies. 


389 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Djebel Hauran, which is the granary of Syria, was 
hostile and made every possible difficulty about supply- 
ing Syria with corn ; the seas were blcjckaded, and there 
was one single railway (and that was not complete at 
the time) over which the entire military transport and 
the entire provisioning of the country had to pass. The 
attack on Egypt may have been a folly, but as the en- 
tire war was a folly from every point of view, each cam- 
paign had to be carried through as thoroughly as 
possible. 

In the midst of the canal attacks, Djemal Pasha had 
discovered an Arab plot in favor of the F rench and had 
dealt with it with extreme severity. The court martial 
in Alie condemned forty men to death, and some others 
to exile. Thus he restored order, which had never been 
so complete in Syria since he began his constructive 
policy of building roads, fighting disease, and opening 
schools. His energies were always most valuable when 
used for constructive purposes. ^Vherever he so- 
journed as governor the people still enjoy good roads 
and good public buildings and have the memory of a 
period of great security and public order. 

Falih Rifki Bey came to Constantinople to publish 
the defense of the proceedings of the Alie court martial. 
He was then a young lieutenant, but in reality he was 
a journalist and a writer who acted as secretary to 
Djemal Pasha. ( He is at present the deputy for Boli.) 

Falih Rifki Bey brought me a letter from Djemal 
Pasha; the content was this: He had been obliged to 
close the French schools and monasteries, M’hich used to 

390 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

give education to the Arabs, on political grounds. The 
schools opened by the department of public instruction 
were not sufficient. The local governments in Syria, 
with the aid of the army, had decided to establish a series 
of schools. Could I go there or send teachers to start 
the work ? This was at the beginning of the year 1916. 
My sister Nighiar volunteered to go and started with a 
limited staff. She established the first primary school 
in Beirut, with six grades. People from all classes went 
to her school. The Arabs must have loved it, for after 
the Turkish regime, when there was a great deal of anti- 
Turkish publication, the Arabic papers spoke kindly of 
her institution. 

In the summer of 1916 I had another letter from 
Djemal Pasha. He asked me to go with Xakie Hanum 
and study the situation and draw up a plan for a larger 
number of schools in Damascus, Beirut, and Lebanon. 

As the work would take only the summer months, we 
accepted, and we started from Haidar Pasha Station for 
S3Tia, with Hamdullah Soubhi Be}', who was invited by 
Djemal Pasha to stud\' the old Moslem and Turkish 
architecture in Syria and to visit the institutions of the 
desert. An aide-de-camp of the pasha accompanied us. 

As I had not gone bej'ond Ismidt on the Anatolian 
line, I left Haidar Pasha with extreme curiosity' and in- 
terest. I have since traveled so often on that line that 
the impression of the first trip is somewdiat effaced, but 
I remember well the continual military movement which 
made one wonder sadly at the unknoivn future of the 
men who passed by. 


391 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

We found out that a Red Crescent commission com- 
posed of doctors we knew very well was going to Medina 
to the army of Fahreddine Pasha, whose defense of the 
holy place is a pious and chivalrous episode of the World 
War. 

That large stretch of bare yellow land from Es- 
kishehir to Konia was desolate and hot in the extreme. 
As the train stopped before Konia, near a little village, 
we spent nearly two hours visiting the place. It was 
a tiny village with twenty-five houses, and there was 
hardly a man to be seen. Old women sat at the door of 
their huts, and little children played about, while a group 
of young women returned from the fields with their 
scythes on their shoulders. The heat, the dust, and the 
sadness of the lonely women w'ere beyond description; 
the younger ones squatted in the dust and asked us when 
the war would end and told us the names of their hus- 
bands. We were in the second year of the war, and al- 
ready they looked as if they were at the end of their 
strength. The end of the war was their concern more 
than any one’s. They not only had their beloved at tlic 
front, but they also had to supply Turkey and her army 
with the means of living. Somehow though they strug- 
gled on six more years in their barren fields, with a hope- 
less wait for their men, which in most cases was in vain. 

In Konia the station greeted us with a scene of misery. 
A large number of Eastern Anatolians, mostly refugees 
and Kurds, were crowded with their families and few 
belongings in the station. They were the remainder of 
the Armenian victims, running from the Armenian mas- 

392 



HOW I WENT TO 8YEIA 

sacres. Under the glare of the station lights, huddled 
together in their bright-colored but tattered costumes, 
their faces hopeless and entirely expressionless, as refu- 
gee faces usually are, they waited for the train. There 
was that smell of misery peculiar to a human crowd, 
unwashed, and in physical as well as moral suffering. 

At Pozanti Station a series of new buildings had been 
begun. In fact in every station which came under the 
authority of Djemal Pasha there were new buildings, 
good hospitals, a guest-house, a military casino, and all 
over the country good roads either finished or in the 
making. 

In Mamoure we procured a lorry to go to Islahie, 
where we were to take the train to Aleppo. The scar- 
city of transport was so painfully felt that we meant to 
share this truck with as many people as we could put 
into it. It was a difficult matter for the aide-de-camp, 
who not only wanted room for himself (he was very fat) 
but also feared the cholera and typhus which were rag- 
ing in the country. Besides, as we were the guests of 
tlie pasha, he wanted us to have more comfort than under 
the circumstances we really cared to have. 

We crammed the truck, and after he had in a military 
tone declared he could not take any more and had seated 
himself beside the chauffeur, we helped those who came 
running after us to climb on the truck. They were a 
Turkish tradesman and an Armenian merchant who 
were going to Islahie. As we had smuggled them on 
board when the truck had started without the knowl- 
edge of the aide-de-camp, we sat close to these last two 

393 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

unwelcome travelers, like two fierce hens sitting on their 
newly hatched chickens. 

At the foot of the Taurus Range, before we began to 
climb the giant mountains, we heard a desolate cry and 
halted. On the road sat a half-naked old woman. Her 
vest was torn, her white locks were unkempt under a 
worn-out fez, her naked toes stuck to the ground, and 
her face had the infinite pathos and loneliness of a lost 
child. As the aide-de-camp asked why .she was there I 
remember her lips drooping exactlj’^ like a child’s, so 
queerly in contrast with her toothless mouth, which kept 
the appearance of an empty hole. 

“I am from the tribe which has gone to Osmanie,” 
she said. “They were to come and fetch me this morn- 
ing. They have forgotten me. Oh, son!” 

She belonged to one of the numerous Turkish nomadic 
tribes which live in that region. Was .she really forgot- 
ten, or was she too much of a burden and left to die, or 
would they come to fetch her ? Knowing the traditional 
respect and love for the old in tho.se tribes, we could hope 
for the best. As we had to hurry in order to cross the 
mountains before dark we could not tarry, and so we 
provided bread, money, and a jacket to cover her old 
bones and left her to her fate. We knew that she could 
crawl back to Mamoure and find .some connection with 
her people. As the truck started and .she looked like 
a speck on the receding lonely road I felt my heart torn 
with these signs of misery which were to become more 
frequent as we proceeded, but Hamdullah Soubhi 
sobbed aloud like a little child in pain. Whenever there 

394 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

are differences of opinion and action which separate me 
from Hamdullah Soubhi I think of him sobbing like a 
child over the lonely old woman, and I feel the abyss be- 
tween us bridged. 

We reached Islahie in the evening and took the train 
for Aleppo. The lamps in the train did not work, so 
we lighted a candle, and its flickering flame enhanced 
our sense of sadness, at the idea of being so far from 
borne and in the midst of some of the worst suffering in 
the country, to which one could see no end. 

The compartments opened into each other, and the 
aide-de-camp went to sleep in the one next to ours after 
telling us not to let in “any dirty beggar.” 

At the very next station an Arab walked in, in the 
tattered common uniform of those who go back home 
from the army. He had the ordinary brown oval face 
of the Arab, with its deep burning eyes and a youthful 
beard. He was evidently sick and walked leaning on a 
stick, and he begged us in Arabic to let him into our 
compartment, for he felt too tired to go on to his town, 
which was near Aleppo. Hamdullah, who had been 
complaining of the sonorous snoring from the aide-de- 
camp’s compartment, now felt it quite welcome, for it 
left us free to take in the soldier in peace and tend to 
him to our heart’s content. 

On the borders of Arab land, in the sad half-light of 
the candle, that sick Arab, sitting on the red velvet seat, 
leaning against his stick, his sensitive ej’^es full of suffer- 
ing and fire, his low tired voice that poured out his 
troubles, remains in my mind like a living portrait. I 

395 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

remember Nakie Hanum watching in the passage lead- 
ing to the aide-de-camp’s compartment, ready to tell us 
in case he should wake, and us feeding the Arab, talking 
to him in broken Arabic, and trying to console him now 
that he was returning to his village. It was a comical 
situation in spite of its pathos, and as we helped him out 
at his station, and he was beginning to pray for us in 
wonderful Arabic, with the rich guttural harmony which 
only an Arabic throat can compass, the aide-de-camp 
woke up suddenly and came to see what new mischief we 
were up to. Looking after the figure of the Arab walk- 
ing into the darkness, leaning on his stick and praying 
for our happiness, he said severel)'^: 

“I hope you did not touch that sick Arab beggar, 
Hamdullah Bey?” 

Hamdullah Bey sat in dignified silence. The aide- 
de-camp added: 

“Forgive me for worrying you, but you do not know 
the horrors of typhus.” 

“I do,” said Hamdullah Soubhi, with the oratorical 
gesture and tone he uses in addressing a crowd, and 
gazed into the darkness where the Arab had disappeared. 

We entered Aleppo at midnight, and in glorious 
moonlight. It is on the border of the Turko-Arab 
lands, and it is the city of the bard and of popular songs. 
I expected a warm place, but the nights in Aleppo are 
freezing like those of the desert. 

It looked like a white mass, with dim shapes and 
curves under the soft blue canopy where the single 
gorgeous light of the moon had paled the stars. The 

396 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

white dust, the white streets and houses, the eagle-like 
effect of the tower brooding over the city, and a strange 
glare in the white moonlight gave one the feeling of a 
frozen city. We descended to an Armenian hotel, the 
best in Aleppo, and near it from an Arab night-bar wild 
music and ecstatic voices struck our ears. We immedi- 
ately asked for rooms and went to bed, but Hamdullah 
Soubhi had gone to see what was going on in the bar. 

"Mout, mout” cried youthful voices in an ecstasy 
which might have been caused by some strong drink. 

“Why were the youth in the bar shouting mout 
[die] ?” I asked Hamdullah Soubhi the next morning. 

“An Arab girl sang,” he said. “The youths were so 
intoxicated with the beauty of her voice and the beauty 
of her person that they could not bear the idea of such 
perfection existing on earth, so they asked her to die.” 

“Were they drunk?” I asked, for I had not yet seen 
how every emotion shakes an Arab and causes him to 
express it in the most violent way. 

“No,” he said, “they sat in their silk gowns and 
smoked their narghiles, and did not look murderous 
at all.” 

The whole day we wandered in the streets of Aleppo. 
Hamdullah Soubhi, as a professor of Turkish and Is- 
lamic art, was sight-seeing very seriously, while we gave 
ourselves up to the more medieval charm of the nar- 
row streets, and the tottering old hans (inns) of won- 
drous beauty, where all the old Turkish bards had sung, 
and the great had stayed on their way to Arab lands. 

The train started late in the evening. In a few hours 

897 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

the real Arabic villages rose in the twilight like huge 
human beehives, standing out against the evening sky, 
their blue smoke curling up in transparent waves, so 
different from the thick sooty smoke of the modem 
cities. The air was getting warmer and warmer. We 
must have slept for some time when I woke up to a state 
of things which seemed a dream, so different in sound 
and feeling from what I have known all my life. 

A hundred voices, mostly women, called shrill and 
guttural, ‘'Ya Mohammed, Ya Abdurrahman, Ya Ab- 
dullah/’ Then a few men’s voices joined in graver 
tones, “Ya Oummi” (O mother). 

We were in Horns, a real Arab town. The women 
whose husbands and sons were in the army had come to 
the station because a military train was passing and 
there was a chance of meeting their men. They were 
wringing their hands and calling in inexpressible excite- 
ment to the soldiers in the cars. Some had found their 
men, and there was kissing and love-making going on 
in its naivest and warmest form. 

Nakie Hanum was fighting at the window, which we 
had left open, to prevent bundles, water- jugs, and fruit- 
baskets from being hurled into our carriage. Men and 
women also who wanted a place in the train were try- 
ing to squeeze in through the window. Nakie Hanum 
was defending the window rather cleverly, and with 
force and authority, telling them in book-Arabic that 
there was no place. No one listened till Hamdullali 
Soubhi Bey woke and joined Nakie Hanum in the de- 
fense of our little place, and closed the window. I sJit 

398 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

selfishly watching them in the warm and quivering at- 
mosphere, as the women ran up and down the platform, 
wringing their hands. No woman can wring her hands 
like an Arab woman; there is the same life and beauty 
in it which one sees in the inspired art of days gone by. 

As the train moved on their shrill voices rose above the 
whistle of the train, and they ran after us, calling all the 
time. I can still hear the one who called, “Ya Adbur- 
raJnnan." Her passionate personality and the flame of 
her desert heart enveloped one. Who was Abdurrah- 
man, and who was she? I shall never know, but I feel 
that I caught a glimpse of the inner meaning of that 
black-veiled shadow through its gestures and its calling. 

I woke once more in Baalbek. A bright moon was 
glistening through the broken pillars of the ruins. 

Djemal l^asha’s family were in Lebanon at the sum- 
mer residence. Their house was one of those heauti- 
fully built marble dwellings in Sauffer, with spacious 
marble halls, and picturesque stairs and balconies, that 
look out on the wonderful Lebanon chain, a fleeting 
series of sharp misty blue shadows on bare rocks, with 
velvety soft olive green on the forest-covered tops. 

Djemal Pasha was away at the time. The house was 
kept by his sister, mother-in-law, and stepmother. The 
sister was a fine serious old Turkish lady. The mother- 
in-law, who has become one of the Turkish women I have 
most loved, was a lady about sixty, thin, energetic, chic, 
and very capricious. One develo])cd a protective feel- 
ing for her immediately. Madame Djemal Pasha had 
taken her sick child to Switzerland at the time. The 

399 



IMOHMOIRS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

members of the household were affectionate, simple, and 
very kind to their servants and to each other. Djemal 
Pasha arrived from Jerusalem to stay only for two days, 
and we talked about the way to prepare our plans. I 
told him that I wanted to see and study the existing 
schools, and I wanted to talk with enough Arabs to 
understand the needs of the country. So I asked to go 
to Beirut and work our plan out there. 

He consented, and asked us to go to the desert and 
Jerusalem, after our work was over, to see the country. 
Although his military project of conquering Egypt was 
no longer realizable, he was proud of his public works 
all over Syria. 

After the extreme measures he had taken to put down 
the conspiracy in Syria, he was anxious to create a good 
government and an efficient system of public education. 
He had seen the strong inclination of the Arabs toward 
the French, based on the educational efforts of the 
French, and he was desirous of copying their methods in 
a less religious and more liberal sense. 

The first man I consulted was Hussein Kiazim Bey, 
then residing in the Lebanon. He was one of the 
former founders of “Tanine” and had been the governor 
of Aleppo. He had undertaken to organize and help 
the Armenian refugees to settle in Syria with real hu- 
manity and capacity, but after some difference with the 
central government he had retired and now lived in a 
large house in Sauffer. I had several talks with him, 
which impressed me very much. He knew Arabic well 
and had broad ideas about the treatment of the Arabs 

400 







HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

and the other minorities. A convinced Moslem, he cited 
the Koran and prophesied that all rule based on tyranny 
was doomed to fail. He seemed to have real influence 
with Djemal Pasha in his new policy of moderation. 

I visited Emin Arslan and his sisters, and listened at- 
tentively to their ideas on education. For Emir Emin 
Arslan was a representative person in Lebanon. 

The next day we went down to Beirut. On the olive- 
green and bluish heights of Lebanon there was snow, 
and we had to wear thick coats, but as we approached 
Beirut, there rolled before us a plain with pine and 
banana groves, palms of extraordinary height and slen- 
derness, and in the distance a rich red beach, stretching 
out to the brilliant blue Mediterranean, a sea without 
ships, reaching and blending with the sky in liquid soft- 
ness. 

The poorer population looked haggard and underfed. 
But women of the richer classes, gorgeously dressed 
and elaborately painted, drove about the town in luxuri- 
ous carriages. The famine had not reached its climax, 
but one felt it coming, and the prosperity of the rich 
hurt one’s eyes. 

We went all over the schools. Lebanon and Beirut 
were literally covered with French monasteries, re- 
ligious schools, and other institutions. The learning 
was narrow and very much used as political propaganda 
for the French, but whatever was taught was taught 
with thoroughness within those mysterious monastic 
walls. 

We stayed in the Hotel Bassoul on the quay and 

401 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

worked and received our visitors as well. The head- 
quarters was also in the hotel at the time. This led me 
to know the chief of staff, Colonel Fuad Bey, of whom 
I shall speak on a further occasion. 

The report was finished in two weeks. The skeleton 
of it in a few words was this: Beirut, Lebanon, and 
Damascus should unite and establish one common nor- 
mal school and college. Beirut should be the place for 
the school. Each of these provinces should have a 
model primary school with six grades to prepare stu- 
dents for the college and the normal school. Turkish, 
Arabic, and French should he the three languages 
taught. 

I little thought that I should come hack and apply the 
plan I proposed only a few months later. What I 
thought most important was the new spirit the govern- 
mental education would have to create. 

Arabic nationalism so far had been in S}"ria a political 
instrument in foreign hands. Nationalism used for po- 
litical purposes is an ideal turned into a monstrosity. 
Turkey must help the Arabs to develop a national spirit 
and personality, teach them to love their own national 
culture more than any foreign one; and when the time 
came for the Arab to have his independence, he would 
geographically and economically see that he had more 
common ties and interests with the Turks than with the 
foreigners. 

The Arabs had equal repre.sentation in the parlia- 
ment, but somehow it did not work well, and to me it 
looked as if it would be far .safer for Turkey to work 

402 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

with the idea of a future cooperation with the Arabs in 
their minds rather than with the idea of ruling them al- 
ways. Endless blood, endless money, and useless strug- 
gle have been spent in the Arab lands. The defense 
and maintenance of Arab lands by the Turks was not 
what the Arabs wanted; they wanted the French. 
They repented of this wish soon enough though. 

Colonel Fuad Bey called on us several times, and I 
had memorable talks with him. He is one of our in- 
tellectual soldiers, and I remembered him from his 
letters from Yemen, where he had gone with Marshal 
Izzet Pasha and arranged the treaty with Imam Yahia. 
Ilis letters to “Tanine” describing Yemen and the 
famous Imam Yahia were realistic pictures. I admired 
him for his unyielding honesty and hatred of corruption, 
hut he was said to be politically weak and very am- 
bitious. I wanted him to tell me about the doings of the 
Alie court, and what I wanted to know most was 
whether the Arab nationalists were working simply for 
a change of rule or for independence. 

He spoke Djemal Pasha’s and the government’s 
views rather than his own, for I believe he also was 
against political executions. He said that success was 
our ultimate ideal and that if a partial terror had not 
been instituted the Turkish army would have been 
obliged to leave Syria in the first months of the cam- 
paign. Speaking about the Arab nationalists, he be- 
lieved that some were genuine patriots. He told me 
about the death of one which I shall never forget. 

•103 



MEMOmS OF HALIDE EDIB 

“I came to Beirut on the day of the execution,” he 
said. “It was before the government house. There 
were a series of gallows, and some had been already exe- 
cuted. There was one among them who marched among 
the condemned. He had been a reserve officer and wore 
a calpak. He was quiet and seemed entirely above the 
fear of death. He sat on one of the benches and 
smoked until his turn came. He chose his own par- 
ticular gallows, and he passed the knot around his neck 
and said, ‘Born an Arab, I have served the Arabs, and 
I am dying for the Arabs.’ I was so much hurt at the 
idea of killing this great Arab that I did not even ask 
his name. But the Syrians would know him. He got 
hold of me strangely. I used to stop a moment each 
time I passed by the government place and sent him a 
greeting of respect. I often sat a year later on the 
balcony of Der-Nassira and told him in spirit that I 
would give my very best to the Arab children during my 
stay in Syria.” 

^Vhen we started with Nakie Hanum for Damascus, 
Djemal Pasha’s family and headquarters had already 
moved on. 

A tall gaunt Arab woman dressed in Turkish fashion 
entered our compartment. She had a dark face with 
unusually light brown eyes for an Arab woman. In 
spite of the bony powerful structure of her body and her 
very thin face, there was an invisible force in her and 
an arresting quality in her eyes that were very com- 
pelling. Her veil was especially flimsy, and her man- 

404 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

ner contrasted strangely with her height and bearing. 

“She must be the wife of a Turkish officer,” I thought. 
“She is interested in Turkish women, and she seems both 
willing and frightened to talk.” So 1 began a conversa- 
tion. Oh, yes, she was the wife of a Turk and trying 
to learn Turkish, she said. Her simplicity and her lack 
of paint — almost miraculous for an Arab woman of the 
city — gave one the feeling that in spite of her timidity 
and shy ways she had an inward confidence in her 
charms. 

The life was extraordinary on the way through Leb- 
anon to Damascus. Xo people own their land as the 
Arabs do; they make you feel it instantl}'. The life 
substance of the Arab is much warmer and of more ag- 
gressive kind than of any other nation I know. Xo 
wonder that whether you enter Arabia as their ruler or 
as a traveler you are soon completely enveloped in its 
atmosphere. You not only speak their language and 
live their life, but you actually acquii’e their looks! It 
is for the savant to say if it is all owing to the internal 
and contagious warmth of the people or to geographical 
influences. 

'File night was dark and gloomy, but as we neared 
Damascus an e.xtraordinary harmony of water thun- 
dered and echoed in the valley, and among masses of 
willow-groves the river Bereda coiled with silver bril- 
liance like the movements of a supernaturally white and 
transparent snake. 

The valley is equally wonderful in sunlight with its 
rich olive-groves and tall poplars, while the same Bereda 

405 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

flows in gigantic sweeps through it all, sending its 
fresh sparkle to travelers who come from the heat and 
the dust and the endless desolation of the desert. 

It is said among the Arabs that Mohammed’s fre- 
quent description of paradise in the Koran, “with rivers 
flowing imder its feet,’’ is inspired by the freshness and 
the force of the Bereda, which he had seen as a child, and 
again after his march of long days through the desert. 

After we handed in our report we prepared to go to 
the desert, where Hamdidhdi Souhhi had already gone. 
It was of supreme interest to me to see the desert, but 
I also wanted to see a young comrade from the Ojak, 
Dr. Hassan Ferid, who had organized the Red Crescent 
hospital in the desert. The hospital was spoken of as 
one of the best, and so it was one of the attractions as 
well. 

We stayed three days in Ilainascus before we started 
for the desert, during which tlie Damascus ladies enter- 
tained us. I also saw the Armenian orjdianages in 
Damascus, which were opened and helped by D jemal 
Pasha, but which were run by yVrinenians, mostly 
women. The Armenian world seemed to consider 
Djemal Pasha as a godsend, and the women showed me 
handkerchiefs with his pictures which they carried 
around their necks. 

A trustworthy simple Circassian who had been with 
me in Syria came, after the occupation of Syria by the 
French, and told me a very characteristic story. 'Fhe 
French had brought in a large number of Armenians 
with them, and one of them was .swearing loudly against 

406 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

Djmal Pasha in the market-place. A poor Armenian 
woman spoke to him saying, “He was very good to us 
and gave us food during the famine and protected our 
lives when every one was dying in the street.” 

To which the man answered, “It is an Armenian’s 
duty to swear at all ’I’urks, the more so against the good 
ones, for it is the good ones who make the world like 
the Turks.” 

The last night before we left Damascus the ladies 
gave a musical evening in the Arab fashion. There 
was no end of sweets and delicious fruit and of Arab 
women dancing and singing. The singers and the 
(lancers were in tight European clothes, which rather 
reminded one of the ordinary Armenian dancing-girls 
in Constantinople. However, there was an old Bedouin 
dance performed by two girls, covered in loose and long 
mashlaks, only their eyes showing, and their bodies un- 
dulating under the silk draperies, moving with the agil- 
ity and grace of the desert people. Toward the end a 
great excitement aro.se. “She is coming; she is coming; 
I have arranged it at last,” said the lady of the house. 

“Who is she?” I asked. 

“She is Iledie, the great Arab singer,” said my host- 
ess. “JMcn ruin themselves for her. She is the mistress 
of an ex-official and war profiteer, who does not allow 
her to sing in public, but he let her come as a favor for 
this time, because there are no men.” 

And she came. She was evidently a Christian Arab, 
for she came in European clothes and unveiled. Her 

407 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

gaunt thin silhouette had that force and life which no 
amount of European clothes or lack of paint could dis- 
guise, and she had the typical Arabian swing of the 
body. Although her sleek dark head and light brown 
eyes had no veil, still I recognized her immediately. 
She was the lightly veiled woman I had seen in the train 
from Beirut to Damascus. The unspoken gratitude of 
her eyes as I calmly acted as if I had never seen her be- 
fore was marvelous. And the same adoration of the 
great artiste was as much in evidence in this feminine 
party of Damascus as it would have been in a salon in 
Paris. 

The ladies sat around her and served her with fruit, 
delicious apricots and grapes, such as one gets only in 
Damascus. Iledie had a whimsical smile, very clear 
eyes, a small head, with hair very simply arranged in a 
knot at her neck. She looked somehow' more genuine, 
even more honest, than some of the jew'eled and elab- 
orately painted ladies who spent all their energies to 
beautify themselves and keep their husbands to them- 
selves, while Iledie turned the head of every man she 
met without taking any trouble or pains. Her large 
hands with their long fingers played with fortunes and 
let them slip through their tapering ends with utmost un- 
concern. 

After a great deal of begging and urging, which she 
took as the natural thing, she sang the famous desert 
song, “Although I am a great chief of the desert, I am 
thy humblest slave.” 

The power and force of art are beyond environment. 

408 



HOW 1 WENT TO SYRIA 

In that cheap European imitation costume, in that 
cheap and badly made European dress, she managed to 
render the song with the soul, the passion of a real Arab. 
She had a low contralto, pure and deep and powerful, 
which got the guttural catch of the Arab’s emotional 
tones as she pronounced the word “zaliin’ (cruel), with 
which epithet the great chief addressed his beloved. 

AVhen her song was over I realized with the rest that 
we had given ourselves to the beauty she expressed in 
her voice, and we breathed freely as one does after the 
strain of some strong emotion. 

Externally .she was not a beautiful person, but she 
had an unaccountable passionate significance. She 
breathed it, she gave it out about her ta such a degree 
that one did not wonder at the weakness and folly of 
men. 

The next morning we were on our way to the desert. 

Djemal Pasha’s mother-in-law also came with us. 
She w'as as happy as she could be and promised to stay 
quietly in Beer-Sheba when we moved about. We were 
to go on to Jerusalem after visiting the desert. 

There w’^as nothing particular about the Arab towns 
we touched during the first part of our journey. They 
were bare, hot, and dusty with a yellow sand waste as a 
background to them all. Women and men walked in 
the stations, and the scene at Homs repeated itself with 
more or less noise and excitement. In Toul-Kerem 
people brought immense watermelons cut in two; they 
were bright red and deliciously juicy. 

409 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

The evening set in, and we arrived at Vadi-Sarar, 
where I witnessed a curious scene from the window of 
the train. Another military train was being loaded at 
the station. Every usual human activity plus the tre- 
mendous bustle caused by military exigencies was 
going forward on that single line, so that the jostling 
and cramming were appalling. Most of the cars were 
open ones, and the soldiers were carried on these. As 
the engines used wood, the smoke, which seemed to l)e 
composed of myriads of fireflies, spread into the dark 
air. It was beautiful, but those who sat on the top of 
the piled wood had to be careful of the sparks. The 
Arab soldiers, who hated the war and the hardship aiij^- 
way, made a great fuss, all talking and complaining, A 
tall Turkish sergeant, erect and hard as an iron bar, 
stood by the train and tried to squeeze in as many as he 
could. I could see that his patience was tried to the 
utmost and his Turkish stoicism exasperated at the 
Arabs, for the Turkish soldiers all marched through the 
wilds of Anatolia on foot for days and months without 
a murmur. 

When the sergeant thought he had loaded enough and 
passed to the next car, a queer and weird wail began, 
accompanied by the dropping over the edge of the 
wagon of all the human load, one by one, like ripe fruit 
falling from a shaken tree. Then the sergeant grew 
angry, and raising his whip he struck a few. In the 
metallic, short, and clear command of the sergeant I 
felt at last the roused anger of the mild and kindly Turk, 
which is something to be avoided by those who rouse it. 

410 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

I jumped down and went near the sergeant. I could 
hardly see his face, but I touched his sleeve. 

“Countryman,” I said, “they are as weak as women. 
Don’t strike them.” 

I shall never forget the sudden drop of his powerful 
arm. He turned to me instantly. He must have been 
homesick for his mother-tongue, for he broke into a con- 
fidential tone at once. 

“I start with two hundred, and by the time they reach 
the next station they become less than forty. They 
have no endurance, and they give one no end of trouble. 
I do not like it. They are always after their women; 
they would rather be shot as deserters than fight ; and I 
would rather go to the firing-line than transport 
Arabs.” 

“How many years since thou hast been home?” 

“Six.” 

He suddenly began his work again, his voice sharp 
and his commands metallic; but he did not use the whip. 
As 1 moved back to our train, he cried without stopping 
his work: “Allah sclamct vcrsonn heinsliircl” which 
means, “May Allah give you peace, sister!” 

Our train started. Tn that mellowed darkness, illu- 
minated by the sj)arks of the smoke and the station, the 
Arabs and the Turkish sergeant melted away. 

We were to pass at 2 a. m. through Galilee, and I 
wanted to see the lake ; so I asked Ijieutenant Arif, who 
was the military escort sent by Colonel Fuad Bey, to 
call me when we arrived. 

I woke with a strange noise of falling water and lay 

411 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

awake for a moment. Then suddenly some one tapped 
at the window of our compartment. It was Arif Bey, 
and we hurried with Nakie Hanum, putting on long 
coats. It was a strange still night ; the place smelled of 
jasmine. We walked through a narrow lane and then 
through a passage leading to the lake. The whole place 
was covered with yellow jasmine, which gleamed in the 
moonlight, and the stillness was such that it disturbed 
and stirred one more than any imaginable sound could 
have done. At the end of the passage the lake leaped 
into one’s eyes like a study in black and white. It had 
a brilliant white sheen, cast by the moon, and on the 
shores the sail-boats seemed like huge black shadows, 
falling sharply into the mirror-like transparence of the 
lake. 

It must have been just like that when Christ so often 
crossed it. He must have sat on the shore and talked to 
the fishermen, perhaps on the selfsame old stones under 
the boards that were meant for a landing. We hurried 
back, all three silent and stirred by the beauty, the 
sweetness of the jasmine, and the historical significance 
of the place. 

“We have now reached the desert,” said Arif Bey the 
next evening. I was watching and trying to see the 
desert and expecting a new emotion. But the first con- 
tact had no meaning for me. There was a black waste 
on one side and Beer-Sheba on the other, lighted bril- 
liantly with electricity. Arif Bey jumped down and 
fell into that sudden-turning-into-stone sort of military 
attitude, which means the saluting of a superior officer. 

412 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

“Colonel Behdjet, the commander of Sinai,” he in- 
troduced himself, as he helped us down. The title and 
the position sovmded grand, but he was as mild and as 
human as a philosopher in the middle ages. 

It was almost uncanny to go through the streets of 
Beer- Sheba, so well lighted, and all the roads arranged 
on a plan, with new white houses and the mass of mili- 
tary buildings. Besides the martial figures that moved 
about, I caught sight of single Bedouins crossing the 
street, with that strange swing of their slim bodies, lead- 
ing a string of camels, turning a corner. 

There was a square with a green garden and a foun- 
tain in the middle of the town, and opposite the fountain 
there was a large white building kept for the guests, 
which was prepared for us also. 

The house was simply but tastefully arranged with 
green ferns in pots and flags, and Behdjet Bey took his 
meals with us. All the officials in Beer-Sheba, espe- 
cially the doctors, seemed pleased to see people from the 
outside world, and they tried to entertain us. 

The very next day Behdjet Bey started us on our 
sight-seeing according to the plan he had worked out. 
It was a well ordered little town, with hordes of Arabs 
and camels and very efficiently managed hospitals. 
There were Catholic Arab sisters nursing, dry small 
Women in black veils and with very smooth movements. 
Among the black shadows of these religious women a 
sister in white attracted my attention. She had a fa- 
vored position; the men seemed to have an affectionate 
dependence on her; while the doctors treated her with 

413 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

tender respect. Her round face and clear gray eyes 
had not lost their freshness amid all the suffering of the 
place, and she talked Turkish with a familiar accent. 
She was known as Sister Anna, and she was a Protes- 
tant Armenian. She was the only Armenian who had 
sensed the double tragedy of the Armeno-Turkish mas- 
sacres and simply brought her lovely heart to the service 
of the sick. That suffering has no race, sex, and class, 
and that the appeasing of it is the only human act which 
brings a lasting satisfaction, she seemed to have learned 
by experience. 

After the hospitals we went to the German aeroplane 
station. A German air officer called Erlinger showed 
us round. I had heard about his wonderful feats in the 
air, and also of his turning somersaults in the air when- 
ever any ordinary Turkish land officer, curious for the 
experience of an aeroplane ride, came his way. There 
was a great deal of humor in his face which justified his 
reputation, and I felt tempted all of a sudden to go for 
an air drive. So I said in a conversational tone, “I 
wonder how it feels to be in the air.” Hardly were the 
words out of my mouth before Erlinger began to shout 
commands in German, and German soldiers began to 
pull an aeroplane out. Erlinger stuck a cap on my 
head and put a fur jacket on me, which he seemed to 
have got hold of in a mysterious way. 

To-day the anxiety and the nervousness of the ohl 
lady and Nakie Hanum .seem out of place. But tlicn 
there was a feeling of di.strust about aeroplanes. For- 
tunately we were flying over the desert in no time. The 

414 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

first sensation was of delight caused by that miraculous 
sense of speed, but I soon became absorbed and thrilled 
by the yellow vastness of the desert and its wonderfully 
smooth mounds, flying at a terrible pace under us in an 
oblique vision. 

When the aeroplane, which had been flying smoothly 
for a time, began to shake and jump, I felt that the time 
for fear had come and wondered how one held on to an 
aeroplane when it turned upside down. 

J ust then Erlinger looked back at me with a quizzical 
expression. I believe that he wanted to see the effect of 
it all on my face. In spite of my internal anxiety, his 
wicked joy at the idea of frightening the Turks, even 
when they are meek-looking little women, amused me. 
1 smiled understand ingly, and that very instant the 
aeroplane steadied itself. I think that any sign of fear 
would ha\'e led him to the wickedest feats; what was 
liumor and amusement in me he took for courage, and 
tliat saved me. As I came down I saw the old lady sit- 
ting, with her hands up shutting her ears, and her eyes 
tightly closed, and she was calling to Xakie Hanum, “Is 
she alive ?” 

To which Nakie ITanum answ^ered, “Very much so.” 

The old lady seemed very nervous, reproaching me 
with heartlessness, declaring that the fear she felt was 
going to kill her very soon. 

'riiere are strange coincidences in life, and when 
she began to grow feverish and developed pneumonia, 
I came to feel repentant, though I knew well enough 
that no amount of fear could have caused it. She could 

41 .&gt; 



MEMOIRS OF halid:^ edib 

not be removed for ten days at the very earliest, and the 
fighting was causing some anxiety to the commander of 
Sinai. The English aeroplanes had begun to visit Beer- 
Sheba, and the outlook was not pleasant with a sick old 
lady in bed. 

Sister Anna came to nurse for a few hours in the 
night, but she would not come in the daytime. “I can- 
not give up my poor soldiers. She is a great lady and 
can have every possible care.” This was so fine that 
the old lady, who was pining to have her every minute, 
almost cried over the beauty of the girl’s sentiment. 

“It is her show of will which pleases me more than the 
moral side of it,” she said, laughing. “I always did 
what I wanted. I will tell you an incident which you 
will never forget. Once I had a toothache, and my hus- 
band took me to a dentist, but I was determined not 
to have my tooth extracted. My husband always 
spoiled me shamefully, and he actuall)'^ sat and had his 
own tooth extracted — to encourage me, you know. T 
will let my tooth be taken out if the dentist also pulls 
his own tooth out,’ I said. The dentist was furious at 
first, but finallv he did extract his own tooth. Whether 
he wanted to get me off his hands at all costs, or whether 
my husband paid him very high, I cannot tell, but I took 
a displeased air and said that I would never allow such 
a silly dentist to touch my tooth, and I walked out.” 

Every evening we sat out with Nakie Hanum in the 
garden. The desert sky is so low and the stars so near 
that you feel it would be possible for any tall person to 

416 









HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

stand up and gather them. The moon rose late, but the 
luster of those near stars, ever so much larger and 
brighter than the stars I had so far known, illumined the 
desert with a soft and clear light. The camels and the 
men stood out in full outline, colorless but mysteriously 
and softly enveloped in light. 

Opposite the garden there was a wooden mosque, 
where a boyish voice called out for prayers. In no part 
of the world is the muezzin call so perfect and harmoni- 
ous as in the mosques of Constantinople. So he must be 
from Constantinople, I said to myself. 

After the call to prayers, the Armenian cook, Artin, 
a dark Constantinople lad, stood by the door and sang 
“Aida” in a grave barytone. Somehow I had a feeling 
that both the young Turkish muezzin and the Armenian 
c(jok were suflFering from a great longing for Con- 
stantinople. 

At the fifth day, when we felt that the old lady was 
out of danger, Behdjet Bey took us for our longest drive 
in the desert. It was already dawn ; the morning light 
had no warm hues vet; a mo.st delicate lilac and an im- 
perceptible greenish white enveloped the town; the 
camel-strings and the drivers passed on, with those light 
steps that made no noise on the sand, and the graceful 
swing that stays ever in one’s mind’s eye. We rode 
into the desert feeling how unfamiliar an auto sounds 
and how out of place a railway line looks in a desert. In 
ten minutes we were in absolute wilderness. 

It is no use to describe the sense of one’s nothingness 
and almost religious ecstasy that the dawn in the wilder- 

417 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

ness inspires. It was not connected with any particular 
religion to me, and I had no historical feeling. The 
perfect blue of the inverted canopy over the unutterable 
gorgeous red blaze on the horizon which warmed the 
tops of the vast golden sand-mounds; the unlimited span 
of the desert which caught the blaze and reflected it in 
a ruby veil; the loneliness and the eternal silence of it 
all! No wonder the Deity of the white man was dis- 
covered in this place of mii’aculous beauty. 

Behdjet Bey, who was collecting historical data, told 
me that the trail we followed was crossed by Moses and 
Selim the Grim. But this also gave me no historical 
sensation. I was utterly disconnected with the past and 
the future; I was as insignificant and as nameless as 
one single grain of sand among the myriads. 

Of course we stopped at every ordinary and orderly 
little station, each having a well arranged guest-house, 
a factory for small repairs, a blacksmith, and some water 
arrangements, as well as some little growth of green. 
But I was subdued and awed and did not care for civi- 
lization or civilized tools. I was impatient to plunge 
more and more into the desert. It became hotter, the 
colors madder and more flame-like, and the mountains 
more frequent. At last the colors all resolved them- 
selves into a glistening and burning gold, and the sky 
turned into blue fire, burning into one’s very brain. I 
saw no sign of life for so many hours that I could very 
well imagine the desert to have been created that very 
day. 


418 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

On the sides of the trail Behdjet Bey pointed to mod- 
est mounds which were the graves of the unknown sol- 
diers who had died on their way to the canal. The 
humble trace must be lost by now. Let it be lost. The 
Turk never had a proper grave or a proper memorial 
for his brave deeds. He knows beforehand when he 
marches on that what he suffers, however sublime, what 
he gains, however grand, belongs to sultans and pasha 
commanders. He has no Perpetual Flame or Arch of 
Triumph to make him remembered. But the perpetual 
flame and the arch of triumph are within him, and it is 
he who constitutes the continuity, the vitality, and the 
higher meaning of his race. His sultans and his pashas 
will be but paltry effigies and his race will lose its higher 
meaning if that sacred fire ever leaves his soul! 

We tried hard to reach Ilaffir station at noon. Dr. 
Hassan Ferid’s hospital of the Red Crescent was there. 
The white tents blazed in the sun on a mildly raised 
sand plateau. Dr. Hassan Ferid had gone with Ham- 
dullah Soubhi to Jerusalem, where he would wait for 
our arrival. The order and the cleanliness was ex- 
cellent in spite of the enormous difficulties of the place. 
We took some light lunch and rested for more than an 
hour. The heat was at its highest; one’s feet could 
hardly touch the burning sands w’ithout being scorched ; 
and one’s breath burned one like fire. 

When we started in the afternoon, I can hardly un- 
derstand how we bore the heat, till evening came with 
another series of lights and beauty and spread all over 

419 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

the desert. We reached Kusseime at sunset. It was a 
pleasant place with a green garden and clear water from 
which a sparkling fountain rose. 

The sheik, a sad-looking man with an enormous sword 
hung over his burnoose, received us, his little boy cling- 
ing to his arm. Behdjet Bey’s grave face lighted with 
something which might have been a smile, and he whis- 
pered to me: “He means no mischief with that enor- 
mous sword. It is Djemal Pasha’s gift, which he 
carries proudly. It is too heavy. I am sorry for the 
poor fellow.” I wonder what kind of a new toy the 
present rulers have supplied to the children of the 
desert. 

The little boy of the sheik had his hair shaved, and a 
tuft of long hair was left on the top of his head, which 
looked queer. A horde of delightfully brown children 
in short blue chemises, under which their lithe brown 
bodies were entirely naked, each with the same shaved 
head and the tuft of long hair on the top, played before 
the garden. Their movements were like lightning, and 
their gestures and talk like flames. The .sheik’s son 
stood apart and looked at them wistfully, from the sepa- 
rating human borders which one calls class. 

The hospital contained the newly arrived and gravely 
wounded soldiers brought that very day from El-Arish. 
One heard their low moan, and their eves held the far 
and strange vision of the dying. 

We walked out silently and sat by the water, watching 
the little dark heads popping up and down in spasmodic 
dancing movements. The Armenians were singing 

420 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

Turkish songs in one corner of the garden, and the water 
joined in with its cool melody, while the evening colors 
faded in the desert. Then we plunged once more far- 
ther and farther into the desert. 

As we turned homeward the comfort of the night with 
its cold breath set in. The sky grew brighter, and the 
stars once more lowered themselves. The distant out- 
lines of the yellow mounds and the endless stretches set- 
tled down into the night, while the silence was broken 
by the long and distant sobbing and howling of the 
jackals. It was a strange and persistent sound. At 
times we saw the eyes of the jackals, which approached 
like golden flash-lights. I could hardly believe in its 
reality when Beer-Sheba with its lights magically lit 
our way. I felt that the motion of the car was only a 
sham and that it would lead us no more to any inhabited 
land. 

Three days later the old lady could be taken back to 
Damascus, and we started with Nakie Hanum for Jeru- 
salem in the car of the chief engineer of the desert roads, 
accompanied by Lieutenant Arif Bey, 

Once more I fell under the spell of the wilderness, 
but this time more with its historical sense. The J eru- 
saleni road passed through these low half-rocky hills, 
all covered with hundreds of old hermit cells, the open- 
ings mostly banked up with sand. Every opening drew 
me and made me wonder at the sort of life the hermit in 
the pa.st had lived there. \Vliat was he thinking of, 
buried in that desolation, parched by day under the sun, 

421 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

and watched by night by the freezing silver stars of the 
low heavens? 

The first moment that the machine went viTong and 
had to be attended to, I longed to go out and climb up 
to those dark cave-mouths and peep into their mystery. 
We were in a hurry to reach Jerusalem before night. 
But I did get to one which was low enough, in a moment 
of machine repairs, and looked in. I had to bow my 
head down and walk a few steps. All at once I per- 
ceived something white and hard lying in the semi- 
darkness of the cave. 1 stepped out again and took 
matches from Arif Bey, who stood by the mouth of the 
cave. 

It was a young Arab lying still, a white chemise cover- 
ing his body, his face in the dark and his bare feet swol- 
len and purplish. Struck by the sight and the strange 
smell I left the cave swiftly, and before Arif Bey went 
in to see, I knew that he must have been dead for some 
time. The grim reality of the body robbed me of my 
historical musings instantly. I could now only notice 
the tremendous number of camel corpses, and infer from 
them that a far greater human effort had been put forth 
for the canal invasion than we in reality knew. 

It was evening when we entered Jerusalem. 'Fhe sky 
of Jerusalem has a violet tinge, and the stars are more 
distinctly single, each hung by an invisible silver chain 
on which they seem to tremble and flash. 

We were to stay in Augusta Vietoria House, some- 
thing between a religious house and a hotel. It was 
most beautiful, and wonderfully kept by the noble Oer- 

422 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

man matron called Sister Matilda. The building was 
surrounded by thick pine-groves and looked out to the 
distant hills of J erusalem. Its garden and its corridors 
were covered with rich clusters of red and white flowers. 

It had been the head(juarters of the Turkish army for 
some time, but the headquarters had moved on to Da- 
mascus when we arrived. 

Sister Matilda came forward to receive us in the long 
glass corridor. When I saw that tall and austere figure 
with the stately bearing of the fine face 1 did not wonder 
any more at the perfect taste, cleanliness, and order of 
the establishment. 

She had genuine affection for the Turkish soldiers, 
and Djemal Pasha had more than admiration for her; 
it was veneration. She told me that the staff of the 
Turkish headquarters never smoked in that building, 
and the orderlies always took off their shoes when they 
walked on her polished floors. Some of the younger 
members had told me that they rather suffocated in her 
holy atmosphere, being deprived even of smoke, but each 
and all spoke with sincere re.spcct for her. Djemal 
Pasha said to me: 

“Xo man has inspired me with the respect with ■which 
she inspired me. I .should love to appoint her as gov- 
ernor of one of the largest provinces here. She would 
bring order and prosperity in no time.” 

She returned bis admiration with interest, for she 
also told me that the order and cleanliness which the 
Djemal Pasha regime had created was beyond anything 
she remembered in Jerusalem, although she had been 

423 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

there many years. Of course order was the dominating 
characteristic of Djemal Pasha everywhere. Speaking 
of Jerusalem, he said jokingly to me, “I am glad I was 
stopped by Djemil Bey from creating too much order.” 
He had invited Zuercher to study the place and had 
drawn up a plan for the general improvement of Syria. 
The result is an artistic work by Zuercher published 
after the World War. 

The mosque of Omar is one of the supreme things I 
remember best in Jerusalem. It glistened on its un- 
paralleled terrace, overlooking the medieval and Jewish 
architecture which surrounded it on a lower plane. Its 
graceful dome added something to the old town. As I 
went up the stairs of the terrace, a saying of Mohammed 
ran in my mind : “All tall men are fools except Omar; 
all short men are perfidious except Ali !” IIow rare in 
history is a man like Omar! I simply gloated over the 
entry of his army, and his wonderful justice and sim- 
plicity — a man of the street, a rare democrat and idealist 
who had given to the inhabitants such free and happy 
moments as they had seldom known. 

We stood and looked at the opposite hill, which had 
a steep dark valley at its foot; and on the top of the hill 
there was a .small square Jewish tomb covered with 
stones. Not only the tomb but also the valley and the 
hill were covered with piles of stones. 

“What is it?” I asked. 

“It is the tomb of Absalom,” said Djemil Bey. “The 
Jews go on .stoning it.” 

Because Solomon was once angry with his .son, the 

424 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

poor fellow had to be stoned in his tomb forever. I 
never liked Solomon much ; he was too wise and in a way 
too much like the wise men who are the leaders of to- 
day — beautiful maxims for others and a bad selfish life 
for himself. 

I went over the places where the life of Jesus had 
been played out — first, in Bethlehem, the church of the 
Nativity, and the stone cave where the manger was. 
In the church, the Catholic priests, in gorgeous gowns, 
chanted a service; and beautiful women of Bethlehem, 
costumed just as they were in Christ’s day, knelt on the 
stones, lost in meditation, while a huge organ played on, 
making the very stones vibrate. 

There is something wonderful about the associations 
of a great man’s life, especially if he has been crowned 
with martyrdom. The satisfaction of the human being 
seems never quite complete unless the man who loves 
and serves does not finish by allowing himself to be tor- 
tured and torn to pieces. Then lasting sanctuaries are 
erected, and he is made an emhlem of love and eternal 
greatness. 

Opposite the manger, carved in a massive rock, was 
the cell of Jerome, where he h.ad lived thirty-two years 
and had breathed his last. Outside and opposite the 
j)lace was a house where Paula, a pious Italian woman, 
had watched that cell for sixteen years. It hallowed the 
place for me; a heart that keeps a human image for 
sixteen years is a haunting heart which beats in one’s 
memory ! 

More even than the church of Calvary and the place 

42 .) 



MEMOIRS OF HALID^E EDIB 

where Jesus was tried, the road called Via Dolorosa 
captivated me with the sense of Passion week. Those 
old Roman arches, which covered the winding road to 
Calvary, cast wonderful shadows, and in the open places 
the lights blazed over the Jewish crowds, holding their 
markets, buying and selling, clutching, screaming and 
gesticulating; surely the setting was the same when lie 
passed on to Calvary! 

The garden of Gethsemane belonged to the Italians. 
It was a garden of chrysanthemums of lovely colors. 
The two-thousand-year-old olive-tree was there, and the 
story of tlie Crucifixion was represented in small wax 
images of a particularly charming Italian kind. I sat 
on a wooden bench and watched the brothers moving 
about and the flowers waving in the breeze. 

Churches with Catholic pomp of mystery and music; 
churches with Orthodox smell of incense and monoto- 
nous chants, old tombs of prophets and bil)lical women; 
the narrow and medieval streets; the grandiose arch- 
ways, and the Semites of all types, tongues, religions, 
sects, and classes! 

But those ancient churches and consecrated and his- 
toric spots had no peace. One felt that all these many 
creeds and peoples were trying to have them to them- 
selves, and were ready to jump at each other’s throats 
at any moment. There was a hot and unwholesome at- 
mosphere, mixed with a religious passion verging on 
hysteria. The Turk alone had a calm, impartial, and 
quiet look. He divided these spots justly among them 

426 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

all, and stood calmly watching, stopping bloody quar- 
rels and preventing bloody riots in the holy places. 

The full extent of this force and tranquillity I realized 
in a church connected with the Virgin. From a huge 
and high window the light blazed on a square red carpet. 
Djemil Bey carefully walked out on the marble, not 
touching the holy carpet with his feet. F rom the stairs 
leading down to a subterranean region a voice that was 
not Arab, a clear and low voice, was chanting the Koran. 
We found the owner, sitting on the step, protecting his 
head from the sun, and leaning over a large Koran 
opened on his knees. He had a pleasant and serious 
face and told us that he was the guardian of the carpet 
marking off the place of one particular creed. The 
guardian had to be on the alert, and one saw that he 
was brave and experienced enough to stop any brawls 
that might arise in this connection. 

“Are they very particular?” I asked. 

“They would murder each other in an instant if they 
saw that one crossed the boundary as much as a hair- 
breadth. See that window?” pointing to the sunny big 
one. “It was black with the dirt and cobwebs of ages. 
Xone dared to touch it. Each asserted the right of 
cleaning it. But an attempt to do so on the part of any 
would have meant a wholesale massacre.” 

“Who washed it at last?” I asked. 

lie smiled as he answered. 

“Enver Fasha came two months ago. lie saw the 
dirty state, and he called the heads of the creeds and 

427 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

asked them to wash it. There was an instant row as to 
who should hold the brush and who should carry the 
water. Then the pasha said, ‘The Turkish soldiers as 
the guardians of the place shall wash it,’ and it was 
cleaned in half an hour.” 

Before we started for Constantinople, Djemal Pasha 
took us, Xakie Hanum, Hamdullali Soubhi, and ni3’self, 
to see an orphanage in Lebanon called Aintoura, after 
the place. It had been an old Jesuit college composed 
of a series of solid stone buildings, and it had very fine 
grounds. It was run b}' only a few women and two 
men, although there were already about four hundred 
children. The fact that Djemal Pasha was coming with 
some visitors was known, and the place had been put 
reasonably in order, but the children looked dejected, 
miserable, and sick bej’^ond description. They were 
Turkish, Kurdish, and Armenian. Each child had a 
drama, and each luid had its parents msissacred by the 
parents of the other children, and now all w'ere stricken 
with the same misery and disaster. Each child had a 
Turkish or Moslem name. 

None of us spoke during the visit, and as we left the 
place we seemed to have brushed the inner ugliness and 
horror of the World War. 

I had a conversation in the car W’ith Djemal Pasha 
which was really Illuminating. I said: “You have 
been as good to Armenians as it is possible to be in these 
hard days. Why do you allow Armenian children to 

428 



HOW I WENT TO SYRIA 

be called by Moslem names? It looks like turning the 
Armenians into Moslems, and history some day will re- 
venge it on the coming generation of Turks.” 

“You are an idealist,” he answered gravely, “and like 
all idealists lack a sense of reality. Do you believe that 
by turning a few hundred Armenian boys and girls 
Moslem I think I benefit my race? You have seen the 
Armenian orphanages in Damascus run by Armenians. 
There is no more room in those ; there is no more money 
to open another Armenian orphanage. This is a Mos- 
lem orphanage, and only jNIoslem orphans are allowed. 
I send to this institution any wandering waif who passes 
into Syria from the regions where the tragedy took 
place. The Turks and the Kurds have that orphanage. 
When I hear of wandering and starving children, I send 
them to Aintoura. I have to keep them alive. I do not 
care how. I cannot bear to see them die in the streets.” 

“Afterward?” I asked. 

“Do you mean after the war?” he asked. “After the 
war they will go back to their people. I hope none is 
too small to realize his race.” 

“I will never have anything to do with such an or- 
phanage.” 

lie shook his head. “You will,” he said; “if you sec 
them in misery and suffering, you will go to them and 
not think for a moment about their names and religion. 
You speak as if I am doing something inhuman. I am 
taking the bread out of the mouths of the Moslem or- 
phans who would have the money spent on them if I did 

429 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

not keep such a large number of Armenian children.” 

I had not decided on the right and wrong of the ques- 
tion when we started for Constantinople. It was Sep- 
tember 16, 1916. 


430 



