X 


toward reaction; the Armenian question 

T he official entry into the parliament of the new 
representatives, in their simple black coats, side 
by side with the brilliant uniforms and the 
jeweled decorations of the Hamidian officials, marked 
the visible passage of Turkey from the old regime to 
the new. As one watched the splendid procession with 
its streak of men in black, one’s heart cried out, “Be- 
hold the coming regime !” 

Around that coming regime the storm gathered. At 
first the opposition was concentrated against the po- 
litical organizations and the political writers, but the 
moment was coming when every writer who stood for 
progress without taking sides with any political party 
was to be attacked. For the moment the opposition 
really barred the way to any kind of new thought. 
Instead of concentrating against the rather raw, im- 
petuous, and tactless politics of the Union and Progress, 
the opposition attacked persons and progress. The 
Byzantinism and lievantinism of the opposition went 
to such depths that the non-party element and the 
progressives who were shocked by the intolerance of 
the Unionist party in its narrow attitude nevertheless 
rallied around it, so bitter and personal did the method 
of the opposition appear. On the other hand the party 

273 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

in power became deaf and intolerant to even sincere and 
well meant criticism. Lack of liberalism on one side 
and lack of principle on the other gradually destroyed 
the party dictatorship in Tui’key. 

It was in January that I received the first hut not the 
last danger-signal in the form of an anonymous letter. 
In all my writings I had clearly stated my belief in a 
gradual educational change, in the study and under- 
standing of the difficult social problems of the country, 
and in the necessity of giving the greatest consideration 
to educational reform. As these principles, frankly 
expressed, kept me out of p.arty politics, it was a great 
and an unpleasant surprise to me suddenly to find my- 
self mixed up in them. 

Among the many envelops I have received in my life 
this one stands out in my memory as clearly as .if it 
lay before me as I write. It was white and small and 
contained a card and two small scjuare hits of blank 
paper. On the card there was first an order that I was 
not to write any more to “Taninc,” and then followed 
the threat that if I did not obey “the punishment will 
be terrible.” I have received many letters of that sort 
and have actually^ read my own death sentence in 
official print, but I have never before or since been so 
terror-stricken. My hands were cold and damp, and I 
actually felt weak in the knees. 

I can honestly say that I have never felt so cowardly 
and yet so brave, for I did not capitulate before the 
physical terror. I had a clear conviction that those 
who sent me the note were fighting not only the Union 

274 



TOWARD reaction; the ARMENIAN QUESTION 

and Progress but any form of new thought. I realized 
next that it was not only my life which they threatened 
but something else even more terrible for a woman in 
niy position. 

When I tried to overcome the physical fear of death 
and the moral fear of being blackmailed in public in 
Old Turkey, I saw my little ones — Hassan Togo 
building a house in bricks, shaking his golden curls hap- 
pily, and Ali Ayetullah watching my face with his 
wonderful deep eyes. I was only twenty-four, and this 
was the price of the literary fame I had acquired in a 
few months. 

I do not know how I lived through the physical and 
mental horror of the succeeding months but I did live 
and write for “Tanine” and the other papers as usual. 
Youth imagines death as an unbelievable horror, but 
youth is difficult to cow even with the vision of death 
and disgrace. It was about this time that I came to 
know a lifelong, honored, and beloved friend in the 
person of Isabel Fry. I had written a letter intended 
as an appeal to the “Xation” which attracted her at- 
tention, and we exchanged letters. Salih Zeki Bey, 
who was in London at the time, had called on her, and 
he gave me his impressions. 

“She is a fine woman, but she will be disappointed in 
you if she comes out to Turkey,” he said. 

“Why?” I asked, rather pitpied. 

“Because you look young and foolish, and wear ruby- 
colored velvet dresses,” he said, smiling and pointing 
at niy new frock. 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

I always think of that ruby-colored dress in connec- 
tion with Isabel Fry, but I did not have much longer 
to wear bright-colored dresses at home. (Turkish 
women of a certain class did not at that time wear colors 
out of doors.) Miss Fry, who had taken me for an 
elderly woman from the tone of my letters, happily 
did like me despite my ruby-colored velvet dress. 

She came to Turkey in February, 1909, for the first 
time and stiiyed three weeks. We went to see some 
Turkish women who were interested in reform, and 
she visited a few schools as well. She wrote an excel- 
lent article for “Tanine” on women’s education. 

The political passion reached its climax in March, 
1909, when Hassan Fehmy, a journalist on an opposi- 
tion paper, was shot on the Galata Bridge. This was 
the first political murder of the new i-egime, and it had 
a very bad effect on every one. The opposition used 
the funeral as a demonstration against the Unionists. 
From the corner of my house I saw a bier wrapped in 
a Persian shawl, wdth the Arabic verse from the Koran, 
“One martyr is enough for Allah, ” written in large 
letters over the coffin and a white-turbaned crowd fol- 
lowing it like an immense daisy-field. The ominous 
silence gave me the impression of what it must have 
been like in the old days of Fatih,’ when thousands ot 

1 Fatih, as the center of f^reat theological colleges (mfdresses), 
always opposeil to westernization. Great mutinies in Turkish hi.story were 
led by the eminent hod j as and the theological students at Fatih, and these 
mutinies put forth the religious pretext, their usual war-cry being, 
want Sheriat,” meaning the holy law. 

276 



TOWAED reaction; THE ARMENIAN QUESTION 

theological students with their white turbans rose and 
broke up the reforming tendencies before these ten- 
dencies were ripe. I spoke of it to Salih Zeki Bey, who 
smiled and said: “The Unionists have the chasseur 
regiments from Saloniki, the founders of the revolution. 
They need not fear a reaction.” At the end of that 
very month the same regiments supplied the leaders of 
the counter-revolution from among its sergeants and 
the corporals. 

“Beware the ides of March,” I said to myself as I was 
awakened by unfamiliar and far-off firing on the morn- 
ing of March 31, 1909. There was a feeling of intense 
gloom and oppression, although the weather was bright 
and sunny. A deadly silence reigned in the usually 
bustling streets, broken only by occasional irregular 
steps, with the clink of military spurs. 

The meaning of this unaccountable firing wms an- 
nounced to us b}-^ our old man-servant Hussein. He 
had been with us since our school days, and I had 
taught him how to read and write. His education, 
such as it w'as, had given him a passion for politics, and 
he followed cabinet changes and the political quarrels 
of the papers and parties more than I did. He hated 
the Unionists and reform, and he would gladly have 
seen even his own masters torn to pieces on account 
of their progressive ideas. But he was an old servant 
iind in a strange way my pupil, although he was twice 
niy age, and so we treated his politics as a joke. 

I well remember his glee as lie knocked at the door of 
wy bedroom that memorable day and said : 

277 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

“Wake up, Elfendim, the army has risen, the blood- 
streams carry deputy corpses, Ahmed Riza and Hussein 
Jahid are torn to pieces before the parliament in Sancta 
Sophia.” (The parliament first met in the Ministry of 
Justice at Sancta Sophia Square.) 

Inconceivable as it seems, in the first moments of 
Unionist misfortune he had run up to our bedroom door 
in great joy to tell us of tlie death of two men both 
known as radical reformers, although one was our 
friend and the other a very respected and admired 
personage. 

In his extreme excitement he began from behind the 
door to tell me about Dervish Vahdeti, the leader of 
the reaction. Hussein had evidently followed him 
about as he spoke to the soldiers. Vahdeti was a 
reactionary and fanatical hodja who preached the whole- 
sale massacre of all the Unionists and of the young 
students and officers favorable to reform; he considered 
them the real enemies of the holy religion. He pub- 
lished a paper called “Vulcan” in which he asserted that 
the British and Russian governments would be far more 
favorable to the holy law than the existing Turkish 
government, and that the government, with the Union- 
ists, must be exterminated. This outbur-st of anti- 
national Islamic fanaticism appeared suspicious, and he 
was thought to be the paid emissary of the British 
embassy, a tool of Mr. Fitzmauricc, the first secretary 
of the embassy, whose name was involved in the counter- 
revolution of 1909. I did not study the evidence 
against Vahdeti, for I was absent during his trial, niid 

278 



TOWARD reaction; the ARMENIAN QUESTION 

SO I cannot say whether or not there proved to be any 
truth in this. Anti-patriotic and anti-national church 
supporters have always existed throughout the history 
of the Christian Church. Vahdeti might have been a 
JVIoslem instance of the same thing. But there has been 
a change among the fanatics of his sort since then: no 
Moslem reactionary advocates a foreign occupation 
now, and the Islamic churches in and out of Turkey 
have become much more nationalistic. 

Salih Zeki Bey went out hastily to find out about 
the extent and importance of the rising. The next 
thing I remember about the day is the coming of my 
father with Dr. Djemal, an old friend from Sultan 
Tepe. The counter-revolution, they reported, was a 
very serious one. Mehemed Arslan, the deputy from 
Lebanon, had been lynched, and Nazim Pasha, the 
minister of justice, shot before the door of parliament 
by infuriated soldiers, who took them for Hussein 
Jahid and iVbnied Uiza Beys. The soldiers were shoot- 
ing their officers, as well as any one else whom their 
organizations pointed out as a liberal or a reformer. 

Tewfik, the son of Auntie Peyker and Ilaindi Effendi 
(the young officer who had returned from Europe after 
the constitution was declared, but had joined the op- 
position and was now with the reactionaries), sent word 
that I must escape to some safe place and that my 
name was on their black-list. Dr. Djemal asked me 
to leave the house in disguise and hasten, but I thought 
that I was safe in my own clothes in Istamboul, for 
no one would know me there. I took the boys with n\e 

•279 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

and immediately started with my father and Dr. 
Djemal for Scutari, where I could find a refuge more 
easily. As we drove along the Sublime Porte firing 
was going on, and the people were moving like con- 
demned shadows, while solitary soldiers were running 
hither and thither. We took a boat from Sirkedji, the 
only one that was available. 

1 left the boat at the landing in Scutari and had 
started to walk into the town, holding tightly the hands 
of the little boys, who were convulsively clutching at 
my skirts, when suddenly a human hurricane hurled 
itself on us and flung us apart. It was soldiers from 
the Selimie barracks, who, after killing their officers, 
were rushing down to take the boat and join the 
counter-revolution. I found myself flattened against 
a shop, Ali Ayetullah was pushed into a coffee-house, 
and Hassan was thrown against a wall. They were 
trembling and half fainting with fear but were mirac- 
ulously unhurt in the brutal stampede. It was my first 
contact with the mob. 

In the meantime father’s house, as that of a Union- 
ist, although neither an important nor a very well known 
one, was in danger. Some Unionist houses were at- 
tacked. During the day and the night, Sultan Tepe, 
so lonely on the top of the green hill, was a scene of 
shouting, rioting, drum-beating, and firing, while the 
rifle-shooting from Istamboul rose to a frenzied pitch. 
The mob with lanterns and drums continued their 
demonstrations all night, and each time they approached 
we expected the horror of the final moment. The whole 

280 



TOWARD reaction; the ARMENIAN QUESTION 

night I sat watching and waiting, the babies crawling 
around my knees, clutching me as the firing and shout- 
ing became louder. 

The next morning strange-looking men stood by the 
door and watched the house. Opposite the garden 
walls of Sultan Tepe is the tekke of the Euzbeks; 
the sheik as well as his children were friends of my 
father. That evening in the dusk a young man from 
the tekke jumped over the garden wall and came to 
the house without being seen by the men at the door. 
It was he who said that I must escape, for a cousin of 
theirs, an influential reactionary, was trying to find out 
if I was in my father’s house. An hour or two later 
under the cover of the night 1 escaped with the boys 
through the hack door to that holy refuge. The young 
men of the tekke kept armed watch that night, and I 
rested two nights in that (juiet and comparatively safe 
shelter, but as the reaction grew wilder and as the city 
was moved more and more by the spirit of massacre, I 
was no longer safe. When the reaet ionary cousin, 
knowing the liberal tendencies of the youth of the tekke 
as well as my father’s friendship with the sheik, began 
to inquire whether I had taken refuge there, I had to 
leave the sanetuary and seek refuge in the American 
Cnllcge, which was then in Seutari. 

In leaving the tekke I had to take further precautions. 
As I had grown up in the place, every one knew me, and 
the boys as well as I had to be disguised. I put on 
granny’s loose black veils and dressed the boys in the 
oldest clothes of the gardener’s children. I walked 

281 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

along the hills above Sultan Tepe, and Nighiar, my 
sister, who was a student in the college, came with me; 
before we had gone far from the tekke, the sight of two 
unusually brutal men running on the hills frightened 
her so much that her knees gave way. I could not help 
laughing in spite of my own anxiety, for she fell on 
her knees like a young camel. 

On reaching the American College, Dr. Vivian, who 
had Dr. Patrick’s place for the time, received me with 
great kindness. Her calm strength and friendly re- 
ception brought back to my mind for the first time since 
the beginning of the horror the imminent danger in 
which the new ideals and the country stood. These I 
had forgotten in my terror. Before I could greet 
Dr. Vivian I sank on a chair and began to sob pas- 
sionately. 

I stayed in the college four nights, hidden in the very 
room in which as a little girl I used to sit and repeat 
my childish lessons to IMiss Dodd. All that seemed 
ages ago now', as I read the papers and listened to the 
incessant firing in Istamboul. d'here was a rumor that 
an army was coming from Saloniki to suppress the 
counter-revolution. How' strange it sounded! A hun- 
dred years ago another Turkish army had marched 
from Macedonia under Alemdar Moustafa Pasha to 
save the young reformer Selim and his reform from the 
mob and the army which had risen against it. Was 
history going to repeat itself in another form? 

I heard in the meantime that Young Turks were 
!)eing protected by the Russian embassy and helped to 

282 



toward reaction; the Armenian question 

escape. The Russians in and out of politics have be- 
haved with real humanity and chivalry. The Russian 
embassy, although no friend of the regime, gave asylum 
to revolutionary and anti-revolutionary with equal 
generosity. 

A rather mysterious phase of the reaction was the 
Armenian massacre in Adana. It seemed that the 
party of reaction, which was killing the Young Turks 
in Constantinople, was killing the Armenians in Adana. 
The Armenian and foreign sources declared the mas- 
sacre to have been pre[)ared by the Young Turks them- 
selves. But the Young Turks, who were powerless 
and hiding for their lives, were hardly likely to be able 
to direct any such movement. The causes were deeper 
and more complex. 

As 1 have already mentioned, the Young Turks had 
come to a superficial understanding with the Tashnaks, 
the Armenian revolutionary leaders. The Unionist 
program, which involved a centralized representative 
government, was accepted by all the minority leaders, 
and some of the .iVrmenians were sincere Unionists. 
But some, indeed even the majority of the Armenian 
leaders, still kept their se])aratist tendencies, and these 
were anxious and watchful. The Armenian Free 
State, which was a mere political game to Russia and 
l^higland, was a real political ideal to some leading 
Armenians; and they needed continual trouble and a 
niai'tyred Armenian nation in Turkey as a pretext to 
iittract the attention and the sympathy of the European 

•&gt;8;f 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

public and to induce European interference in the in- 
ternal administration of Turkey. 

The Young Turks in their first understanding with 
the Armenian Tashnaks had allowed them to keep their 
arms till the new regime should he firmly settled. This 
was the apparent cause of the massacre of Adana. 

In Turkey massacres are set in motion by a mutual 
feeling of distrust and fear. It happens in some such 
way as this: In the Turkish quarters the rumor would 
go around that the Armenians were going to use their 
bombs and kill the Turks. As a rule the Turks were 
without arms in those days; hence bombs in the hands 
of a revolutionary minoritj^ made them nervous. The 
same rumor would go round in Armenian (juarters, a?id 
the potential fear and hatred, already worked upon and 
accumulated by the politicians, would explode, the 
leaders would disappear, and the peoi)le would proceed 
to throttle each other. Thus the discovery of arms in 
the Armenian quarters and a personal (juarrel between 
two individuals started the great Adana massacre. 
Djemal Bey (later Djemal Pasha) was sent as gov- 
ernor after the reestablishment of the Unionist regime; 
he restored order and became immensely popular es- 
pecially in the Armenian (piarters. 

During my stay in the college the street mas.saercs, 
the anarchy, and the lack of any control over the mob be- 
came so dangerous that my family sought for me a 
safer refuge out of the country, and I had to leave for 
Egypt with my little boys in the midst of the counter- 
revolution of 1909. 


284 



