XVIII 


EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

T he evkaff schools, which we had modernized 
through the work of Nakie Hanum, passed to 
the ministry of public instruction that very 
mouth. Hairi Effendi, the sheik-id-Islam, who had re- 
mained in the war cabinet because of his constructive 
work in evkaff, resigned. I followed with Nakie 
Hanum. 

The two months from September to November, 1916, 
were to me the most painful during the war. I was in 
utter despair; the great calamity and hopeless misery 
which overwhelmed my country seemed to he everlast- 
ing. The war seemed endless and human suffering un- 
limited. I was unable to w'rite a line, and if there had 
been a monastic life for women in Islam I should have 
entered it without hesitation. I was in this state of 
mind when Falih Ilifki Rev came once more fi’om Syria 
with a letter from Djemal Pasha urging me to under- 
take the organization of the schools in Syria, among 
which was the or])hanage of Aintoura, The number of 
children in Aintoura had gone up to eight hundred, and 
they were in a deplorable state. 

I accepted the organization of the schools, but still 

431 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

refused Aintoura. I promised, however, to find a good 
man to become the director and said I would undertake 
its inspectorship. I found a fatherly and kind-hearted 
man who was already doing excellent work in the Red 
Crescent. He himself had children, and he seemed very 
tender and kind to helpless things. His wife, who was 
an old friend of mine and a successful teacher and or- 
ganizer, undertook to choose the staff. 

The college and the normal school for the three prov- 
inces were to be in Beirut, where I was to live and spend 
most of my time. 

In Lebanon and Damascus two primary boarding- 
schools with six grades were to be opened on a modern 
footing. The staffs for all the three institutions were 
mostly chosen from among my old pupils who had mod- 
ernized the evkaff schools in Constantinople with great 
success, and so I started with about fifty women and a 
few men for Syria, toward the end of December, 1916. 

Two days before I started I went to visit my father 
in Broussa. An incident that happened at the station 
in Galata illumined me both as to my own nature, in its 
most angelic and resigned mood, and as to the ways of 
governments in war. 

A strict examination for gold was made of every pas- 
senger during the war. The Turkish population some- 
how never feels real confidence in paper money, and 
there was enough secret dealing in gold to justify the 
application of strict measures. There were a great 

482 





EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

many Anatolian women who traveled over the country 
for trading purposes, and they managed to smuggle all 
sorts of things, the discovery of which would have baffled 
any government. I saw them waiting their turn before 
the barrack where the examination was made. As I 
walked with Nakie Hanum toward the place, a rather 
dirty-faced but highly painted woman with a German 
accent came toward us and asked us to follow her. 

“1 am the government examining inspector for gold 
smuggling. Come with me to this office,” she said, and 
opened a door to a very big room. 

“I would rather go and be examined with the crowd,” 
I answered. 

‘‘Now no jabbering; no Turkish ways,” she said, with 
a ridiculous assumption of authority. “I represent the 
government and do what I please.” 

I made an instant decision to keep my temper under 
control and go through the disagreeable process with 
extreme sang-froid, so we walked in. At the end of the 
room stood a tall man with his hands in his pockets. Al- 
though he wore civilian clothes, he was the commissary 
of the station. 

I waited for a moment, expecting the man to leave 
the room, but he did not do so, though the woman was 
getting ready to examine us intimately. 

“The gentleman must leave the room before you be- 
gin,” I said quietly. 

Evidently she was a woman picked from the worst and 
lowest classes, and she spoke as her class would speak. 

433 



MEM01B8 OF HALIoi: EDIB 

“He is a great man,” she shouted. “It is an honor to 
be examined in his presence. You Turkish women are 
imbearable — ” 

“You leave out the Turkish women,” I said. 

The man then spoke in a jeering tone. “She is a 
noble Austrian, and I am in command. Be careful 
about the way you talk to her.” 

“If you were the sultan, and she an Austrian royal 
princess, I would not be examined till you leave the 
room.” 

I am, generally speaking, a mild little person and 
keep my temper under control, but I was now struggling 
with something within me as I had never struggled be- 
fore. I last remember the woman laying hands on me 
and trying foreibly to undress me. . . . Then a com- 
plete gap. I have never understood this gap, but I am 
afraid of it as showing incalculable possibilities within 
me. 

The next thing I knew three policemen were entering 
the room. The man and the woman were not in the 
room any longer, while Nakie Ilanum was smiling 
queerly. 

“Will you please walk to the police station in this 
building?” said one, while I thought that all the three 
looked at me with oyjen S5nnpathy. 

“What for?” I asked. 

“For slapping a woman.” 

I looked at Nakie Hanum with surprise, but she 
nodded her head confirmingly. 

There was a long table with five policemen sitting in 

434 



EDUCATIONAL WOEK IN SYKIA 

a row, while the tall man, termed the great man by the 
woman, dictated with much gesticulation. The room 
was full of large mirrors. In one of them I caught 
the image of the woman. 

“She has left her finger-marks on my cheek,” she 
shrieked in a sort of refrain. 

I caught my own image also in one of the mirrors, and 
it frightened me with its ferocity. I was crimson to 
the whites of my eyes, and I seemed to look like an angry 
tiger. 

Part of the report he dictated was in this sense: 

“As she seemed to belong to a high class, we took her 
to the room of the commissary, and with due respect the 
woman inspector tried to make the usual examination 
for gold. She immediately made seditious and rebel- 
lious utterances against the government, used most abu- 
sive language, and finally beat the inspector, who is a 
noble Austrian.” 

I remember him walking up and down, pleased with 
his eloquence. 

“Sign,” he said at last. 

“I will not,” I said. 

“I will arrest you if you don’t.” 

“You may. I can only sign something which is true, 
and if you allow me to dictate my own statement I will 
sign.” 

The policeman sitting in the middle had a long fair 
face with very kindly eyes. He said something in low 
whispers to the “great man” which made him consent 
with some reluctance. 


435 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

I told the story shortly and simply, and finally added 
that if those they thought entitled to special treatment 
were exposed to this sort of thing it horrified me to think 
of the treatment which the common people must receive. 
This I signed. 

Writers always enjoy a certain consideration, and the 
idea of this story possibly appearing at some future date 
in the Turkish newspapers was probably not a welcome 
prospect to the bully, but to his honor he did not flinch. 
On the contrary he added a new threat: “I shall say 
that you have attacked me with an umbrella, and if tliis 
lady” — pointing at Nakie Hanum — ‘‘had not been pres- 
ent you would have beaten me.” I had no umbrella, and 
if we two, Xakie Hanum and myself, were put together, 
lengthwise and crosswise, we should still not have been 
as large as his powerful frame. 

I went home that evening realizing sadly and fully 
the meaning of ‘‘seditious and rebellious utterances,” 
which I so often saw given as reasons for delivering over 
people to courts martial. 

The next morning Ahmed Bey, the chief of the police, 
apologized through the telephone, and thanked me for 
enlightening them about the undesirable process used in 
gold examination without the knowledge of the govern- 
ment. As I went to Broussa the next day I found both 
the process and the woman inspector changed. 

We rfgched Beirut late one evening in the pouring 
rain. The director of Aintoura took the secretaries and 
the accountants (who were men) to the hotel, and 1 with 

436 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

my fifty women teachers found places prepared in the 
girls’ primary school, which, as I have already said, was 
run by my sister. 

The governors of Beirut, Damascus, and Lebanon set 
to work to help, as did the army headquarters. For us 
it meant nearly sixteen hours of work each day, but 
before the end of J anuary the schools opened, the pupils 
arrived, and the work began in all of them. 

The normal school and college, which was to be in 
common for the three provinces, began in Der-Nassira 
(Ladies of Nazareth). The building was long and 
three-sided, perched on a high terrace which overlooked 
the orange and banana groves, the tall date-palms of 
the lower terraces, and the magnificent blue expanse of 
the Mediterranean. 

The buildings used to contain a religious and rather 
fashionable school for Syrian girls, which was run by 
sisters. The sisters were in the building when we ar- 
rived. I drove up to the school the very next morning 
as the rooms were being whitewashed, cleaned, and pre- 
pared. The mother superior received me and went over 
the place with me. 

Djemal Pasha had a convent prepared for them in 
Jerusalem, and she. Sister Freigc. the superior, and the 
thirty sisters under her were to leave soon. But as we 
sat with her in the simple sitting-room and a sister 
offered me coffee, I tried hard to think of some arrange- 
ment by which it would be possible to keep them with 
me. I knew that Djemal Pasha was always kind about 
finding comfortable quarters for the large number of 

437 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDi; EDIB 

homeless religious women in Syria, and for Sister 
Freige and her people he would be especially so. Still 
they fitted in so well with the whole surroundings that 
I wanted to make some practical arrangement which 
would benefit us both. Sister Freige herself was a dis- 
tinguished personality, with a remarkable presence and 
face. Her long, dark, oval, clear-brown eyes and the 
firm mouth with its lines of pity and understanding fas- 
cinated me. 

In half an hour we came to a complete understand- 
ing. She was to stay on with her staff and undertake 
the entire housekeeping. The left w'ing, which had an 
odd arrangement and was unfit for school accommoda- 
tions, was to belong to them. I remember the affection 
and the sincerity of her voice as she said, “We will pray 
for your soul, my child.” And they did remember me 
in their daily prayers in that mysterious church of theirs. 

Among the feverisli activity of the school days I 
could rest only at tea-time, when Sister Freige used 
generally to drop in and give me her views about educa- 
tion and school management. 1 am afraid that I took 
none of her advice, hut I loved to hear her talk. I think 
of her now saying, “Weekly baths lead to vanity; free- 
dom breeds saucy girls; friendship between two girls is 
wrong.” 

The first month I had trouble concerning the sisters 
which might have become grave. I was told by a faith- 
ful man who was given us as a guard that the sisters 
were signaling and acting as spies for the French. He 

438 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

told me that there was a wireless apparatus on the roof. 

I went over the roof very carefully with him and saw 
that there was nothing at all. I knew the simple women 
in this monastery to be far removed from all political 
activity. Sister Freige was perhaps personally pro- 
French, but she had enough sense of honor to refrain 
from actually doing anything which might be called 
treachery. On the other hand, I loved my country too 
much to allow any sentiment to cause me to protect the 
sisters if I found any act of treason going on. But in 
any case 1 did not want to act on impulse. One day the 
man came to me and told me that every night after mid- 
night a man entered the sisters’ part of the building and 
left the pkce before morning. The man was dressed in 
priest’s clothes. On inquiry I found out who the man 
was. He was a Catholic priest who had to conduct the 
prayers, as in their ritual women could not conduct 
them. Then I told Sister Freige frankly that I could 
not allow it and that they must pray alone. I do not 
know whether she understood that I Avas acting in their 
own interest, hut .she was sad. Inquiries Avhich were 
conducted without her knowledge confirmed in every 
case her statements about little matters Av'hich were 
brought to me, and for Avhich I had to he res]ionsihle to 
my goA'ernment. IIoAvever, after some six months both 
the government and myself felt at peace about them, 
and Sister Freige never knew my troubles in the matter. 

The entrance examinations Avere excitmg. For 
twenty vacant places in the higher classes, Ave had 175 

439 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

applications. It was mostly from Lebanon and Beirut 
that the applicants filled the school. Fortunately the 
Damascus students were chosen by our institution in 
Damascus. Lebanon mostly sent Christian girls, 
Beirut sent both Moslems and Christians, while the 
Damascus students were all Moslems. As Jessir 
Effendi, the Arab inspector of the public instruction, 
translated the examination questions into Arabic, he 
smiled. “If you were an Arab you would be accused 
of Arab nationalism and given to the court in Alie.” 
As a true Nationalist myself I thought that every one 
ought to know his own country’s language and culture. 
As a fact the girls, who were mostly from French 
schools, knew nothing about the country they lived in 
and despised their own language as inferior to French. 
The new schools which we had opened took the teaching 
of Arabic very seriously. 

We had almost completed the dormitories and the 
class-rooms when Djemal Pasha came to the school with 
Azmi Bey, the governor. They went all over the school 
and finally asked to see the church. It was an enor- 
mous place, with no end of statues and images and rather 
badly lit. Djemal Pasha thought that there ought to 
be no church in a secular school and that the place ought 
to be turned into a dormitory or a public hall. I had the 
dormitories ready, and as for the public hall there was 
a white-walled rectangular chapel with a beautiful light 
which suited my purpose better. The church door was 
closed to the main building, but the sisters entered it 

440 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

from a side door. In this case I insisted that they ought 
to be allowed to have their church. As we went on dis- 
cussing the matter I caught sight of an old sister kneel- 
ing behind a chair and watching us with furtive eyes. I 
was not surprised, for it was in their system to know 
all. 

I was rather taken back by a scene that day which 
made me wonder a great deal. A short fat man who 
was doing the furnishing of the school came to Djemal 
Pasha and said that there were crosses on the graves of 
the sisters in the lower garden, and asked if the pasha 
desired them to be removed. I was glad to hear Djemal 
l*asha say furiously: “What do you take me for? 
Should I ever allow graves to be touched?” 

We soon opened classes for sewing and for languages, 
mainly French and Turkish. The waiting-rooms were 
filled with Arabic women, anxious to attend these 
classes. All had pleasant, wide-awake faces and proved 
to be very apt pupils. 

It was at this period that a man called Dumani came 
to see me. lie brought samples of washable home-made 
stuff which seemed excellent for use as uniforms for the 
students. He had a weaving factory where he made use 
of waste silks in Syria. He offered it very cheap, but 
his condition was that half of the money must be paid 
in wheat. Azmi Bey took him under his protection, and 
he furnished all our schools with that wonderful stuff 
from his factory. When I learned from Sist^t Freige 
his history I was more than glad to have introduced him 

-HI 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

to Azmi Bey. His father, the richest man in Syria, had 
gambled away all his fortune and died, leaving an 
enormous amount of debt. Dumani had sold all he 
could from their property, paid the debtors, and started 
to work like a simple working-man. He and his brave 
mother, a noble woman in every way, are among those 
for whom I have a deep respect. 

In the meantime I was not satisfied with the state of 
things in Aintoura. I had installed the director and his 
staff in the very first week of January. The place was 
in a state of incredible filth and misery. Out of the 
eight hundred children over five hundred were siek. 
There was no order whatever, and the personnel con- 
sisted entirely of a few good but incapable women, a few 
men, and half a dozen soldiers who were supposed to do 
some work. The w'omen and the men were overjoyed to 
see the arrival of a larger staff. Each child, each bed, 
and each piece of furniture was covered with vermin, and 
most of the children had mouth disease. The children 
themselves looked like little wild beasts and acted as 
such. There seemed to be no human decency or cleanli- 
ness left among them. The smell, the dirt, the din, and 
the sickly sight quite overcame the new staff. They had 
not imagined such a state possible. Loutfi Bey asked 
for boilers at once and set to boil every possible boilable 
thing and to disinfect the furniture and the place 
thoroughly, for typhus was one of the worst epidemics 
of SyriaT A new doctor also called r.,outfi arrived from 
the front and really worked wonders in establishing a 

442 



EDUCATIONAL WOEK IN SYKIA 

decent hospital and better hygienic conditions. The 
vermin were destroyed, and the worst of the dirt and 
filth removed. But in spite of this there seemed to me 
on my weekly visits to be little or no progress. 

The director, Loutfi Bey, was becoming more and 
more depressed. The complete degradation of the 
children frightened him. There were a few big healthy- 
looking children who seemed to dominate the whole 
place. Loutfi Bey told me that they took the bread of 
the smaller children and sold it in the village, gambled 
in all sorts of ways, and did other things which could 
not be told. I talked with those children, and I talked 
with the teachers, stayed and observed for a little time, 
and finally decided to come up to the institution myself 
and set to work. Der-Nassira was well started in all 
its branches and was in reliable hands, so that I could 
absent myself from it for some time. 

As Loutfi Bey was too much depressed to go on with 
the work, he and a few of his staff decided to leave. Dr. 
Loutfi accepted the direction of the school — 'an ap- 
pointment which proved a blessing to the establishment. 
I wired to headquarters in Damascus, gave notice of the 
change, and settled down to work. 

I began my work by going into the dining-room to 
see the terrible ordeal of feeding the children, which had 
so appalled the director and the staff. 

The dining-room consisted of three very Jong and 

&gt; Both the flrst director, who stoyed only for a short time, and the Dr. 
Loutfl who stayed and worked wonders had the same name. 

443 



MEM0IB8 OF HALID]^ £DIB 

very large halls opening into each other. Only four 
hundred and fifty children were on their feet and came 
to meals. Even the greater part of these looked as if 
they would be much better in a sanatorium. Two sol- 
diers stood by the door with two large sacks full of bread 
and distributed it to the children as they passed in. 
Makboule Hanum, the matron, with a few other teachers 
were trying to pour out the soup. 

Before all the children had got into the hall, a tre- 
mendous uproar and fighting began. It was a scene for 
students of anthropology to see, for it illustrated the 
terrific struggle for existence among the lowest kinds of 
animals. The stronger boys were snatching the bread 
from the weaker ones, and the weaker ones were strug- 
gling to keep from giving up their bread. It was a wild 
fight, with all the children wrestling and tearing each 
other, crying and screaming. The accountant of the 
school, a sturdy man, was trying to establish order with 
a stick but in vain. Some children were still on the floor, 
and the matron was wounded, blood running down her 
hands and neck. It seemed this was the worst they 
could do, and I was glad to see the limit, although it 
filled one with unutterable sadness to see the quick de- 
terioration of human nature in misery. 

The old director was to be our guest till the end of the 
week, and I remember his pardonable satisfaction as he 
saw me enter. “I am glad you saw with your own eyes 
the impossibility of the task,” he said. 

“They will be eating their dinner in peace in one 
week,” I said. I believe the order and the quiet of the 

444 



EDUCATIONAL. WORK IN SYRIA 

teachers’ dining-room hurt me at that moment. That 
evening I went all over the depots and noted the amount 
of raw material in the form of piles of yarn, cotton, 
leather, and wool. There was also a considerable 
amount of strong stuff which could be turned into bed- 
ding. Loutfi Bey had got nearly three hundred suits 
and some hundred shoes ready; his idea was to dress and 
organize when all the material should be ready. My 
plan was to begin at once and get the boys to weave, to 
carpenter, to make shoes, in short throw this enormous 
mass of grown-up children into work and make them to 
a certain degree self-sufficient. 

The first night, after working till twelve in my 
office, which was in the first floor, I quietly wandered 
into the school. The corridors were full of bigger 
children laughing and talking with the Arab soldiers 
who were supposed to be keeping guard. The dormi- 
tories were in a WTetched state, little ones and big ones 
all huddled together. I went back to my room at two 
and made additional notes on what I was going to do. 

One of the w’omen from Constantinople w’ho decided 
to stay on was a good dressmaker. I called from the 
village several women and with the bigger girls began 
to prepare the dresses and the bedding of the smaller 
ones. I had asked headquarters for a good carpenter, 
shoemaker, and a director to organize a brass band, and 
procured two very good w^eavers and a few simple looms 
to start the weaving of the yarn into stuff for children. 
The masters arrived in three days, chose the necessary 

445 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

big boys, and set to work feverishly. I owe the quick- 
ness of the establishment of order to those bigger boys 
to a very great extent, the very ones who seemed so im- 
possible and degenerate at the beginning. I had very 
serious talks with them, and through personal contact I 
chose also those I wanted for other purposes than weav- 
ing and carpentering. 

At the end of the week the smaller ones had their 
dormitory ready with their new bedding; their dresses 
and a part of their shoes were ready. Each ten small 
children (boys and girls below seven) had an ahla, that 
is, an elder sister from among the bigger girls, who was 
to mother them, and to help them to dress and wash and 
go to their classes. One teacher had to sleep in the 
little room which opened into the dormitory. The first 
day when each ten marched into the bath-house with 
their abla was a memorable day. When the first ten had 
had their baths and were dressed in clothes which it was 
a pleasure to look at, they sat on a bench in the hall of 
the bath-house, and leaning against each other, they 
slept with such a happy expression as I had thought was 
impossible for them. As each ten walked out with their 
ahla, dressed and combed and clean, the entire school, 
which had come down there to w’^atch the change, stood 
and let them pass with something like awe. That night 
I went three times to that dormitory to watch the sleep 
of the little ones. 

At the end of two months all the children were well 
dressed and well shod, all from their own weaving and 
shoe-making. Their dormitories were clean and well 

446 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

ordered. The young carpenters had made three hun- 
dred wooden beds, and were now making bed-tables. 
Besides they were getting ready a whole Montessori 
outfit for the small ones, who were having something like 
Montessori classes. The entire program of teaching, 
which was divided into five grades, was fully applied. 
The boys also had their bigger brothers, each twenty-five 
having a big boy as sergeant. This was an honor, and 
they enjoyed such consideration as co-workers with the 
teachers that each sergeant tried to keep his crowd in 
the best training. The blessedness of work, cleanliness, 
and interest in games and music kept them in much bet- 
ter humor, and the general harmony among the children 
was surprising. I remembered the first days when the 
Kurdish and Armenian children almost tore each other’s 
throats daily and felt very thankful at the speedy 
change. The two Kurdish boys, who were now the best 
weavers, had come to me during the first week after I 
came to Aintoura ; both had their heads in white band- 
ages, and both spoke at once: 

“We want permission to go to Damascus.” 

“What for?” 

“We want to kill the Armenians.” 

“Why?” 

“The Armenians killed our parents, and they beat us 
daily.” 

“It was not those boys who killed your j)arents. Be- 
sides their parents also were killed by other, people. 
Now tell me; how did you get those cuts on your heads?” 

I sent them to the hospital and told them that they 

447 



MEMOIKS OF HALID^! EDIB 

must postpone going to Damascus for the time. What 
I liked about them was that although they expressed so 
much hatred of the Armenian children, they did not 
tell me the names of those who wounded them. Now 
these same boys were weaving the clothes of all their 
comrades and going about as peacefully as lambs. The 
Kurdish children possessed the qualities of honesty, 
truth, and affection to a surprising degree, but unless 
always treated with firmness and justice they were very 
hard to manage. They lacked the quality of leadership 
of the Turks and the Armenians. The Turkish chil- 
dren were the easiest to manage. Besides their first- 
rate capacity for discipline and leadership, they were 
mild and kindly and formed the pacifying element of 
the school. WTien it came to hard work with self- 
sacrifice one could always depend on the bigger Turkish 
boys, and it is through their firmness and goodness that 
I was able to bring order into the mealtimes. Now or- 
derly children, clean and well combed, marched into the 
dining-rooms with their abla and their sergeant and sat 
down and had their meals in quiet. But sometimes in 
the middle of the meals, when the children seemed hap- 
piest, one of the little ones would suddenly begin to 
cry. It was a searching cutting cry which lasted for 
hours, no doubt caused by some association with their 
home. Sometimes in the middle of their play in the 
garden when they seemed happiest, hundreds of the 
young throats would begin to thunder a Turkish song, 
“Whither are my own brooks?” The words were An- 

448 





SXX I 


EDUCATIONAL WOHK IN SYEIA 

atolian, and the music had infinite yearning. One felt 
that these children whatever happened would carry 
something crippled, something mutilated in them. 

The Armenian children were good musicians, and the 
brass band which was formed became the joy and the 
pride of the school. The Armenian children were 
nearer to the Turkish children than to the Kurds in cer- 
tain qualities, although nearer to Kurds in race. 

How relieved I felt when I could take off my shoes 
and put my swollen feet on a chair and work at the in- 
tricate correspondence which one had to carry on with 
headquarters and the provinces in-order to keep the es- 
tablishments supplied with food and other necessities! 

I had never hoped to hear laughter in Aintoura; the 
most I looked for was less tears and less sickness. Yet 
I saw sturdy legs and chubby faces, and I often heard 
laughter and sounds of gaiety. The comparative 
friendliness and good health was very cheering after two 
months of killing work. I never realized how killing 
it was till one morning as I looked in my glass it became 
covered with a gray cloud, and I fell on the floor, feeling 
that I was being overtaken by death before I could start 
properly all I had to do in the establishment. 

The event was in April, the weather was intensely 
hot, and I was told by the doctor that it was a case of 
• cerebral anemia. I stayed in bed for a week before I 
went to inspect our school in Damascus. 


449 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

It was during this week of utter sickness that I made 
an important decision concerning my own life. I de- 
cided to marry Dr. Adnan. 

He was in Constantinople and I was in Syria, and our 
marriage took place in Broussa, to which he was able to 
go. My father was to represent me, with my letter to 
him which clearly asked him to give my consent. The 
marriage took place on April 23, 1917. When I re- 
ceived my father’s telegram and that of Dr, Adnan that 
I M'as married, I was creeping back to life and work 
again. 

I was getting glimpses into the many-sided lives and 
peoples of Syria. There were the rich Ijebanon and 
Beirut Christian nobility, an Arab imitation of tlie 
Parisian world; the dresses, the manners, the general 
bearing Mere of French importation. Strange to say, 
they still had something of their own which they tried 
hard to hide. There M'ere the Moslem and Druse nobil- 
ity, who fiercely, proudly kept their own M'ay and per- 
sonality. There was a great deal of profiteering and 
war M’ealth, all made on M’hcat. Among the Syrian 
masses, famine in its cruelest form was fast approaching. 
In the rich streets of Beirut, men in rags and with fam- 
ished faces, solitary M'aifs and strays of both sexes, 
wandered; lonely children, with M’avering, stick-likc legs, 
faces wrinkled like centenarians, eyes sunken with bit- 
ter and unconscious irony, hair thinned or entirely gone, 
moved along. There is an endless vista of road in my 

450 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

mind’s eye where these nameless little figures move on 
and on. There is a vision of rich marble steps before 
stately mansions, where on a skeleton baby arm one of 
those miserable little heads rests in unutterable aban- 
don and longing to die. 

The first time I heard the cry it echoed and echoed 
through my brain and heart. It was after a concert in 
the American College, where I had gone with some 
teachers, and I had given myself up to the bliss of music. 
I was driving home through the streets of Beirut back 
to Der-Nassira when I heard it: “Dju-an.’’ It was a 
solitary cry piercing and insistent and cutting the air 
like a knife. I have heard that “Dju-an” so often since. 
As time went on, the shrill passionate voices of women, 
the grave guttural tones of men, in colorless and pas- 
sionless pain, little children’s weak throats which hardly 
seemed to have a breath left, all gave forth that cry in 
a single sharp note, like a sword-blade which pierces 
through the heart. 

Syrians, the intellectual ones, often spoke to me about 
a certain Vcdi Sabra, their great musician. 

Vedi Sabra’s name I had heard in 1908 as the com- 
poser of a national song, the words of which belonged to 
Tewfik Fikret. It began with, “We are a nation of 
brave men ... we are Ottomans,’’ and it had been 
sung by eighty thousand men and students in the gar- 
den of Taxim, with Sabra leading the orchestra. In 
those days race hatred in Turkey had not come into 

451 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

being. In 1915 Vedi Sabra was connected with the 
conspiracy in Beirut in the French interest, and he was 
exiled to Erzeroum. 

I wrote to Djemal Pasha asking him to let us have 
Vedi Sabra as the head of our music department, which 
we meant to make into a model for Syria. Before 
long we had him at the head of our music classes. 
In a place where there is moral and physical suffering, 
after hygiene and order, music conies next as a comfort- 
ing and reviving influence. 

I promised the authorities of Syria to come back for 
one more year, and if the victory was ours, I hoped that 
those humble schools of mine, outcome of infinite labor 
and love, might be the nucleus of the constructive and 
peaceful institutions which my government meant to 
start in Syria. So I went back to Constantinople to 
spend my vacation. Dr. Adnan, who was inspecting 
the hygienic condition of the Turkish armies, came to 
Syria in June, and we traveled home together. 

In September, 1917, 1 came back to Syria to serve one 
one more year, as I had promised. The splendid effort 
and the capacity of the teaching staff in the preceding 
year had enabled us to begin the work of teaching with- 
out much difficulty in all the institutions. Aintoura had 
progressed to a surprising degree, for it had continued 
through the summer months with a lighter program. 
The number of children had gone up to twelve hundred. 
There was a neighboring convent for nuns ; Dr. Loutfi 

4.52 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

had rented a part of it from the nuns and had placed 
there all the girls and some teachers with their hand- 
work classes. I remembered having gone to visit the 
sisters the previous year. The order was so strict that 
only the matrons could appear, and only behind an iron 
railing. We had exchanged polite inquiries about our 
mutual health through the railings. It had appeared to 
me like a mythological play on the German stage. Now 
they also were to accept contact with the outer world, 
led by tbe necessity of a livelihood. 

The most useful change was the new arrangements in 
flrainage, water, and the installation of electricity. The 
general cleanliness, the harmony among the inmates, 
and the progress in the various crafts were great. The 
young shoemakers now had commissions from the out- 
side world. 

Dr. Loutfi’s greatest concern was the little ones. 
Thei’e were eighty small childi*en who somehow did not 
thrive as the bigger ones did, in spite of all the care he 
lavished on them. The little Montessori classes were 
furnished with pretty little chairs and tables, brightened 
by palms, bathed in the sun, where the teachers and the 
children worked and played. The little ones had a 
different regime, plenty of sun-baths and the best of 
eveiytbing; still there was a look of depression and 
fragility about them all. Bad or good humanity has not 
yet discovered a better place than a family pook, or a 
better caretaker than a mother. No institution, no mat- 
ter how scientifically run, can replace these. If the 

4.33 



MEMOIRS OE HALIDE EDIlt 

family system is replaced by large governmental insti- 
tutions, the nature of the human race is bound to un- 
dergo a fimdamental change, and I believe it will be for 
the worse. 

There was one child among the small ones for whom I 
was destined to take a keen, even painful interest. She 
was the youngest there. I had seen her first as one of 
the sickly tattered crowd of children during the previous 
year. She had a dirty chemise which covered only a 
part of her little body ; shaking her unkempt curls, she 
was looking about her with intense curiosity in her little 
eyes, blazing with passion and will-power. She hardly 
spoke any language well, but she jabbered in a mixture 
of Turkish and Kurdish, putting in Armenian and 
Arabic words now and then. Her name was Jale, 
which means Dewdrop in literary Turkish, but the name 
had evidently been given to her by some one in the 
school; no such name could be given to an Anatolian 
child. She had been immediately taken up by Sister Is- 
met, the Turkish nurse, who gave her all her spare mo- 
ments, and the little girl had conceived a great passion 
for her in return. She was now one of the gayest and 
the healthiest children. 1 knew the reason: she had 
found in this way a human kinship; if all the rest could 
each have been adopted by one special woman. Dr. Lout- 
fi’s task would have been easier. 

There was greater misery the second year, but a read- 
ier spirit of helpfulness. Azmi Bey had opened an or- 
phanage with seven hundred Arab children, all gathered 

454 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

from the roads of Beirut and Lebanon. Ali Munif Bey 
had opened several soup-kitchens for the waifs and the 
street orphans. His successor, Ismail Hakki Bey, who 
because of his liberal administration was very much 
liked by the Lebanon people, was augmenting them. 
Americans also were doing a great deal. There was 
one excellent orphanage which was supported entirely 
by Mr. Dodge, the son-in-law of Dr. Bliss. The self- 
sacrificing life of the Dodge family in Beirut during the 
years I stayed there was a thing to be proud of. 

There was a growing sympathy and harmony between 
the governmental and American institutions. I am 
specially grateful to Dr. Bliss for his encouraging 
friendliness and help in finding the teachers of Ara- 
bic; it was through him that I also got an excellent 
teacher of physical culture, a young American wo- 
man, Miss Fisher, who was a valuable addition to our 
staff. 

The fashionable and rich ladies of Beirut and Leb- 
anon were also active the second year. A fine work- 
shop for embroidery and lingerie was opened and most 
ably run by them. They employed a great number of 
j'oung orphans. 

.iVnother admirable instance of humanity was that of 
Dr. Smith in the lunatic asylum of xVsfurie. He was 
protected and helped by Djemal Pasha (he was Eng- 
lish), but some pAsons insisted that in the days when 
the sane were starving the mad shoidd be allowed to die 
first. This was a cruel argument, against which poor 
Dr. Smith struggled hard, and he managed to keep his 

4o5 



MEMOIBS OV HALIoi EDIB 

helpless patients alive to the end. I visited the asylum. 
It was admirably kept and was the best of its kind in 
Syria. 

I should like to give a picture of my old friend Selim 
Sabit, an interesting and an unusual personality. I had 
met him in 1916 when I went to draw up a plan for the 
schools. He was an Arab copy of Napoleon III in 
dress and beard. I have often seen young Arabs in 
higher society affecting the fashion of that particular 
French period. I cannot really tell whether it was out 
of admiration for Napoleon III or a fancy that the 
fashion was becoming. Selim Sabit said that he was 
sevent 5 '-six, but those who disliked him for his eccentric 
and outspoken character said that he was eighty-four. 
But his pointed beard he managed to keep coal black, 
and his small eyes, nearer together than any other eyes I 
have ever seen, had a shrewd, piercing, and very youth- 
ful light. His long oval face had a skin finely wrinkled 
into thousands of lines. He spoke in rhetorical tones, 
made such bows as one never sees in this workaday 
world, wore the brightest of waistcoats, and had daz- 
zlingly colored ties. My first impression was that of a 
vain old man, and I forgot him. In 1917 I heard him 
talked of as criticizing the callousness and the indiffer- 
ence of the higher classes to the sufferings of the masses. 
It was aristocracy offended at the shortcoming of the 
true aristocracy which prompted him. 

Then he became very much interested in the school 
and often called and offered his services. I soon found 

456 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

that under that travestied exterior a true and loyal heart 
and an unbounded courage were hidden. His great at- 
tachment to the school was founded on its respect for 
Arabic and on its tolerance. This nationalism was out- 
wardly contradictory in a man who dressed as he did, but 
it was very sincere. After the first months he tried hard 
to persuade me to stay in Syria and to run the schools. 
I refused firmly. 

It was with him that I went up to see the Maronite 
patriarch, our neighbor in Aintoura. The eagle-like 
house of the patriarch perched on a very high rock, look- 
ing down over a steep precipice into waters which had 
an especially deep blue. The atmosphere of the house 
seemed to be an imitation of Rome. Cardinals, who had 
cultivated Italian faces and looked like the pictures of 
cardinals in art galleries, politely received us and talked 
perfect French to us. The old man himself looked a 
genuine mountaineer. Although more than eighty, he 
still was erect and robust, witli the clear eyes of Leb- 
anon. He spoke French with the accent of his 
countrymen, and in his gorgeous red robe of a flaming 
pomegranate, he gave one the feeling of a sturdy 
Lebanon peasant. I had often heard of him as favor- 
ing French domination, and I see to-day that the IMar- 
onites are upholding the French claims. JMy own 
impression is that once the artificial difference of the 
Moslem and Christian Arab is removed (a feeling 
nursed and made the most of by the Western powers 
in the East) , all the Arabs, including the JSIaronites, will 
unite in no time. 


457 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

My Arab friends filled my rooms with violets and 
crimson carnations, which looked like piles of fire in the 
large trays or baskets in which they were sent. If an 
Arab likes you in Syria, you receive poems and flowers, 
and you also receive his confidence unconditionally 
over a cup of coffee. If you are an official they bribe, 
flatter, and corrupt you, and so subtle are their ways that 
it is very difficult to resist them. So even those flowers 
in the first days made me say to myself, “Am I being 
corrupted?” But I was soon assured. Flowers cost 
nothing, and poems addressed to friends are different 
from those addressed to the great of the land. A man 
belonging to a rich family did try to bribe me, although 
clothed in the language of flattery. I was so near the 
sort of anger I had shown to the gold inspector in Con- 
stantinople that I ended the interview as soon as possible 
and with a suddenness he will not forget. Any one in 
Syria who is in a position to employ people so as to ex- 
empt them from military service must he prepared for 
sueh offers. 

“It is about Ruffat Fffendi, your accountant at Leb- 
anon, than I want to speak,” he began. 

“What about him?” 

“The fact is that I want to he your accountant at Leb- 
anon.” 

“I am perfectly satisfied with Ruffat Fffendi.” 

“I am ready to make a great sacrifice in gold, thou- 
sands in fact, to procure the place.” 

“To me ?” I said as I suddenly rose. 

“No, no,” he said hurriedly. “I mean to the institu- 

458 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

tions, and I am going to give Ruffat Effendi two thou- 
sand pounds which will make his fortune.” 

“Did he consent?” I asked, coldly walking to the door. 

He was muddled and ashamed and began to beg to be 
taken in, no matter in what capacity; he would die, he 
said, if he went to the army. 

I opened the door and beckoned him to walk out. 
And as I went up with the feeling of shame that I had 
been offered a bribe, I thought of a passage in the “Hull 
House” of Miss Jane Addams where she tells how she 
was also exposed to the same thing, and wondered if 
there was anything in her bearing which made any one 
dare to offer a bribe, even in the shape of a contribution 
to her institution. 

Vedi Sabra asked to be allowed to put “The Shep- 
herds of Canaan” into a musical play, and after arrang- 
ing the libretto with me, he set to work. He did the first 
act in Syria, organizing an orchestra of twenty-five, 
composed of the best amateurs and professionals in 
Beirut. Douinet, the Syrian pianist, wlio had broken 
his front teeth in order to look like Beethoven, was to 
accompany the orchestra, and Sabra began to get ready. 
We would give it before we left Syria. 

By November the reverses at the front had begun. 
I was so absorbed with my work that I had hardly real- 
ized that Syria could be taken aiu' moment by the enemy 
and that the whole place could be turned into a battle- 
field. I had an anxious letter from Saime Hanura, the 

459 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

head of the Damascus school, asking me to come and 
make a decision, as there .was considerable fear among 
the people of Damascus. 

I started as soon as I could, and it was only in Reyak 
that I heard very serious news. Djemal Pasha’s family 
had left the day before, and he himself was leaving quite 
soon; a German commander, Falkenheim, was coming. 
The military activity on the line had stopped ordinary 
transport, but I traveled in a carriage full of cartridge- 
boxes. 

After a serious talk with the teachers that evening, I 
went next day to see Djemal Pasha at his headquarters. 
He was extremely sad and not in the best of Iminor with 
his colleagues in Constantinople. He thought that his 
removal would upset the entire organization and order, 
in which he was not mistaken. But as it was war time 
lie felt bound to keep the peace and obey orders. He 
proposed to take with him the teachers of the schools, 
which had been opened mainly through his initiative, for 
there was a possibility of anarchy. I thanked him and 
told him that until the moment came when the govern- 
ment closed the schools in Syria we should not leave 
our posts. He was insistent on possible and imminent 
danger, but I told him that the honor of Turkish women 
demanded that they should stay till they were officially 
authorized to leave the schools. Another Djemal 
Pasha, called the Second at the time, was to be in Syria 
and at the head of the forces. He and Colonel Fuad, 
the governors of the provinces, would help us to go on 
to the end of the year if . . . 

460 



EDUCATIONAI, WORK IN SYRIA 

I told all my staffs of the immediate danger and 
frankly admitted the possibility of greater danger and 
hardship, so that any one who wished was to go with 
Djemal Pasha. From the first to the last all refused to 
leave their posts. The sublime sacrifice and the confi- 
dence of these women and men I can never forget, 
although this same confidence gave me moments of diffi- 
culty which I can never fully explain. 

A series of sleepless and anxious nights followed. 
Supplies were becoming rarer and rarer; to get the 
necessary provisions for a fortnight necessitated no end 
of correspondence. My idea was to get supplies which 
would last the schools till they closed, and for Aintoura 
for at least five months. It was after this that I began 
to follow the military movements with anxiety and in- 
terest. In the campaigns in Syria there was at the be- 
ginning one soldier’s name which shone with special 
brilliance, that of Colonel Reffet. Fuad Pasha shared 
the luster in the last months. 

The first week of February I started for Damascus. 
I wanted the provision question settled safely for Ain- 
toura. There was talk of closing the schools in Syria 
in March on account of military operations, which w'ere 
not in any way reassuring. Organization and order 
were hard to maintain under the circumstances. There 
was almost no transport. It was with difficulty that I 
could get a carriage with good horses and a reliable 
driver. Although one had to use a fan in Beirut, a 

461 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

snowstorm was raging on the tops of the Lebanon. 
Brigandage had begun during the last few months. I 
started at four from Beirut, and soon the night set in. I 
found to my great annoyance that there was no oil in 
the carriage lanterns, and it was not procurable on the 
way. We had to go nearly ten hours over high icy 
mountain passes, and all the time in the dark. It was 
a nightmare, and the brave guard who was on the car- 
riage told me that he had one of the most anxious nights 
of his life. We reached Zahle, the town before Reyak, 
half an hour after midnight, and I went to the house 
of the governor, whose wife was an old friend of mine. 
I was to proceed to Damascus the next day. 

In the morning before I started Major Kemal, the 
new chief of supplies, came to see me. He had heard 
of my arrival that night. He promised to send the sup- 
plies without my going to Damascus, and solemnly de- 
clared that Aintoura should have provisions enough for 
four months. The order for the closing of the schools 
in March was confirmed during my stay, in Zahle. I 
went back relieved. 

The young Arabs on my return gave me a surprise 
entertainment. They had translated parts from my 
works into Arabic and some into French, and they acted 
them with surprising capacity. I almost cried over the 
“Folly of Handan,” acted by a beautiful Arab girl. 
She became quite the vogue and acted the part at teas, 
which are grand affairs in the high life of Syria. 

462 



EDUCATIONAL WOEK IN SYEIA 

I heard Sauda, the native Arab musician, sing and 
play on that occasion. He accompanied his own songs 
on the oud (a kind of Oriental lute). The rhythm at 
the end of each verse as he sang was wonderfully strik- 
ing, and at the end of each he looked with a flash of lan- 
guid questioning at his audience, and the audience re- 
sponded with a masterly concert of sighs, as if they were 
fainting at the very beauty of the music. It was done 
with such perfect flnish, and the entire rhythm of the 
song, the movement of the musician, and the sighs were 
so in tempo that my attention was almost called away 
from the real beauty of the music. 

Several other entertainments in Arab schools fol- 
lowed, and the schools finally got up an exhibition of 
Syrian artists, most of whom I had come to know. The 
j)aintings did not amount to much, for the best painters 
were not in Syria, but there was a small group of statu- 
ary by an amateur which was instinct with the inmost 
significance of Syria’s suffering in its clumsily executed 
stone figures. The group represented an x\rab mother 
feeding a baby at her emaciated breasts, with two small 
children, one lying dead at her feet, and the other agon- 
izing, clutching her torn skirts, Avhile the woman, with 
her fallen unkempt hair and dying eyes, was the very 
emblem of the starving women in Syria, It brought in- 
stant tears to my eyes, and it is a pity the young artist 
had not been trained in the technique of his art, or he 
would certainly have passed to posterity as haying ren- 
dered in marble the image of his country’s suffering. 

463 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Again in the early days of February I was going 
through the classes in Aintoura. I had gone to stay for 
a longer spell in the little Montessori class. This time 
the little ones looked brighter and better, except one 
little girl who was morose, sickly, and miserable beyond 
description. All the other children held each other’s 
hands, sang, and turned round gaily, while she walked 
listlessly. It was months since I had met such a sickly 
child in Aintoura, so I went to her and taking her thin 
cheeks gently in my hands, I lifted her face to mine. It 
was that of J ale, the happiest and healthiest child some 
months ago. 

“Whj^ don’t 5’'ou sing, Jale?” 

“I have no more a mother.” 

Sister Ismet had cauglit a bad form of malaria, and as 
it had affected her lungs for the time being, she was 
removed to a higher place in I.,ebanon. And it was that 
separation which had brought Jale into this shocking 
state. Fortunately I had known to tlie full in my own 
life the effect of moral distress on cliildish sensitiveness. 

“You come and be my guest in Beirut sometime. 
Your mother will be getting well before long,” I said. 

“You will be my mother,” she said, as if deciding on 
something which depended only on her. 

As I was taking leave of the teachers I lieard a series 
of unearthly shrieks which followed each other in rai)id 
succession. 

“It is, dale’s voice,” explained Dr. lioutfi. “The 
child is a wonderful, almost uncanny creature, who will 
have her own way absolutely.” 

464 




I \ 



EDUCATIONAL WOEK IN SYEIA 

I remembered strangely the night in the house of 
Yildiz when I had forced Mehemmed Effendi to take 
me into Abdul Hamid’s palace where my father was. 
It was the same case ; some one had told Jale that I had 
forgotten her and gone away. 

As she came holding Dr. Loutfi’s hand and hugging 
the tiny bundle containing her belongings, I realized 
that her little hooked nose was red with crying, and the 
rebelliously determined look of her eyes was different 
from that of other children. 

She took possession of me, of Der-Nassira, of the sis- 
ters in no time. She used to have her little bed laid out 
in the room where I worked from which my bedroonj^ 
was separated by a thin partition of boards. 

“Are you there, mother?” cried a shrill voice at night 
several times, and she only left me in peace after I had 
assured her of my presence. 

She chiefly occupied my mind as she sat in the eve- 
nings on my homely sofa, sniffing at the flowers with 
epicurean joy, and singing a song which she herself had 
made, words and music: “Send us Helva [sweets], 
let us eat it, emin, aman, emin, aman.” The last words 
were made up for the sake of the rime. 

Vedi Sabra came to my room and played some of the 
airs from “The Shepherds of Canaan” and asked about 
the Turkish of the songs, while the school was feverishly 
preparing for the play. Some of the airs of the musical 
play were taken from the popular Arab songs, which I 
thought were charming. And it was usually those airs 
which Jale also enjoyed. She seemed to love the mild 

465 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

and gentle manners of the Arab musician, and affected a 
most protecting air toward him, ordering coffee for him 
whenever he came in. Sabra himself seemed intensely 
interested. 

It was on one of those evenings a strange thing hap- 
pened. Sabra was telling me in French that he often 
wondered about the nationality of the little girl. She 
had Eastern Anatolia written all over her person; the 
hooked nose, the dominating will, the passion all denoted 
it; but what was she? Who had made her cover that 
tremendous space and thrown her into the very heart of 
Arab lands? Whether it was the effect of our curiosity 
on her sensitive mind, or the influence of that song of the 
revolution of 1839, an air of thundering, bloody terror, 
and the cry of a wild mob which Sabra had adapted to 
the words of Joseph’s brothers, in their murderous mood, 
“Let us kill him, let us kill him,” which Sabra played 
and sang after we had talked about her, I cannot tell. 
But before Sabra had struck the last note, she was on 
her feet, running hither and thither, in extreme excite- 
ment, and enacting the bloody scene which had hitherto 
lain in her subconsciousness. 

“We run, we run,” she said, running as she spoke. 
“There is Said, Said who pounds meat; so and so” — 
pounding — “who cuts the throats of the sheep” — imitat- 
ing the action on her little throat. “There is Hadije; 
she holds my hands and runs; the men from the church 
must not hear us” ; she tiptoed with intense earnestness. 
“They are coming out, the Armenians are coming out, 
they take Said, they cut his throat, so and so, they put 

466 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

the knife through Hadije, they turn and turn the knife, 
all her bowels are out.” 

She was perspiring with emotion and passion, but she 
did not cry. We were spellbound with horror; she had 
at last revealed her identity. She was evidently a 
Kurdish girl who had seen Said and Hadije, her parents, 
who were trying to run away, murdered by the Ar- 
menians coming out of a church. Neither Sabra nor I 
shall ever forget the words and the acting. 

I took her on my lap and tried to make her sing the 
little song of Helva,^ and I tried to sing with her and 
gently rock her to oblivion of the vision of horror which 
she held in her tiny head. 

“Said who pounds meat is my father; Hadije with the 
bowels on the earth is my mother,” she said before she 
began to sing the song of Helva. 

In connection with another Kurdish child I have an- 
other dramatic but happy picture fixed in my mind. It 
happened in one of my last visits to Aintoura. After 
the announcement that the parents able to prove their 
identity could take their children away, some Armenian 
women had appeared. But as there are very few Turks 
and Kurds in Beirut and Lebanon, none of these na- 
tionals had turned up to claim their children. On that 


2 We took Jale to Constantinople. I meant to adopt her, but as she bad 
trachoma in her eyes, Dr. Adnan thought that I should be exposing my 
own boys to tlie incurable di.sease if I kept her. Makboule Ilanum, our 
matron in Aintoura, had her in the orphanage of Tchaglian. In 1919 the 
international commission for the separation of the children pronounced her 
Armenian, with quite a number of other Turki.sh children. *“Ask Mother 
Halid6,” she had said to the commission; “she will tell you I am not 
Armenian.” 

4(&gt;7 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

day as I walked out of the orphanage, I saw a man and 
a woman standing by the door and looking very differ- 
ent from the natives of Syria, although they were 
dressed in a way that was familiar to me. The man was 
tall with a long black beard, and he had the picturesque 
and colored costume of the Kurds, although in rags. 
The woman was his wife. He asked me if this was an 
orphanage and if it contained Kurdish children. Then 
he took from his breast a carefully folded but very worn 
and torn paper. It was his identity card and was going 
to pieces. He was from near Erzeroum, and in the emi- 
gration when the Armenian General Antranik had 
come, his child Hassan was lost. The pair had walked 
all about Anatolia going from one orphanage to another 
in search of little Hassan. The paper was marked all 
over with red ink by the institutions he had passed with 
this sentence, “The child Hassan not being in this or- 
phanage.” This was the last orphansige they were to 
come to. As Dr. Loutfi went into the buildings with the 
precious paper in his hands, my heart was beating as 
much as those of the old pair. In half an hour Dr. 
Loutfi walked back holding by the hand a rather 
delicate-looking child in a clean apron and shoes. The 
huge pair seemed framed in the ruddy blaze of the moun- 
tain evening; at the sight of the child they fell on their 
knees and opened their long arms, and the child crept 
hastily into their broad bosoms. Thus Ramazan, the 
son of Abdullah, found his little son called Hassan in 
Aintoura. 


468 



EDUCATIONAL WORK IN SYRIA 

I asked Dr. Bliss and Mr. Dodge to come to see me 
and begged them to take Aintoura under the protection 
of the Red Cross as soon as fighting began in Beirut. 
The children were supplied for four months, thanks to 
Major Kemal, and the director with some of the staff 
was going to stay till the last moment. I also begged 
them to pass the Armenian children to the Armenians 
through the Red Cross, and the Moslem children to the 
Red Crescent in Constantinople, if the necessary mo- 
ment came. They promised, and they kept their prom- 
ise. They sent up Mr. Crawford in the name of the 
Red Cross when the Allied armies entered. This was 
my last service to Aintoura. . , 

On the twentieth of February the school gave “The 
Shepherds of Canaan.” 

Children all over the world are good actors, but the 
Arab children beat them all in certain ways. They 
work themselves into an absolute belief of reality. Any 
play which has dramatic passion, tragedy, and romance 
can be trusted to Arab children, and in most cases they 
will perform it to perfection. Ellen, a girl of thirteen, 
with a contralto that dominated the orchestra, most 
strange for her size and age, acted Judas. Her face, 
one of those fair ovals with starlike, warm blue eyes and 
golden complexion, had wonderful dr.amatic expression. 
Her sister, only eleven, a milder and gentler copy of 
Ellen, looked like a very picture of the Christ;-child. 

The stage had a real palm-tree and thick red sand. 

469 



MEMOIBS OF HALlDi: EDIB 

The children in their gorgeous robes, in brilliant redi 
and blues and orange, their feet bare, imagined them- 
selves in the desert, feeling the murderous jealousy 
of Joseph’s brothers plotting to sell or kill Joseph. In 
the last scene when they sang out the air that all Syria 
knew, “Let us kill him, let us kill him,” I felt really 
anxious for the life of the little girl Joseph. The fierce 
contortions on their Semitic faces, their murderous 
hands playing around Joseph like lightning, and poor 
Joseph running and trying to escape in real and unut- 
terable horror brought down the house. Then the per- 
formance passed to the audience. Some one got up and 
^began to thunder in oratorical Arabic. “Feyad, 
Feyad,” went in a whisper through the public. Syria’s 
great poet and speaker so far had kept away from every- 
thing connected with the Turks. Now he was not only 
there but was paying the greatest tribute, and at a mo- 
ment when the rule of the Turk seemed surely at an end. 
Speech after speech followed his, and it was a thor- 
oughly Arabic audience. It was dark l&gt;efore they began 
to go, and they sang Fikret’s “We are a brave na- 
tion ... we are Ottomans,” with a sincerity that re- 
minded one of 1908. 

Thirteen times Beirut forced the school to give that 
play. As we were only to remain a few days more, we 
gave it twice a day, and the audience always left singing 
some familiar air, mostly that of little Joseph, “For all 
times.” On the lamp-posts in the streets of Beirut the 
name of Ellen was written, and Sabra was lionized and 
the Arabs quite happy over the little play, “The Shep- 

470 



EDUCATIONAL WOEK IN SYEIA 

herds of Canaan,” which hecame theirs. My friend 
Selim Sabit always had tears in his shrewd little eyes. 
“The one who reads between the lines has unveiled our 
hearts,” he said.® 

I put my little actors in a lorry and took them to 
Aintoura for a night. The boy musicians of Aintoura 
used to come and play for Der-Nassira, usually on Fri- 
days. This was the turn of Der-Nassira to entertain 
them. In the carpentering hall, where a stage was im- 
provised, the little actors sang and acted to Aintoura 
and kept them in delight. 

&gt; 

On the fourth of March, thanks to the help and kind- 
ness of Djemal Pasha the Second, we left Syria for 
Constantinople. Thus ended our work in Syria, and we 
left the Arab lands amid very sincere farewells and some 
tears. 

3 Selim Sabit always called me “the one who reads between the lines.*’ 
In 1919 he had opened a competition in the Arabic papers of Beirut, He 
was to pay ten pounds to the writer who would express best what “the 
one W’ho rends between the lines” means. 1 received two letters from him 
in Angora in 1921. One was full of pictures. It was marvelous how he had 
managed to put in water-colors the entire Arab land with palms, sands, 
tents, bananas, and palms. Before I could answer I heard of his death. 


471 



EPILOGUE 


Of the events during the interval between March and 
the armistice, signed in Mudros in October, there is not 
much to tell. It was a historical entr’acte. The cur- 
tain had fallen on the Ottoman empire and its last repre- 
sentatives, the Unionists. 

There was expectation behind the sense of great 
loss. The Unionist regime had begun with a bloodless 
, -^“volution promising liberty, justice, equality, and fra- 
ternity. It had brought both the sublime and tlie in- 
fernal to Turkish lands and Turkish people. And 
after it had passed away, the Turkish people were wait- 
ing for the curtain to rise again and reveal a new and 
pacific Turkey in which the gi-eat achievements of 1908 
should stand forth, cleansed and purified by the blood 
and sacrifice of Turkey’s great sons. 

How the new era began, and what was the scene en- 
acted must be told as a separate tale — the tale of one of 
the greatest epics of modern Europe! 
