XII 


SOME PUBLIC AND PEKSONAL EVENTS, 1909-12 

I HAVE a painful memory of my home-coming to 
Sultan Tepe on my return from England. The 
little boys stood with their backs to the garden 
wall, holding hands. Whether it was fancy or reality I 
could not tell, but the peach-like coloring of Hassan’s 
face seemed to have a.ssumed a delicate tinge, and his 
usually round cheeks looked sunken. That very night 
I realized fully what a bloody revolution means to a 
child’s delicate nervous system. In the middle of the 
niglit I woke with a start to hear Hassan talking 
deliriously in his sleep. It was a frantic appeal to the 
soldiers not to kill me, and he repeated it all the time 
with the accent of unutterable misery and fear which 
only a child can have in its voice. In the morning he 
had a very high fever, and it j)roved to he typhoid. 
This time I was so completely occu])ied with nursing 
the child that I slipped out of the world of affairs and 
barely realized the great and exciting change which 
the new regime was undertaking. 

I wrote “Sevie Talib” during the long watches of the 
night. Hassan’s case was not very dangerous, hut on 
account of the shock he had received his nerves were 


295 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

in a deplorable condition. His delirium and his help, 
less terror brought me nearer to understanding childreo 
in similar cases of suffering in later years. 

The book was published in the winter. The fact 
tliat I had dared to expose social shams and conventions 
brought down on my head a volley of criticism, lint 
the book’s popularity was equal to the severity of the 
attacks. It was about this time that I liad an invita- 
tion from Prince Medjid to visit him and his wife in 
his house near Chamlidja. Prince Medjid was the 
most popular prince then in Turkey. A clever mu- 
sician and painter, a highly cultivated man, both in 
Oriental and European literature, a skilled horseman 
and a tender-heai’ted human being, these attrihiiles 
made him very much to be desired as a ruler. Put he 
was rather far down the line of succession, being then the 
sixth I believe. His invitation to me was not merely 
an invitation to a writer, it was to an old acquaintance. 
When I was three years old and he (piite a young man 
we had known each other. I had a blurred memory 
of a wonderful chandelier, very spacious halls with 
heavy silk furniture and gilded mirror.s, and a young 
man who wore his fez very much on one side and who 
held me on his knees and teased me ealling me 
“naughty,” while tall women in long trains and high 
head-dresses glided about silently on the highly polished 
floors. I seemed also to remember an immense garden, 
a pond, weeping willows, and several swings with fair 
Circassian girls swinging in them. Somehow after I 
went to see the prince and the princess in their jiaiaec 

296 



SOME PUBLIC AND PERSONAL EVENTS, 1909-12 

I could never locate these places, though the memory 
of them still haunted me. 

I shall never forget the feeling of uneasiness and of 
being entirely out of jilace in a palace which over- 
whelmed me. When I saw that the prince and his 
stately wife were quite as nervous as myself I recov- 
ered. Prince Med j id seemed agreeably excited over 
the new regime, which allowed him to meet people and 
move about like any ordinary human being. So far 
he had been buried in his library and had only been able 
to ride about within the limits of his own large park. 

“I feel like a new doll taken out of a box and told to 
move and speak,” he said. I was glad to be once more 
eonlirmed in my early belief that however great the 
position of a man may be it is wrong to remove him 
too far from the habits and lives of his fellow-men. 

Although the kind and affectionate manners of the 
])rince and the princess never changed, T felt oppressed 
whenever I visited tliem in Dolma-Bagtchc. They 
ouictly dropped out of my life after the prince became 
heir to the throne, though I did see him again in sad cir- 
eiunstances of which 1 shall sjicak later. 

I was at that time writing a series of ai’ticles on the 
educational (picstion of the day, which was the subject 
diat interested me more than any other. The articles 
had evidently attracted the attention of Said Bey, who 
was the counselor of the ministry of education, and he 
called on me one day and tried to persuade me to give 
some of my time to teaching. He esiiecially Avanted me 

297 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

to see the normal school for girls and to propose some 
changes. I had never thought of teaching and did 
not care much for the idea, but it seemed to me that 
the call to the educated Turks to teach in the era of 
reform was like the call to military service. It led me 
to go to the normal school and study its conditions. 

I visited and studied the school with Nakie Hanurn. 
She was an old graduate of the normal school and had 
been for some time a teacher in the American College, 
Avhere she had assimilated during her training there all 
that was best and most applicable to school manage- 
ment in Turkey. EndoAvcd with intelligence, charac- 
ter, and constructive ability, she developed into one of 
our best organizers. Her natural understanding and 
knoAvledge of the students and of the teachers of the 
time fitted her especially for the task. She ivas ap- 
pointed director of the normal school, and it was with 
her that Ave carried out the reform which the ministry 
of education accepted in my report. 

At first the school Avas in Ak-Scrai, an old dilapidated 
building, and its dominant teaching features Avere Ara- 
bic, Persian domestic science, and a thorough instruc- 
tion in religion. It needed a curriculum Avith a newer 
and more scientific spirit, a living language, and a more 
modern atmosphere and equipment. The most vital 
change was to be the development of a new s])irit in 
the Turkish student. A new sense of responsibility and 
of cooperation, a new self-respect in the child, as Avell 
as a more earnest and open-minded and less autocratic 

298 



SOME PUBLIC AND PERSONAL EVENTS, 1909-12 

attitude in the teacher were necessary before the new 
education in Turkey could take shape. 

No one could have done it better than Nakie Hanum. 
She knew her human material so well that she was able 
to evolve the new spiritual liberty of the child without 
too much destruction or exaggeration. Time has showix 
us that the point of equilibrium between the teacher and 
the taught is very delicate and of most vital importance. 
If it is too much on the teacher’s side it creates an auto- 
cratic, tyrannical, and repressive system of education; 
if it is too much on the student’s side it ci'eates complete 
anarchy. Without a proper adjustment of the relations 
between teachers and students, without the right de- 
gree of discipline and order, one can neither teach 
nor learn seriously. 

Nakie Ilanum’s teaching corps showed real self- 
abnegation and made very serious efforts, conscious as 
they were of the importance of their part as pioneers 
in a new realm of education for women. I entered the 
school as a teacher of the principles of education, and 
my first contact with the teaching and student classes 
in Turkey began at that time. 

It was a year of liveliest interest. In two years the 
educational department saw tlie necessity of a girls’ col- 
lege, and as the normal school had shown real progress 
it was turned into a college, and a new normal boarding- 
school was opened in another part of Istamboul. 

For five long years I was a teacher in the girls’ col- 
lege, teaching the history and principles of education 

299 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDiE EDIB 

and ethics to the young and some other things which one 
teaches behind the lines, things which are necessary if 
one means to build new country. If I taught I also 
learned, and in the give and take my students formed 
and molded me as much as I did them. It was with 
the help of some of the students of those years that we 
were able to modernize and organize the mosque schools 
some years later with Nakie Ilanum, and it was with 
the aid of the same element that I organized the schools 
and the orphanage in Syria, of which I shall speak in 
coming chapters. 

Before I pass on to another subject I must say that 
Said Bey — the counselor of the ministry of education, 
several times minister of public instruction, and a well 
known professor in the University of Istamboul — must 
have the honor of being the j)ioneer advocate of the 
modernization of women’s education in New Turkey. 

After bitter moments caused by the severe repression 
of the reaction, the Ilakki Pasha cabinet came into 
power in 1910 with a big program actuated by tl.e 
spirit of reconciliation. Ilakki Pasha, who was an au- 
thority on international law, and who had stood the 
test of Abdul Hamid’s reign, seemed the proper person 
to take the responsibility for the moment. Neither too 
young to antagonize the old, nor too old to stand against 
new ideas of progress, he had the confidence and the 
respect of all. A limited number of the extremists of 
the Union and Progress were the only peo^jlc against 
him. 


300 



SOME PUBLIC AND PEKSONAL EVENTS, 1909-12 

In announcing his program he gave as his motto the 
following verse from the Koran: “Allah has ordered 
to rule according to justice and mercy.” But he had no 
time to carry out this axiom. The Tripolitan trouble 
— the sudden seizure of Tripoli by the Italians — roused 
the popular anger against him so violently that he had 
to resign immediately. lie was accused of not having 
foreseen the event in time, and of not having taken any 
diplomatic or military action to prevent it. 

The constitutional reform in Turkey, which aroused 
the general sympathy of the world, somehow disap- 
pointed the powers, who had so neatly planned the di- 
vision of the sick man’s estate. One after another they 
hastened to snatch from Turkey what they could. Dur- 
ing the first months after the establishment of the new 
regime in 1908 Austria had broken the feeble thread 
which bound Bosnia-IIerzegovina to Turkey. An im- 
mense excitement broke out through the entire country, 
followed by acute disillusion. It was the first shock 
to the childish belief that once a New Turkey arose 
the powers and the aggressive little nations who sur- 
rounded her would allow for the difficulties of the re- 
form period, and give her at least a short time to find 
herself. I remember the wild demonstrations in Istani- 
houl, the speeches and street gatherings, the discarding 
of fezzes because they were of Austrian manufacture. 
Solemn vows of the eternal boycott of Austrian goods 
appeared in all the pa])crs. Everywhere in Turkey the 
crowds had worn picturesque red tops; now they wore 
home-made white caps. Although it was difficult to 

301 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

imagine anything in the way of military action against 
Austria, still Kiamil Pasha’s practical way of arrang- 
ing the dispute with Austria by accepting two millions 
of Turkish poimds angered many people as the first 
commercial act in Turkish history where a question of 
honor was involved. The Turkish government as well 
as the nation was used to fighting for lost causes, at 
whatever cost of Turkish lives, money, and other re- 
sources. The supreme point had always been the safe- 
guarding of national honor. The Turks so far had 
never conceded land without fighting for it. The vast 
lands which they had had to yield up had always been 
watered abundantly with Turkish blood. Consequently 
the practical old man, when he shoAved realism in poli- 
tics instead of the traditional patriotic idealism, aroused 
a passionate resentment. 

Before the sore feeling about Bosnia-IIerzegovina 
had been calmed, the Cretan assem])ly declare&lt;l the an- 
nexation of the island of Crete by Greece. 'I’liis 
aroused another wild outburst. I measure the general 
disappointment from the pain I personally suffered. 
A strong patriotic literature blossomed out from every 
poet’s pen. What Avould sound chauvinistic and ex- 
aggerated now then rej)resented emotion of the sinccr- 
est kind. “Crete is our life; let our blood flow,” shouted 
the youth of the country for months. Then the Italians 
seized Tripoli, and the burden of the song changed 
again. 

So in 1910, Turkey, on top of everything else, was to 

302 



SOME PUBLIC AND PEKSONAL EVENTS, 1909-12 

face the loss of vast lands in Africa. The practical 
settlement of Bosnia-Herzegovina, the helplessness of 
the government before the annexation of Crete, had al- 
ready filled the cup to the brim. Action became in- 
evitable before the outburst of public feeling. 

At first there was the usual boycott, though with even 
greater emphasis than usual. “Tanine” was one of the 
papers which went into perfect hysteria over Tripoli. 
A large list of signed vows appeared. “I will not buy 
Italian goods; I will not eat macaroni; I will not speak 
Italian . . .” was the strain in which it went on. In 
the first edition of “Handan” my editor was obliged to 
announce the change of her vacations from Sicily to 
Corfu. I even had scolding letters from Saloniki, the 
center of the revolution, for allowing a hero of mine to 
play Verdi. 

“I will not eat macaroni” cost Italy a good deal, for 
Turkey until then had consumed a great amount of 
Italian macaroni, and the opening of macaroni factories 
in Turkey probably begins at that time. 

'I’he Tripolitan affair not only somewhat diminished 
the Unionist prestige but, what was more important, it 
made the man in the street realize that reform and the 
ideal of a westernized Turkey were the cause of all the 
trouble. 

The isolated position of Bosnia-IIcrzegovlna and the 
Austrian rule that was already established there had put 
it out of the reach of the Turkish army; the island of 
Crete with its Greek majority and the very poor 

303 



MEMOIBS OF HALIS:^ EDIB 

condition of the Turkish navy * made attack in that di- 
rection impossible; the same reason made active meas- 
ures in Tripoli seem impossible when one considered die 
superiority of the Italian navy and the modern equip- 
ment of the Italian army that landed in Tripoli. Still 
every one thought that if the impenetrable desert and its 
fighting folk had been better organized and prepared, 
the Italian attack might have been rendered more diffi- 
cult. Yet the geographical position of Tripoli was 
such that after Turkey had ceased to be a powerful 
empire and lost her supremacy over the seas, it was 
doomed to fall into the hands of any Mediteranean 
power which was suffering from a surplus population 
and had a modern navy. But this fact did not diminisli 
the bitterness felt at the series of blows dealt so cruelly 
to Turkey, or the indignation at the Italian massacres 
of the defenseless Tripolitan people. 

The Young Turks saw very well that the next blow 
would come from the Balkans, that Turkey’s Maix- 
donian provinces would be snatched away from her. 
Therefore they had to think and act instantly toward 
organizing a modern army and toward doing all tliey 
could to hinder the Italian occupation. With this end 
in view they smuggled a few leading Turkish officers 
into Tripoli, who organized the native forces and made 
Tripoli uncomfortable for the invading Italian army. 

This course was very much in keeping with Turkish 

1 Abdul Aziz had almost ruined the national budget in organizing a n-ivy, 
but Abdul Hamid had ruined the navy by personal Intimidation. The 
were practically imprisoned and rusted in the Golden Horn. 

804 







SOME PUBLIC AND PEHSONAL EVENTS, 1909-12 
temperament. If the defense of Tripoli was not of 
the highest wisdom, it at least savored ot the old days 
of chivalry. From the historical point of view one may 
find three reasons which led the Young Turks to under- 
take the defense of Tripoli as they did: first, the war- 
like spirit of the Tripolitans and the atrocities com- 
mitted by the Italians in Tripoli; secondly, the loss of 
Unionist prestige, which demanded some show of high 
courage and sacrifice if it was to be regained; thirdly, 
the feeling that if no action was taken the series of spoli- 
ations would go on forever. 

Before long Enver Bey, the military attache in Berlin, 
and Fethi Bey, the military attache in Paris (both he- 
roes in 1908), came to Tripoli, and a bold defense was 
begun under their leadership. 

The Tripolitan war is the first of the great and dis- 
astrous wars which the New Turkey has sustained 
within the last fourteen years. Without sending out 
any large forces of men or of warlike resources, with a 
liandful of idealistic young officers thrown, as it were, 
into the desert, the national honor was insured and the 
Tripolitans were helped in their struggle against the 
Italian occupation, the beginning of which had been so 
bloody. The war appealed to every one in Turkey. 
Young men known as bitter anti-Unionists volunteered 
and fought under Enver and Fethi. The popularity 
of these young leaders once more rose to the height it at- 
tained in the first days of the revolution. Enver’s fame 
as the hero of Islam, and his pan-Islamic ideal, date 
from the Tripolitan struggles. His organization of the 

305 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

desert forces and his relation with the Senussi leaders 
were such tlvit if he had wished he could have been 
easily made the sultan of the Tripolitan Arabs with 
larger prospects of expanding his domains. But at the 
end of two years the Balkan war began, and the disaster 
of the Turkish arms in Macedonia brought back Enver 
and Fethi and their brother officers to defend their coun- 
try. 

In the very midst of the Tripolitan excitement tlic 
Turkish papers took ujj the Galata Serai incident, an in- 
cident which would have passed unnoticed had it not 
been that the names of Salih Zeki and Tewfik Flkret 
were involved. 

Galata Serai was one of the greatest schools for boys 
in Turke5% and including Tewfik Fikret it counted most 
of the great poets and writers among its graduates. 

Tewfik Fikret after retiring from politics had turned 
to education as the president of Galata Serai, and he was 
successfully reorganizing that establishment and putting 
his own marvelous spirit into it. lie was very much 
influenced by the new school movement in France, and 
was in favor of an individualistic Anglo-Saxon educa- 
tional ideal, somewhat in the line of Desmoulins’ prin- 
ciples. fn fact Desmoulins has affected very strongly 
a certain set of politicians and intellectuals in Turkey 
who were called Decentralists, and their leader was 
Prince Sebahheddine. 

Tewfik Fikret had obtained very fine results from his 
work in Galata Serai when an administrative difficulty 

306 



SOME PUBLIC AND PERSONAL EVENTS, 1909-12 

involving a difference of opinion with the minister of 
public instruction made him resign. The minister at 
the moment was, as a savant, an equally prominent man, 
and the Young Turks maintained a neutral attitude to- 
ward the disagreement between Fikret and the minister, 
Emroullah Effendi. 

Emroullah Effendi begged Salih Zeki Bey to accept 
the post vacated by Fikret. In those days there was a 
strict tradition about the presidency of Galata Serai; 
only men prominent in letters or science could fill it. 
Salih Zeki Bey, after asking Fikret if his decision to 
leave the school was final, accepted. The public opinion 
divided itself into two camps, the old students of 
Salih Zeki and the followers of Tewfik Fikret. A long 
and violent series of discussions occupied the news- 
papers. It w'as called the “difference between the poet 
and the savant.” Salih Zeki kept the post till he became 
the rector of the university and the counselor of the min- 
istry of public instruction. But this made Tewfik Fik- 
ret’s separation from the Union and Progress final. 

In 1910 I was having serious domestic trouble. I 
felt that I was obliged to make a great change in my life, 
a change which I could not easily force myself to face. 
Salih Zeki Bey’s relation with and atlachinent to a 
teacher looked serious enough to make it seem conceiv- 
able that he contemplated marriage. A believer in 
monogamy, in the inviolability of name and home, I felt 
it to be my duty to retire from what I had believed would 
he my home to the end of my life. But knowing Salih 

307 



MEMOIRS or HALIDE EDIB 

Zeki Bey’s passing caprices of heart and temperament 
I wanted to be absolutely sure, before breaking up my 
home, of the stability of his latest attachment. I there- 
fore took the little boys with me and went to Yanina 
near my father with the intention of waiting there for 
a few months. 

At my return Salih Zeki Bey told me that he had 
married the lad}', but to my great surprise he added thaf 
polygamy was necessary in some cases, and he asked 
me to continue as his first wife. There was a long and 
painful struggle between us, but at last he consented to 
a divorce, and I left what for nine years had been iny 
home. 

It was a cold April night when I drove with the boys 
to Fatih, to the big old-fashioned house of Xakic 
Hanum, where I stayed till I found a suitable house. 
I\liat now seems an almost ordinary incident in a 
woman’s life was then of supreme importance and the 
cause of great suffering to me. ]\Iy foolish heart nearly 
broke. I think the women of Turkey must be more 
used to divorce nowadays, for one hears little of broken 
hearts in the many divorce cases that now take place 
there. 

Nakie Ilanum’s house was in a narrow .street with 
other typically Turkish houses with low eaves and many 
windows, but it was the highest in that street, and from 
the room where for some time I lay sick I could see the 
upper part of a single dark cypress over which the 
needle-like tops of the minarets of the Fatih mosque 
pierced the blue sky. I heard the continual creak of 

308 



SOME PUBLIC AND PEBSONAL EVENTS, 1909-12 

wood as an old donkey turned round and round draw- 
ing water from some deep well in the opposite gardens. 
Besides this primitive melody and the call from the min- 
arets of F atih, there was virtually no soimd in the street. 

Before long I found a house in Fazli Pasha, a steep 
but broad street on the southern part of Istamboul lead- 
ing to the sea. I could look out from my bed upon the 
expanse of grayish sea with the blue haze at its horizon 
and the ruddy glows of the sunsets over it. 

I had been in low health for the whole year, feeling 
feverish and very tired, but I had not paid much atten- 
tion to it. A medical consultation, however, showed 
that it was rather a serious chest weakness, and my con- 
tinual fever and troublesome cough as well as my severe 
headaches obliged me to stay in bed for three months. 

Salih Zeki Bey’s second marriage had aroused such 
personal curiosity that every eye probed me hard to see 
how I bore my own trouble after having written so much 
about other ])eople’s. I remember one fat woman in 
particular among my acquaintances who used to come 
with stories about the love-making of the new couple and 
wateh my face w ith obvious curiosity. I neitber ques- 
tioned nor commented; I had a strange feeling of won- 
der at her apparent desire to see me suffer. I passed 
the test of vivisection rather successfully I believe, for 
iny calmness and apparent lack of interest made her 
after a time drop the subject. Still it was a great pity 
that every one spoke of me as having consuniption at 
this moment of my life, for consumption is ridiculously 
associated in the public mind with disappointed love. 

309 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDlB 

I allowed myself no sentimental self-analysis or mor- 
bid philosophizing at this time, such as I had occasion- 
ally indulged in during the other serious illnesses I had 
gone through. I meant to conquer all physical ills, and 
I meant to make a home for my sons equal to the one 
they had had to leave, and to surround them with a 
happy and normal home atmosphere. I was deter- 
mined to live, and not to leave them to the sort of lil'e 
which children have when their mother is dead or crushed 
in spirit. 

As I write these lines I feel as if I were writing of the 
life of a young woman who has passed away. I see her 
l 3 dng on a simple bed of high pillows; I see her strug- 
gling to write her daily articles or short stories; and 1 
hear her cough continually. Then the evening lights 
blaze over the waters, the little boys come back, and she 
makes painful efforts to conquer her wild desire to kiss 
and hug them. They chatter about the American school 
they attend, and finally they go down to dine with 
granny, while she is left alone in the twilight room, with 
the utter mysterious loveliness and strange longings of 
the evening. She looks at ])ain with a quizzical smile, 
while she listens to the voices of the evening in the 
streets. The sellers of yogurt, cadaif, the chanting of 
beggars, the footsteps of workers who pass down to 
Koum-Kapou, and at last the call of the childish voices 
and the patter of small feet scampering in the dusk in 
those large, lonely streets. 

My own favorite among the voices belonged to a blind 
Arab beggar, and it was only on Fridaj' evenings that 

310 



SOME PUBLIC AND PERSONAL EVENTS, 1909-12 

he came. I knew that he leaned against the corner of 
the house, one hand against his cheek, while his gut- 
tural melody lengthened into an infinite wail, which yet 
had something of the desert and its lonely passion as it 
penetrated the evening air. It was mostly a religious 
chant, a wail and a complaint in wondrous simple mel- 
ody, calling to the Prophet, '‘Y a Resoulallah, Y a Res- 
(ndallah.” The “Allah” was long and died away in a 
hissing sound. In no other musical experience have I 
ever had this almost uncanny contact with the musician. 
I was perfectly aware that he felt some one listening to 
his guttural melody, for sometimes he would stop 
for a moment and murmur searchingly and low, as if he 
were trying to reach out for the soul-contact which had 
snapped for a moment: “Where art thou? Art thou 
listening?” 

Then his stick struck the pavement, and he staggered 
on silently in the manner of the blind. 

Six months later when I was traveling and for the 
first time was not there to hear him, he said to the cook, 
who gave him the usual coin, “She is not up-stairs any 
more.” 

In the autumn of 1910 I was once more going on with 
my lectures and lessons, and the cough and fever had 
gone, llesides my lessons and writings I had become 
a busy public speaker. 


311 



