IV 


THE WISTERIA-COVERED HOUSE AGAIN 

T he large liall and the double stairs no longer 
had the same charming light of the old days. 
The house looked entirely different. Granny’s 
room no longer had that pleasant white-covered divan; 
it was Ahla’s room and had European furniture. 

The whole thing brought hack my first visit to Abla 
when she had just married father. Host of her family 
were there, and I had the feeling of being a stranger 
whose face and manners are being closely watched. I 
(lid not particularly belong to anybody in the house; no 
one was interested in what 1 did, and no one would give 
me that individual attention which Tei'ze had lavished 
ii])on me. In a dim way 1 felt that the house would be 
suspicious of me and I should be left alone as little as 
possible with my father. 'I’lie house would suspect me 
of influencing father in 'reize’s favor. 

Father himself was as jovfid as a boy when he saw 
me; and he ran up-stairs with me to show the rooms he 
had had specially prepared for me. Tei’zc’s old room 
was turned into a study-room, with a large writing-table, 
•lice English arm-chairs, and a rocking-chair which 
eharmed me most of all; while Uncle Kemal’s room was 
to be my bedroom. I remember the brown bed-curtains 

155 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

which I used to draw and sit inside of whenever I felt 
out of sorts. There I felt as secluded from the outside 
world as a nun in a nunnery. Father had given much 
thought and personal care to the furnishing of the rooms. 
And I felt comforted and assured that after all he was 
a familiar and loving figure in this sti’ange atmosphere; 
so I hugged him fast and tried hard to gulp down the 
foolish tears which threatened me so often in coming 
back to the old 2 Jlace. 

I slept alone in a room for the first time in my life 
that night, and gazing at the night-light which always 
reminded me somehow of Queen Victoria’s profile, I 
wondered about the kind of life I was going to have in 
this house. I was to begin Arabic lessons the next day. 
A well known clerical official called Shukri Effendi had 
invented a new system for teaching Arabic grammar, 
and he was going to try bis .system on me. I should 
soon understand the meaning of the Koran, I said to 
myself, and I should be able to i)ray in the right way. 
I thought of granny’s caution : “That woman does not 
pray at all ; no one is religious in the jiroj&gt;er way among 
those i)eople. Do not forget to say thy^ sures at night 
before thou goest to sleep.” The stirh were from 
A1 Fala(|, and as my Arabic lessons went on I began to 
realize the beauty of the words, which till now had been 
nothing but soothing sounds: 

Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of Dawn, 

From tlie evil of the utterly dark night when it comes, 

And from the evil of those who cast wicked suggestions on 
firm resolutions. . . . 


1.56 



THE WISTERIA-COVEEED HOUSE AGAIN 

I remember falling asleep at last while imagining the 
letters I meant to write to Teize. 

The next morning I missed Teize very much. There 
was no one to help me dress, no one to comb my hair. I 
was at that rather ugly stage of a child’s development 
when the features seem exaggerated into sharp edges; 
and as I looked into the glass, I felt the full weight of 
lliis disadvantage. The beauty of the blue-eyed people 
(k)wn-stairs, who had criticized my looks so eruelly years 
ago, frightened and humiliated me as if it had all hap- 
pened only yesterday. JMy sense of ugliness over- 
whelmed me. I was so clums}' with my hair, which was 
much thicker than I liked, that I remember cutting 
pieces off to try to improve matters. Tlie memory of 
my helplessness at that time impressed itself upon me 
enough to make me insist on my own boys’ doing their 
dressing for themselves when they were hardly more 
than babies. 

Ahla’s niece Feizic, a large blonde girl, gradually 
grew into something like a playmate, and 1 took to play- 
ing dolls will) her whenever I got the time from hooks 
and lessons. I avoided ai)pearing before ..Vbla's visitors 
as much as I could, my timidity being doubled by the 
sense of my personal plainness, which soon amounted 
almost to torture. 

My xVrabic teacher was an elderly gentleman with an 
enormous white turban and a gray beard. Ilis system 
proved excellent, and I soon got to understand my 
Koran. Hut this had an unpleasant side to it. lie 
often asked strange gentlemen. iVrabic scholars, to come 

l.)7 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

and listen to our lessons. He wanted to prove the 
efficiency of his system. Fortunately I was not very 
self-conscious with men; they did not notice one’s looks 
as women did. Shukri Effendi approved of my pious 
spirit, and after each lesson he gave me a talk on the 
holiness and beauty of Islamism. Islamism taught by 
an orthodox person is very clear and full of common 
sense, hut like everything very orthodox it lacked a cer- 
tain mystic emotion, and this led me to long as I grew 
older for the mystic tendencies of the dissenting spirit 
of the tckkes.^ I learned enough from my teacher, 
however, to make me fairly correct in my daily ablutions 
and daily prayers. Every Thursday and Monday 
afternoon I used to sit in my^ room and chant Yasin • for 
the souls of the dead. The large hall, with the five 
rooms opening off it where my own rooms happened to 
be, was entirely deserted except for myself, and my voice 
had a way of resounding to its furthest corners, like 
a strange and searching call for the years that were gone. 

Abla and her family had a close and intimate home 
life of their own which was like a door closed in my face; 
and I felt keenly the fact of being excluded and alone. 
This threw me more than ever to my own internal re- 
sources and thoughts, which at that time had a deeply 
religious side to them. The need of some internal sup- 


1 Tekkes are Moslem institution.s, somelhinp: of the character of Christian 
monasteries. The dervishes who are the members of them arc 
tinguished not only for great religious fervor but also for non-orthodox 
iny.stieal tendencies. 

2 ^'asin is the name of the chapter in the Koran which is chanted for 
the souls of the dead. 


158 



THE WISTEEIA-COVEEED HOUSE AGAIN 

port and sympathy, as well as the development of my 
intellect and reason, groping as they were for the mean- 
ing of things which seemed so far enigmatic, awakened 
in me an intense soul life. 1 did a great deal of rather 
precocious thinking at this period. Hamdi Effendi, of 
whom I will speak later, intensified this feeling by his 
constant philosophical and mystical conversations. I 
knew no other way of thinking out the puzzling signifi- 
cance of life which was tlius dawning on me, except by 
calling to my aid the religious dogmas which I was being 
taught. I performed my obligatory iVrabic prayers 
very carefully at the set times, but after each one I had 
a Turkish prayer, almost a talk, with Allah. I asked 
him mostly questions about the reasons which control 
iiieu’s cruel acts and thoughts, and about the position of 
the non-Moslems, w'hich seemed to me the primary in- 
justice of my religion. Why not the same measure of 
goodness and holiness for every one!' 1 have found to 
niy dismay, after a rather com])lete experience, that no 
tloetrinc, religious or otherwise, includes humanity in 
the sense my childish faith and longing required. 

It was perhaps my objection to the exclusiveness of 
orthodox Jslamism which made me love the simple and 
heautiful birth poem of Mohammed by an early 
sixteenth-century poet of the mystic order of the 
Mevlevi-Suleiman Dede. Ife too must have suffered 
Iroin the narrowness M'hich shuts the doors of heaven on 
some people, to attribute to the baby ^lohammed the 
sublime pity and universality of love. lie makes 
J^^mine, the mother of iMohammcd, describe the child. 


159 



MEMOIRS OF HAEID]^ EDIB 

when only a few minutes old, as having its little face 
turned to the wall, its eyes full of tears, mourning and 
praying for the low and sinful who were destined to 
eternal fire. 

The old lady’s house, where granny had left me on 
the day of my arrival at the wisteria-covered house, be- 
came a refuge for me whenever I wanted to escape both 
from the unnatural tension of my inner self and frotn 
the uncongenial atmosphere of my home. Peyker 
Haniun herself was from the palace like Teize and had 
been the chief acrobat in Sultan Aziz’s Music and The- 
ater Department. A strong healthy dark woman with 
a heart and tongue of incredible frankness, she was al- 
most adored by her friends. Her acrobatic feats in the 
palace were legends of marvel. She must have had 
great musical talent as well, for she played on the piano 
very beautifully, turning without pause from one opera 
to another, mostly Verdi and Bellini. Her best })er- 
formance I thought was “Carmen.” I cannot say 
whether it was my extreme impressionability at the time, 
but it still seems to me that I have never heard “Car- 
men” played by any one else with the same go and rhyth- 
mical charm. All this was by ear, for she could not read 
a note. 

Besides these attractive qualities she dared to be her- 
self among the chains of conventions and the social tyr- 
anny of the time, keeping a just measure and avoiding 
too much gossip. She received her husband’s men 
friends with him, and could talk on all subjects with 
intuitive and intelligent understanding. In fact she 

160 





THE WI8TEEIA-C0VEEED HOUSE AGAIN 

had something of the man in her, although she was a 
very capable housekeeper. Her youth, which had been 
passed in lifting tremendous weights, had given her, 
with her great physical strength, something of the frank 
charm of one of the powerful things of nature. 

Her husband Hamdi Effendi, whom I have already 
mentioned, was one of the many old men friends of 
my childhood. He had a mystical mind and called him- 
self a pantheist. He loved music when his wife played, 
and he talked of pantheism to me, interpreting all hu- 
man and natural phenomena by it. His talk soothed 
and somewhat interested me for a long time, but the 
moment came when I used to lose all sense of who is who 
and what is what, and I saw Allah, the familiar objects, 
chairs and tables, trees and water, the universe, and all 
the rest of us in a hopeless jumble. 

Hamdi Bey and Peyker Ilanum’s house had a clean 
comfortable Turkish air, and rather clever people fre- 
quented it. Hamdi Effendi had been the personal 
friend of some of the early martyrs of liberty and spoke 
from personal knowledge of their lives in prison and un- 
der torture. I got my early notions of liberty in his 
humble salon and learned that the powerful sultan in 
Tildiz was a hated despot, destroying all who try to 
, ive happiness and freedom to the Turkish people. 

The old couple had a stalwart son in the military 
school, and the house on Fridaj's w\as full of young 
men in uniform. As young men appeared to me to be 
very much of a repetition of the hateful little boys, I 
kept out of the house on those days. 

161 



MEMOIRS OF HALmi: EDIB 

A certain Saifet Effendi, an Albanian student, lived 
in their house in the vacations. He was considered very 
clever, and I believe he helped a great many young stu- 
dents with their work. I think of him now especially 
for Saifet Effendi was executed by the Revolutionary 
Tribunal. 

My little sister Neiliifer was working her way slowly 
into my heart. After her pretty and short babyhood 
she was in a way put aside with the arrival of the other 
little sister Nighiar. Her mother was entirely taken uj) 
with the younger child and left Neiliifer in the hands of 
the servants or of the great-grandmother. Neiliifer 
began to look like a neglected stepdaughter and was 
developing very unpleasant habits. I remember her 
biting people if she got into a rage, and tearing her own 
hair from over her temples, which made her look very 
strange. Her white face, with deep gray eyes under 
dark and straight ej'ehrows, carried the menace of a 
perpetual storm. I found her gradually coming to niy 
room and leaning against my table, watching me keenly 
at my work, till unconsciously she became an inmate of 
my room. I cannot trace the proceedings whicli 
brought her little bed beside my own, hut till I went for 
the second time to college in 1899 we slept together, and 
she became a second Nut-rat, but infinitely more loved 
and cherished. 

My first visit to Scutari was a great event. The 
whole household there had made great preparation to 
receive me with joy and festivities. There was an as- 

162 



THE WISTEEIA-COVERM) HOUSE AGAIN 

tonishing quantity of sweet dishes, and every one ex- 
amined me carefully as if I had come from a long voy- 
age. Teize said that my hair was badly combed and 
that I looked thin, which was true, but the poor thing 
herself seemed more miserable than when I left. 

It was during this visit that the great earthquake of 
1895 took place in Constantinople. I was in Teize’s 
room, absorbed in some talk of hers, when the mirrors 
and lamps began to shake. Knowing nothing about 
earthquakes I did not understand at first what it was, 
but I saw her crouch down in terror and her lips move 
in prayer. A tremendous underground sound and a 
sudden stampeding noise in the street made me run to 
the window. There on the Grande Rue of Scutari 
people were flying panic-stricken in a cloud of dust. I 
saw shopkeepers joining the crowd, as well as half-naked 
men with bath-towels around their loins and wooden 
clogs on their feet, coming from the street opposite, 
where there was a big public bath. Their clogs gave a 
certain character to the noise of the stampeding crowd, 
while a muffled groan rose at times: “Allah, Allah.” 

“Come down quick,” called granny, and I ran after 
her into the garden. As I jumped the last two steps 
to the ground a big wall crumbled down elose by, cover- 
ing us with dust. 

Not understanding the extent of the danger we were 
in, I was rather interested in what was happening. I 
remember going to a swing which I had made for myself 
in the garden and quietly swinging there till an un- 
earthly sound of a pipe playing a tune in most discordant 

163 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

notes made my hair stand on end with terror. For 
all of a sudden a passage in “The Adventure of Death” 
came into my mind: “On the last days of the earth, 
Tejjal will rise and play on his pipe. The dead will 
leave their graves and follow him to the Judgment day.” 
This therefore was Tejjal, and the earthquake was the 
sign of the last day, for it was said of the Judgment 
day in the Koran, “When the earth is shaken with shak- 
ing, the earth will cast off her burdens.” 

Mahmoure Abla, who was the most terror-stricken in 
the house, had got the same idea, and running about in 
panic had discovered Hussein, our new Anatolian man- 
servant, playing on a crude pipe which he himself had 
made from a willow branch. “It is Hussein,” she 
shouted to me. “Don’t be afraid, Halide.” 

The next morning granny read a vivid description of 
the great catastrophe in the papers. A part of the great 
bazaar, many mosques, baths, and ever so many houses 
had fallen, crushing a tremendous number of people. 
People mostly slept out of doors for the next few days, 
but we lived in the house except Mahmoure Abla, who 
wandered in and out still imagining another .shock when- 
ever the boards creaked or some one walked down the 
corridor. Her case appeared serious to father, and I 
remember his bringing Dr. Mulich to examine her. 
Her face was drawn and gray. She took to praying 
more than her five times a day ; and indeed there was a 
general air of repentance and extra praying in every 
household. I also became affected and hardly left my 
prayer-rug, vowing to be good and specially never to 

164 



THE WI8TEEIA-C0VEBED HOUSE AGAIN 

wear silk or grand dresses again. This penitential 
mood did not last long, for a few months later Mah- 
moure Abla got married, and the whole household had 
silk costumes to celebrate the event. 

During the marriage preparations I stayed mostly in 
Scutari. The event seemed to come at a good time, for 
it took our thoughts away from the earthquake, which 
seemed to haunt us continually. Father also came of- 
tener now and spent more evenings in Scutari. As a 
matter of fact he was as much interested in the trous- 
seau as granny and talked everything over with Mah- 
moure Abla in connection with her clothes and the 
furnishing of her rooms. The bridegroom was to come 
to our house as had been done in mother’s case. 

The night before the marriage we had a little music 
for a few intimate friends who were invited to come in. 
The Gipsy Hava, who must have been the one who had 
performed for granny in her happier days, brought a 
few other Gipsy girls to play and sing. There were a 
violin, a banjo, and a tambourine. They sang, with 
the peculiar charm of Gipsy voices, the beautiful Turk- 
ish song of “My Kerchief”: 

My red kerchief, niy pur})le kerchief, wave It from garden 
to garden, but pass not from the door, 0 beloved: my heart 
is so sore. 

While this rather sad strain was sung by the solo voice 
an emphatic and lively refrain was given by the rest, the 
tambourine marking the rhythm tempo with its pretty 
rattle. 


165 



MEMOIRS OF HALmi; EDIB 

She costs five thousand gold; it is dear. It won’t be 
dear. Oh, take her and come; if she comes not beg her 
and come. 

Mahmoure Abla was fifteen, and in her genuinely 
Turkish bridal dress the next day she looked uncom- 
monly sweet. On her forehead, cheeks, and chin shone 
four diamond stars, very cleverly stuck on. On her 
head she had a diadem of brilliants ; long silver threads 
were mixed in her dark wavy hair, falling on both sides 
down to her knees. Her silver-embroidered veil hung 
down her back. She seemed unusually^ subdued as she 
kissed father’s hand in public and he put round her waist 
the traditional belt. 

At my return to Beshiktash I heard of a rather excit- 
ing event. Two Abyssinian girls, one bought for Abla 
and the other for me, were shortly to arrive from Ye- 
men. And in two day's arrive they' did. 

Abla’s was not an interesting creature, but Reshe, the 
one bought for me, was as pretty' as an Aby'ssinian girl 
could be. As a rule I believe colored people have sad 
dispositions, but when they' arrive in a foreign coiuitry 
as slaves, hardly speaking a word of its language, they 
must feel sad indeed. Granny used to say that Turkish 
chickens and Aby'ssinian children are the most delicate 
creatures in the world, and 1 thought of it as I saw 
Reshe blinking at us and looking around with what 
seemed more like fear than curiosity. 

I remember very clearly' the first night of her arrival. 
As no room had been assigned to her y'ct, she was put 



THE WI8TEEIA-C0VEEED HOUSE AGAIN 

to sleep on a floor-bed in my room. When I went up- 
stairs to my room, Neilufer was already in bed, and the 
two little girls, one coffee-colored and the other fair, 
were staring at each other, their heads queerly raised 
up from their pillows. 

“What is it, Nelly?” I said. 

“1 am afraid to be left alone with her. Halide Abla,” 
she answered. “Art thou sure she is not a cannibal ?” 

We were told a great many stories of cannibals, and 
their characteristics according to our information were 
two canine teeth sharper than other people’s and a tail. 
1 did not believe in these stories, but all the same I 
leaned over Reshe’s bed and looked at her. Under the 
colored night-light she laughed nervously at my face. 
It was a strange grimace rather than a smile, and her 
white teeth shone bi’illiantly. She looked more like a 
black kitten showing its teeth when it is frightened and 
at bay than a child. Politeness forbade my making fur- 
ther examination, but I told Xeiliifer that I had ex- 
amined her teeth and she was not a cannibal. My next 
recollection of Reshe is when I found her one day in my 
room executing a most extraordinary Abyssinian dance. 
Her hair, which she had evidently loosened for the 
performance, stood up on her head like bright wool; 
her eyes and teeth glistened, while she herself squatted 
on the floor, and jumped or rather hopped like a grass- 
hopper from one place to another. This quick and con- 
tinual hopping without changing the position of the 
body was wonderful, while she sang something loudly, 
something like a constantly repeated “ClioucJioumhi, 

167 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDI: EDIB 

chouchoumbi/' as she jumped. I immediately tried to 
do this wonderful feat too, but it was evidently designed 
only for Abyssinian knees, for I could do nothing like 
it. This happened in her joyful moods, but she had 
often melancholy moods too, when she would sit per- 
fectly still, her eyes turned to the ceiling, singing in a 
very soft tone, “Fidafanke fidafanke tashaaskourour- 
ourou" I never learned what this wonderful song 
meant, for by the time she learned Turkish she had for- 
gotten her own Abyssinian. But it had indefinite pa- 
thos and longing. From it I caught a glimpse of the 
misery of her past days before she was able to tell me 
about the way she had been stolen with her little brother 
from a wonderful Abyssinian forest and made to walk 
for months under the lash of the slav'^e-dealers. There 
was that in her .song, especially in the way she sang it, 
which made one gue.ss the dreary suffering through the 
meaningless words. Whenever the oppression and 
weariness of life settled on my heart too heavily, I used 
to ask her to come to my room and sing me that song. 
As I closed my eyes to li.sten, that endless "Rourourou” 
stretched into some infinite distance, whether of the des- 
ert, of the sea, or of the heart I cannot tell. 

When Reshe learned enough Turki.sh to talk, it was 
most amusing to hear her impressions of the first night 
in my room. They were identical with Xeilufer’s. 
Some one had told her in Yemen that white jjeoplc, es- 
pecially those of Constantinople, were in the habit of 
eating Abyssinians. She was accordingly waiting to 
be killed and eaten any moment. Each time she had 

168 



THE WISTEEIA-COVEEED HOUSE AGAIN 
seen Neiliifer’s frightened face eagerly watching her, 
she had said to herself: “She is watching me to see 
when I go to sleep. If I close my eyes she will go and 
tell the others, and they will all come and eat me up.” 

It was now that she told me her heart’s desire, which 
appeared simple enough to gratify. She wanted to 
dress exactly as I did. So I promised her that when 
I was grown up and married and had a house of my 
own, I would see that she should have the same dresses 
as I did, as well as a servant and a nice room to herself. 
At the same time I wrote a “liberating paper,” worded 
exactly as granny told me she had written the liberating 
papers for her slaves, so that Reshe no longer tech- 
nically belonged to me. I gave her this paper and 
told her to keep it in order to insure lier freedom in 
case I died and any one else tried to sell her as if she 
were still a slave. 

She soon grew into the atmosphere of the house and 
joined us in all our childish games, enjoying them as 
much as the rest of us. 

One evening Feizic, the Anatolian servants, and I 
decided to do a horrildc thing. We had been told by 
our elders that if one said a certain prayer entreating 
the aid of the cypress-tree spirits and then drew up 
forty buckets of water from a well, treasure would come 
up in the fortieth bucket. We tried it one Thursday 
evening,* but we did not go further than drawing up 
a very few bucketfuls. The echo of the bucket as it 

•*' Thursdays and Monday.s arc both holy days and especially propitious 
for exceptional undertakings. 


169 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

touched the stones in the bottom of the well was so 
strange and deep that we almost imagined all the cy- 
presses with their enormous green turbans in the neigh- 
boring cemetery marching toward the house. We ran 
up-stairs as fast as we could, and Feizie and lleshe as 
well were so terror-stricken that they passed the night 
in my room. 

Wells had their own peculiar and rather weird char- 
acteristics in those days. Fiacli had its own secret and 
treasure. The haunted well of a certain stone honak in 
Nishantash had a story which both frightened and 
charmed me, and in the first days of my story-writing I 
wrote “The Enchanted Well” on the lines of the old 
story. I altered and added a great deal to the original, 
but I think that now I prefer the crude folk-story, which 
I will repeat here. 

“A peri man with a beautiful face dwelt in the well of 
the stone konak” ; so began the story. One of the young 
Circassian girls in the harem of the house, while draw- 
ing water from the well after midnight, saw the beau- 
tiful creature. She fell in love with it of course. After 
this she constantly w'andered round the well and very 
often tried to throw herself into it. Her behavior ap- 
peared so mueh like a case of fairy enchantment to the 
other inmates of the house that they took her to a 
famous hodja, who was an expert in ailments of this 
kind. The hodja taught the slave-girl to repeat a cer- 
tain charm the next time the peri appeared to her. 
Late in the night, when every one was asleep, .she went 
to the well again and looked in. The peri appeared 

170 



THE WISTERIA-COVERED HOUSE AGAIN 

as usual. But as she repeated the words of the charm 
which the hodja had taught her, the peri turned his 
back. What she saw was so disgusting that the girl 
was immediately cured of her love, for the male peris 
have their backs open and all their insides exposed. 
This is why they always take care only to show their 
faces to mortals whom they want to attract. But if one 
can once get them to turn their hacks their charm is gone 
forever. 

There used to be wishing-wells, wells in which one 
saw one’s future or any other desired thing. The most 
famous of these is the Eyoub Sultan Well. To this day 
simple people take their unmarried daughters and make 
them look into the well, where their future husbands 
may be seen. Tliey look in this well, too, to find out 
about lost things. They are supposed to appear in the 
hands of the thief. I have heard quite sensible people 
tell queer experiences about having seen certain things 
in this well, hut w'hcther it is to be explained by the 
play of light and shadow' made by the green leaves over 
it, or by autosuggestion, I cannot tell. 

The talk about father’s buying a house in Sultan 
Tepe * coincided with a general epidemic of influenza 
which attacked every one in Beshiktash. It w'as only 
after Mahmoure Abla's marriage that we learned about 
the place through Youssuf Bey. her husband. It be- 
longed to some relations of his, and they wanted to sell 
it very badly. 

summer resort on a hill near Scutari. 

171 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

The house was almost going to pieces, and the garden 
was so big and wild that no one cared to buy it. These 
considerations made the owners offer it at a very low 
price. It looked indeed as if the outlay for repairs 
would be eonsiderably greater than the purchase-price. 

Father saw in its purchase the possibility, as he hoped, 
of bringing about a happier state of things for every 
member of his incompatible family. Here in this very 
spacious place there would be room to divide the house 
into two practically separate establishments on opposite 
sides. One of these was to be taken by each of the 
wives, and each could have a very large garden entirely 
to herself. 

Father hoped too that the beauty of the place would 
promote the happy development of all his children ; and 
having them near him, he would be able personally to 
see to their health and education. He actually lost his 
worried look for a time, and he talked of nothing l)ut 
of the different plans for the alteration and repair of 
the house. This naturally made him visit Scutari of- 
tener in order to make his plans for Sultan Tepe on 
the spot. It was during one of these Scutari visits of 
father’s that I was drawn for a short time very near 
to Abla. All of us, including the servants, had caught 
the influenza about the same time. As there was no 
such thing as a nurse in those days in Turkey, father, as 
the only one who was able to be on his feet, did virtually 
all the nursing. 

I w'as moved into father’s room, and he gave me his 
own bed opposite Abla’s and nursed us both together 

172 



THE WISTEEIA-COVERED HOUSE AGAIN 

there, going to bed very late himself and then only on a 
sofa in another room, where he hardly got any proper 
rest. 

It was during this time, but when Abla had lost her 
fever and felt much better, that he went on one of his 
expeditions to Scutari one evening. Teize had just 
home him a son, which might have been looked upon as 
a great event by a man who had so far had four daugh- 
ters. 

But I don’t think it was in father to love a child more 
because it happened to be a boy. He loved all of his 
children intensely and seemed only to be fondest of 
tliem when they were of an age when they needed most 
his care and protection. Up to now he had been only 
paying day visits to Scutari, and this evening visit 
aroused Abla’s jealousy, more especially because she 
herself had longed passionately for a son. She poured 
out her woes to me, and for hours I listened until I felt 
that I could really sympathize with her position. Then 
I realized that she had worked herself uj) into a perfect 
frenzy of jealousy. As a matter of fact I was very ill 
and rather feverish that night, but I understood as I 
had never done before that something which may mean 
immense pleasure to one person may cause great pain 
to another. 

Already weak and restless, Abla now seemed getting 
&lt;iuite beside herself with helpless misery and she called 
me near her and began to talk almost deliriously, al- 
though I know that she had no fever. I was so touched 
by her appeal to me that in childish sympathy I gave my 

173 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

heart to her that night with eager desire to comfort and 
to love her. I remember very clearly my feeling of in- 
tense bitterness against polygamy. I saw it as a curse, 
as a poison which our unhappy household could never 
throw out of its system. 

I had been so full until now of Te'ize’s suffering and 
was so constantly haunted by her face, almost fierce aiid 
distorted even when she was kneeling on her prayer- 
rug, and by her pale thin cheeks inundated by tears, 
that this vision had hitherto been like a barrier between 
me and Abla. Yet the one emotion of sudden pity now 
for Abla was as natural to my heart as the other. 

In her morbid condition sbe easily passed from jeal- 
ousy to the fear of death. As she sat up in her bed, 
the black shadows around her small blue eyes appeared 
enormous, and her cheeks were thin and hollow al- 
ready from her illness. All this added to my pity. 
“Halide,” she screamed, “I want a doctor, and I want 
thy father.” 

I crawled to her bed and .sat on it, and she clutched 
mj'^ hands nervously. The old Turkish streets were in 
pitch-darkness and deadly still. Only the dogs barked 
now and then in some deserted corner. We had no 
man-servant, and no one eoidd go out in the dark, but 
I promised her that I would go to Auntie Payker’s with 
the first light of the morning. The pity I felt for her 
made me forget the splitting in my own head, and I held 
her hand for hours till she asked me to read to her a bit 
from the Koran. “Surely 1 arn dying,” .she kept on 
saying. I took the Koran that always hung in its em- 

174 



THE WISTERIA-COVERED HOUSE AGAIN 

broidered bag on my bed and slowly chanted the Yassin 
in very low tones. The convulsive agitation of her face 
ceased, and with the slow rhythmic chant she closed her 
eyes. I remember now how the sight of her closed eye- 
lids comforted me. I crept back, dressed noiselessly, 
and walked to Auntie Paykcr’s with the first dawn, lean- 
ing against the walls for support as 1 went. 1 had to 
wake them up, and auntie scolded me for coming out in 
the state I was in. Leaving the situation in her capable 
hands I went back, feeling puzzled and muddled about 
all the confusion in human destiny and life. 

When we eventually moved to the house in Sultan 
Tepe I regretted two things chiefly in Beshiktash; 
auntie and her husband, and Noury Bey. 

Noury Bey was a great friend of mine in childhood 
and in my early youth. Our friendship began when I 
was seven and he something like sixty. 

lie was one of those who had started the Young 
Turkish movement with Xamik Kemal, whom I have 
mentioned before as the greatest Turkish patriot and 
one of her best poets. They had passed their early 
life together, mostly in Paris. For some reason or 
other Abdul Hamid, after crushing Namik Kemal, had 
overlooked Noury Bey and some other less prominent 
leaders of the movement. 

His absorbing interest at this period was in art, and 
lie maintained an intellectual and musical salon. He 
Was in addition to this translating books on political 
economy, which seemed a subject strangely unlike his 

175 



MEMOIBS OF HALmi EDIB 

poetic nature. Young writers and musicians usually 
made their debut in his salon, and each could count on 
his protection and loving encouragement. He wrote 
very sweet Turkish songs himself, with a personal and 
gentle touch and charm in them all his own. Some of 
these songs are very well known, especially the one 
called “The Peasant Girl,” which has been set to at least 
three tunes. Of the attempts to deal with a simple 
Turkish subject it is the one which has succeeded best, 
I believe. All the amateur lute players, violinists, and 
pianists who were then esteemed in Turkey were there, 
and the talk was on a high intellectual plane; but poli- 
tics was carefully excluded. It would not have been 
safe to do otherwise; Abdul Hamid’s spies were everj'- 
where. 

He loved me dearly, and with his charming simplicity 
which knew no distinction of age he had crept into my 
head and heart. He was one of the few souls with 
whom I could talk freely. The first time I accompan- 
ied his violinist friend.s, he himself lifted me upon the 
stool and stood turning my pages. Years later he 
wanted me to sing his own songs to him, and sitting on 
a low stool near the piano, with his thin spiritual face 
and his sensitive blue eyes, he listened in rapt thought. 
Among the gray-bearded men and the grown-ups I 
was the only small inmate of his salon. However full it 
was I always had my place near him, and we enjoyed 
each other’s conversation with mutual eagerness. It 
was in his salon some years later that I met Riza Tew- 
fik and finally had him as one of my numerous teachers. 

176 





THE WISTERIA-COVERED HOUSE AGAIN 

The house in Sultan Tepe had not been repaired when 
we moved in, and it was an exquisite old place. Each 
room had eight windows and plenty of space in the good 
old style. It stood on a hill overlooking the winding 
beauty of the Bosphorus and the serpentine green hills 
with lovely towers above. The garden was a pine- 
grove and the grounds a wild daisy field. It had no 
cud of fig-trees, old wells, elaborate ruins of ponds and 
cascades, now covered with a thick growth of ivy which 
denoted a time of past opulence. 

But the curse of polygamy followed us here also. I 
felt personally very uncomfortable, now that granny 
and Teize occupied the opposite side of the house I was 
living in. I naturally felt bound to visit them daily. 
Accordingly Abla and her servants made all sorts of 
difficulties for me, while the fact of my living at Abla’s 
side adversely influenced granny’s and Tei'ze’s attitude 
toward me. The period was nothing but a series of 
troubles and illnesses to me. The uncomfortable stage 
of growth that I was in, with the many lessons I had 
to do, besides my unhappy home conditions, made me 
])ass most of my time shut up in my room, moping and 
sullen, alone with my books and piano. 

Before the year was out Teize was divorced, and she 
moved away with granny and her children to another 
house. I was in bed with the mumps and did not see 
them go, but the crying of the babies in the garden as 
they left the house gave me unbearable pain, and I 
made up my mind never to marry. I was ignorant yet 
of the force of circumstances which makes us like fragile 

177 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

leaves blown away from the trees where they looked so 
green and happy only a moment before. I had now a 
series of resident English governesses and an Italian 
music teacher, an old lady with a wonderful voice who 
had been a singer on the stage; and my plunge into 
Italian music with an Italian gave me a period of intense 
dramatic enthusiasm. 

My Arabic lessons continued with Shukri Effendi. 
It was after a lesson one day that he took up a solemn 
attitude and made me a surprising harangue. “Give 
my compliments to your mother, Halide, and repeat 
to her clearly what I am going to say now. You know 
that our holy religion allows us to marry four times.” 
(I wished it did not, but I listened respectfully.) “But 
no man is allowed to remarry without substantial rea- 
sons.” {They always invented one, I thought.) And 
he went on recounting all the reasons. “But the fore- 
most reason is when the wife is a cripple and cannot 
serve her husband. Now I have a crippled wife, and I 
am obliged to remarry. So I want a real lady to choose 
me another lady. I beg your mother to find me a wife. 
Tell her my message and bring me the answer.” 

I began to understand why the old man was constantlj' 
peeping out of windows, staring at the door when it was 
half opened to catch a glimpse of the female figures in 
the corridors. Probably he had asked father and had 
been advised with the bitter experience of wisdom. I 
told Abla of Shukri Effendi’s message, and she was hor- 
rified at the idea of such a holy man’s doing such a thing. 
Yet the crippled condition of the wife gave him some 

178 



THE WISTERIA-COVERED HOUSE AGAIN 

justification, she thought. To my childish heart, the 
fact that she was a cripple made her something more to 
be loved and not hurt; suffering makes such a strong 
claim on simple hearts. Abla refused to have anything 
to do with the matter, but she was afraid to hurt the 
holy man, so she would not say anything definite and 
left me to manage him myself as well as I could. As 
I am more than stupid in such ambiguous positions the 
situation took away all my enjoyment of the Arabic 
lessons, for he would constantly question me as to Abla’s 
views before he would let me begin to recite. 

One day a tall lady called on Abla with her little 
daughter and introduced herself as Shukri Effendi’s 
wife. “I have come in person both to make your ac- 
quaintance and to show you that I am not a cripple,” 
she said. “My husband is in the habit of telling all his 
friends that I am a cripple in order to get their help in 
marrying a second wife.” 

Shukri Effendi never mentioned the subject of mar- 
riage again. My poor old teacher, to whom I owe so 
much, is dead, but his wife is still alive,'’ and we are very 
friendly at our rare meetings; besides her refined char- 
acter I always feel a personal gratitude to her for ap- 
pearing as she did and putting an end to my agitated 
situation. 

We had an interesting English lady as a governess. 
She was recommended by Woods Pasha and had been 
the wife of a well-to-do tea-planter in India. It was she 
who first aroused my interest in India, and she told 

'’She died in the summer of 102.5. 

179 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

me all sorts of interesting personal adventures. Al- 
though she had not the teaching capacity of Miss 
Ashover, a charming English teacher I had for some 
time, she had a more personal and grown-up style of 
conversation. It flattered me a good deal to have her 
talk to me of her personal life and troubles. She used 
to teach my sisters English nursery rimes and tell child- 
ish stories in a way that delighted me. In my lessons 
she took a different tone and set me to reading more 
serious literature, especially Shakspere and George 
Eliot, and awakened my first ambition to become a 
writer sometime. Her educational methods were in 
some ways very much like those of the French sisters. 
She kept a red tongue with “liar” written on it, to put 
in the mouth of the child who told a story, which made 
our little Avorld rather uneasy. Excepting for this and 
her fixed idea that the Turks were some sort of natives, 
inferior to the English, which view I greatly resented, 
she was a good woman and very kind at heart. 

Our lessons together were more reading then any- 
thing else. She used to make me translate from a (jiicer 
little English book, “The Mother”; and Mahmoud 
Essad Effendi, very well known as writer and teacher 
of Islamic law, used to correct my Turkish and com])are 
it with the original. His corrections almost amounted 
to rewriting, for he put it all in high and difficult Turk- 
ish, while what I had written was in very simple lan- 
guage. Mahmoud Essad Effendi liked the result so 
much that he askeel father to have it published with my 
name and with an introduction by himself. This was 

180 



THE WISTERIA-COVEREU HOUSE AGAIN 

done, and the whole edition was given to the exhibition 
opened in Yildiz for the families of the soldiers killed 
in the Greco-Turkish War of 1897. As every one who 
gave a present of a certain value was decorated, I also 
got a decoration from the presiding commissioners. 
But the whole thing left an unpleasant feeling in my 
mind. In the first place the hook was really by Mah- 
moud Essad Elfendi, and in the second, a decoration 
from the sultan was now in my eyes a moral degrada- 
tion. 

When I returned to the college in 1899 as a student 
once more I was at great pains not to speak of the dec- 
oration incident; but to my great surprise and sorrow 
it got into the college calendar, and I cannot suppress 
the disagreeable fact. 

The departure of this English teacher was something 
of an exciting incident. One day her little daughter, 
who also lived with us and was a great favorite, said that 
the under gardener had called her a halaic. She asked 
me what this meant, and 1 told her laughingly that it 
means a slave. And before I could explain to her 
that it wms a teasing word which is used for eA-^ery little 
girl in Turkey, she ran out and broke her parasol in 
two pieces over the garden boy’s back. 

A week later the mother Avas frightened by some 
Kurdish boys in a back street, and she left for London. 
She had a brother in India Avho had married a half- 
caste girl. The girl had soon died, leaving him very 
unhappy. His sister, thinking that his broken heart 
flight be mended with a Turkish girl, asked me whether 

181 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

I would marry her brother. As I have no class feeling 
I did not mind being thought of as pretty much the 
same as a half-caste ; besides my governess often told me 
about the docility and the mild sweetness of their char- 
acter. But behind the outwardly quiet little person 
whom she thought she knew something about, she did not 
see the stormy forces which made it quite impossible that 
the little Turkish girl should have the mild and sweet 
disposition of the Indians, even despite the fact that 
she was supposed to have sometliing like them in her 
eyes. So my first marriage offer came from an Eng- 
lishman, who did not know anything about either it or 
me. 

After the departure of my last English governess 
Riza Tewfik began to give me lessons in French and 
Turkish literature. He was then a man of perhaps 
forty and at the height of bis artistic and intellectual 
power. He was interested in philosophy and was a 
very enthusiastic admirer of Herbert Spencer. He al- 
ways carried in a bag the pictures of the great philos- 
ophers as well as the books he loved best. With his long 
hair and fine head and his books, he was simply called 
the philosopher by every one. Besides being of a very 
studious turn of mind, he had great imitativ'e capacity 
and could imitate perfectly the dialects in the country 
and the peculiarities of all sorts of people, which made 
him a general favorite with his friends. His Herbert 
Spencer talk did not interest me so much as his knowl- 
edge of Oriental mystic philosophy and of Oriental art 
and poetry. He was a good Arabic scholar and had 

182 



THE WISTERIA-COVEEED HOUSE AGAIN 

a perfect mastery of Persian. He opened to me an un- 
paralleled world of beauty and thought. The philo- 
sophical and mystical beauty of Persian literature with 
its exquisite delicacy of form made me feel that there is 
a spirituality and significance in form when it attains to 
the heights which it undoubtedly has in Persian litera- 
ture. But its very perfection is a danger to any other 
literature and art which fall under its sway. It acts 
upon them very powerfully and always in the direction 
of destroying originality. The admirers and imitators 
of the Persian culture were entirely enslaved and 
chained by its form as well as by its spirit, and any slav- 
ery to form creates rigid and conventional artists. 
Once caught in such a formal school, any new and freer 
personal expression of beauty is stifled and killed. 
And this was what happened to the old Turkish litera- 
ture. In spite therefore of the grandeur and perfec- 
tion of form in our older poets, I felt a stranger to them, 
while the simple and original expression of the people 
in their songs, stories, music, and mystical literature 
of the religious kind charmed me and made me feel akin 
to them. Their familiar, simple, and laconic way of 
telling about spiritual ideas as well as about human 
Weaknesses, their humorous outlook on life, their famil- 
iar chidings of Allah for the apparent muddle of human 
destiny, their mystical adoration of the perfect order of 
the universe, were the expression of a child’s simplicity 
and humor. 

Riza Tewfik must have felt this too, though perhaps 
almost unconsciously, for in spite of his continuous talk 

183 



MSMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

about the higher and more sophisticated expressions of 
Oriental art and Arabic philosophy, he had a very rich 
collection of popular songs, poems, and stories. 

He was a great talker and never tired, so that his lis- 
tener would fall exhausted, losing all power of attention 
and receptivity, long before he had done. He often 
spent nights with us at Sultan Tepe, and I remember 
father’s falling asleep every now and then. But to me 
at that time he was a new world ; and I was taking in, 
sucking down to the very roots, all that his memory and 
mind had to give me as the dry earth takes and sucks 
in both rain and sunshine. 

He was interested in the free, profane, and at the 
same time mystic and religious quality of my mind. I 
used to write little things which he read enthusiastically 
and encouraged generously. 

The outward and final break of the Turkish language 
away from the Persian conventions and Arabic phrase- 
ology was alread}’^ in the air, although so far it was only 
Mehmed Emin who had dared to publish a few short 
poems in simple Turkish language and in the simple 
Turkish metrical form used in the people’s songs and 
ballads. At first there seemed a certain clumsiness of 
form by comparison with the more musical and compli- 
cated harmony of the Arabic meters used until this time, 
and the old Ottoman poets have not become reconciled 
to them even to this day. But Riza Tewfik applauded 
them as an attempt to free Turkish poetry from its 
chains. He himself wrote in the same popular meters 
some ballads and songs which are perhaps the only 

181 



THE WISTERIA-COVERED HOUSE AGAIN 

Turkish masterpieces in this style. I think his success 
was due to his great command of our language and to 
liis dexterity and ease in handling it. Although he 
could not publish at this period, because of the restric- 
tive nature of the press censorship, this was his best and 
most prolific period; for it was then that he wrote the 
large number of poems and studies which he only pub- 
lished much later. 

In the popularization of philosophy, in giving ideal 
form to Turkish meters and in describing truthfully the 
very beautiful landscapes of Anatolia as he did in some 
of his poems, he is a great pioneer. Further than this 
I do not think he had gone. He had great enthusiasm 
in expressing his ideas to young disciples, and for some 
months he often shone as a great light. Then a period 
of repetition would begin, but by that time he would 
have communicated some illuminating point of view. 
I cannot express how much I owe to him in my first 
embryonic efforts to attain to a new form and style 
which would give free expression to myself and to my 
ideas. If he had adopted a hard and doctrinaire atti- 
tude in questions of form he would have hindered me 
in my thought life and in all my future literary activ- 
ities; and in accomplishing my intellectual destiny I 
should have had to spend far greater cnergv' and effort. 
With my maturer api)rcciation of the accumidated ar- 
tistic beauty in the world, I count myself as naught 
iiniong its exponents, hut it is a certain satisfaction to 
have dared to be myself in every line of life. In 
thought and art, Riza Tewfik unciuestionably opened 

185 



MEMOIRS OF HALID^ EDIB 

the way to me, where many others would probably 
have closed it. 

In later years, in spite of his bitter opposition to the 
Unionist government, I retained the same feeling of ad- 
miration for him, although I no longer shared all his 
opinions; but we became completely separated when he 
passed over to the side of the enemies of my country 
with Ferid Pasha in 1918. I do not regret his gov- 
ernment’s condemning me to death so much as the un- 
happy fate which made him the instrument to sign the 
intended death-warrant of Turkey, the Treaty of 
Sevres. But I believe confidently that a day will come 
when his political acts and opinions will be subordinated 
to the fact that he was a link in the cultural development 
of the Turkish people. 

Sister’s father, Ali Shamil Pasha, appeared on the 
scene all of a sudden. He had got back into palace 
favor, and in two months he was made a pasha and gov- 
ernor of Scutari. He lived in Kadikeuy in a very 
large house with his family. He had an Abyssinian 
wife and a very fair and young Syrian one. The story 
of his marriage with the colored lady was peculiar. 
On one occasion during his exile he had felt himself 
very ill, and indeed dying all alone, with no one hut an 
Abyssinian woman who had been the slave of his wife 
who had just died. Pitying her forlorn and unpro- 
tected condition he married her so that she might have 
a pension after his death. But he did not die, and what 

186 



THE WISTEHIA-COVERED HOUSE AGAIN 

was more important still he wanted a white wife so badly 
that he married a yoimg Syrian lady. He fell entirely 
under the influence of the fair one and ignored the 
colored lady in her presence, but he had such warm af- 
fection for the colored wife that he could not conceal 
it the moment the fair one left the room. He had six 
children besides Mahmoure Abla, three white and three 
colored, and he showed the same affection for them all. 
In fact his eldest boy, who was quite black, was the most 
like himself and the most charming among them all. I 
sometimes went to visit them and found the house al- 
ways full of visitors and servants who changed very 
often. The Syrian lady managed everything very dip- 
lomatically and with womanly capacity. She seemed 
indifferent to the presence of the Abyssinian and af- 
fected a proud manner toward Ali Shamil Pasha, which 
almost reduced him to a state of slavery to her. He had 
built three houses opposite his konak for three of his 
daughters, and Mahmoure Ahla now occupied one of 
them with her family. She already had three children. 

Ali Shamil Pasha was especially gay in the evenings 
and joked and talked all the time on the occasion of 
my visits. He would dress his boys in Kurdish cos- 
tumes, both the white and the colored ones; and ivith 
Mahmoure Abla playing a Kurdish air we would start 
a Kurdish dance all together, Ali Shamil Pasha leading, 
waving a red handkerchief, whistling and holding my 
hand ; while I held on to the others behind in a row, we 
turned rhythmically swinging and singing and feeling 

187 



MEM0IB8 OF HALID^ EDIB 

very excited and very happy, while the chandeliers 
rattled and the old hall creaked, and the whole house- 
hold crowded in in the most familiar way to watch the 
scene. 

The Abyssinian lady sat on a floor-cushion and the 
fair one in an arm-chair; but when she went out Ali 
Shamil Pasha would run to the colored lady and caress 
her cheeks like a naughty child, saying: “This is my 
lady, with the real and unfading color. Try her cheeks. 
Halide; no color comes off.” This made the colored 
lady scold him, but it made her extremely happy all the 
same. 

His brothers, who were divided into factions one 
against the other politically and personally, spent tlieir 
lives in perpetual warfare; but several that I have 
known had chivalrous and noble manners and have been 
patriotic and loyal to the country, while some unfortu- 
nately embraced foreign causes in Turkey. 

With Tei’ze’s divorce the uncomfortable and opj&gt;res- 
sive conditions in our family did not entirely cease, al- 
though we now had intervals of peace at home. My 
visits to granny and Tei'ze’s house filled me with the old 
painful sympathy, while the visits of Tei’ze’s babies to 
us always aroused domestic tempests. Abla had an 
Anatolian servant who was a perfect genius in creating 
trouble, and on the visit of the babies she would invent 
some story or other about witchcraft exercised by Teize 
through the servant who brought the children. Some- 
times it would be that she had rubbed lard on Ablas 

188 



THE WISTEEIA-COVERED HOUSE AGAIN 

door SO that there might be a “pig chill” * between father 
and her; or she had left dog’s and cat’s hair mixed under 
their bed so that there might be quarrels between them. 
And the babies, already upset by the unhappy atmos- 
phere of their own home, felt the cold reception and the 
hostile feeling of Sultan Tepe unconsciously and had a 
sad look all the time, which wrung ray heart. 

In 1899 I went again to the college with Neiliifer, I 
as a boarder and she only as a day-scholar, so that our 
lives were separate for a time. 

fl Pigs, being unclean animals in the Moslem world, naturally symbolized 
disagreeable things. A coldness involving especially unpleasant features 
is designated as a coldness of the pig, or a pig chill. 


189 



