XV 


MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

T he years 1913-15 of the Unionist regime de- 
serve to be appreciated for the sincere and hard 
struggle put forth for constructive change in the 
country. I have so far told about the first political 
difficulties of the Unionists, their desire to hold power 
at any cost, their blunders, and their reforming energy 
and courage. Rut now they began to display a certain 
ability to govern relatively better, and they laid the 
i'ounilation of modern reform, which has continued ever 
since despite all obstacles. 

The most serious reforms were those of the army and 
of finance. Djavid Bey, the greatest financier whom 
Xew Turkey has had so far, cooperating with French 
advisers, chief among whom was Charles Ijaurent, 
transformed the finance department from a medieval 
into a modern institution both in spirit and in function. 
The customs were organized by our old friend Sirry 
hey under the supervision of Sir Richard F. Crawford, 
one of the ablest foreign advisers 'Furkey has ever had. 

Enver began the reform of the army when he was 
hardly thirty-two. He called in a German military 
commission to set the change afoot. Apart from the 
political complication into which this influence led 

345 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Turkey at a later period, the Germans also accom- 
plished their immediate task with admirable con- 
scientiousness. Enver was an admirer of the German 
military system, which he had studied in Berlin during 
two years when he was a Turkish attache there. Ilis 
reorganization of the Turkish army was one of the most 
successful of the reforms undertaken, because of the 
military aptitude of the people. I could cite many 
staff-officers, to-day in prominent positions, and very 
anti-Enverist, who admit that the reorganization of the 
Anatolian army of independence was possible only be- 
cause of the sound basis that Enver had laid. His un- 
flinching determination to organize a younger and more 
efficient staff, his absolute disregard of political con- 
siderations where promotion or punishment was con- 
cerned, are admitted by his opponents as well as his 
admirers. 

Comte Roubilant modeled a new gendarmerie, and 
a number of other foreign advisers did excellent work 
in the public works. Admiral Gamble and later on y\d- 
miral Limpus were called to reform the navy. Admiral 
Gamble has left a name which is still spoken of with 
respect and affection among the young element, espe- 
cially among the common sailors. 

Comte Ostrorog unfortunately could not stay long as 
an adviser in the work of judicial reform. After a 
very short service, with the exception of Hussein Jahid 
almost all the important members of the Union and 
Progress came to consider him very anti-Turkish. 

The ministry of public instruction had no European 

346 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 
adviser for years. Both the opposition and the con- 
servatives showed themselves jealous and ferociously 
critical of the direction of that department. Many 
well known men of the empire came to be ministers of 
public instruction one after another, but there appeared 
a lack of clearness about their aims and principles. 

Emrullah Effendi was the first man who had a clear 
idea of what he wanted in the field of public instruction. 
As he believed in the importance of higher education he 
tried to advance the universities, and also to send a large 
number of students to European universities. 

Hussein Jahid, who was one of the strongest intel- 
lectuals of the party, always refused the post, condition- 
ing his acceptance on the adoption of the Latin charac- 
ters, which tlie government would not do. 

Shukri Bey, who became the minister of public in- 
struction in the cabinet of Said Halim after the assas- 
sination of Mahmoud Shevket, was the first successor of 
Emrullah Effendi who had decided ideas and the energy 
to carry them out. Although 1 resigned from the edu- 
cational department on account of a difference of opin- 
ion with him on the principles of education in Turkey, 
still I ean sincerely admit that his wwk deserves con- 
sideration. 

When I first went into the department I saw that 
there were a few educational centers wdiich had their 
own tradition, culture, and (}uality; these were Galata 
i^sirai, Mulkie, Dar-ushaffaca, and the two other col- 
ioges in Istamboul. They had provided educated 
citizens for the empire and for the new regime, few in 

347 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

number but valuable in quality. Now we had to keep 
up the standard and increase the number at a time when 
we had very little teaching material of the desired 
quality. The education of women seriously speaking 
was begun by the new regime, and in 1913 we had a 
good college — and a normal school. I felt that our 
efforts must be directed toward slowly increasing the 
munbers without endangering their quality, that tlic 
normal schools should be fused with the colleges and 
that several of these should be united in order to econo- 
mize teachers and equij)ment, and thus keep up tlie 
standard, which was falling low in the many normal 
schools and colleges which we opened all over the coun- 
try, and which were only nominally what they should 
have been. 

I worked out my project with precision and had an 
appointment to see Shukri liey at the ministry during 
the very first week of his ministry. I went to Broussa 
for the week-end. On my return I saw a statement 
in one of the papers that two teachers who were not 
present at an inspection (they had no classes in the 
school on that day) were to be reprimanded. Although 
there was no name I found that I was one of them, and 
I immediately resigned. The ministry had no control 
over me on the days when I had no lectures to deliver. 
Probably it was merely a foolish mi.stake of some very 
old inspector, but I felt that I had to do what I did. 

Before the week was out Talaat Pasha, Keuk-Alp 
Zia, and Dr. N azim Beys called on me. 

It was the first time I ever .saw Talaat Pasha. I was 

348 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

immediately struck with his simplicity, humor, and 
geniality. At first he spoke on many different sub- 
jects, but he eame to the point in a way which showed 
both delicacy and cleverness. He had come to induce 
me to recall my resignation. Somehow he made me feel 
that I was sacrificing my life-work for personal pride, 
;ind when he saw the effect his words had on me he took 
up my resignation and handed it back to me with a 
smile. “It lacks a stamp,” he said. “Do take it back, 
and do not give up your pupils so easily.” There was 
intelligence and a lack of the consciousness of pride and 
[)ower about him which so often characterizes men who 
attain power as fast as he had done. 

From this time he called at the Bairam festivals reg- 
ularly and at other times occasionally. He continued 
to do so when I was bitterly criticizing his personal 
politics and the policy of his party, and he kept up his 
friendliness to the last. His frugal ways, his modest 
life, and his charm of the true democrat kept my respect 
and admiration for him as a man throughout. However 
one may criticize him, one is obliged to admit that he 
was the truest of patriots, and that no act of his was 
either for personal gain or love of power. He lived 
and died a poor man, proud to he poor, and ready to 
endure .all for what he believed to he best for his country. 

He succeeded during those years in creating a much 
better department of the interior, and he fought merci- 
lessly against corruption and abuse. He used to say 
in those days, “We began as revolutionaries, but the 
time has come to make the law sui)reme in this country.” 

349 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

All this gave way during the last years of the World 
War. Every one seemed to be possessed by one 
single idea, the final victory. No one can fully realize 
how much principle, high purpose, and human feeling, 
as well as material wealth, have been sacrificed and 
damaged for victory all over the world, and what a long 
struggle is necessary for moral and material recon- 
struction. 

Three months after this event I resigned for good. 
Shukri Bey clearly showed that his educational policy 
was to obtain quantity at the expense of quality. He 
wanted to have the largest possible number of men and 
women who would read and write, and he did not care 
for the rest. He went on multiplying schools and 
calling them by names to which the education they pro- 
vided in no way corresponded. In 1915 he also called 
in German professors and advisers who did some good 
academic work for the university. Much as I was and 
am against his basic principle of quantity against 
quality, I must admit that the large number of people 
now able to read and write in Turkey is the outcome 
of his work. Had he stayed longer in power he might 
have had a more lasting effect on the higher education 
of the country. 

Nakie Hanum resigned a few months after me. She 
had created a girls’ college which was notable from 
every point of view and had proved herself to be a 
serious educator. Before she had had time to rest, she 
received an offer from the education department of the 

350 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

ministry of evhaff (pious foundations), to which all the 
mosque schools belonged. 

Hairi Effendi, the great sheik-ul-Islam of the 
Unionist regime, had began a series of interesting and 
serious reforms in evhaff, which was under his control. 
The department had in its charge a large number of 
theological schools {medresses) of an extremely scho- 
lastic and reactionary kind as well as all the primary 
mosque schools, mixed or unmixed. A great deal of 
money was spent on these institutions. Hairi Effendi 
began an able and drastic reform in all of them. The 
medresses for the first time were to have modern science 
taught by modern teachers instead of the old scholastic 
curriculum and the old teachers. The mosque schools, 
which so far taught only the Koran and which were 
housed in little holes, were to be modernized, and a 
dozen schools were amalgamated in one big and up-to- 
date building in an important center. Each was to 
have a modern staff with a modern curriculum. The 
boys’ schools were organized by iVli Iley, a very capable 
and progressive section chief in evhaff. The girls’ 
schools as well as the small mixed ones were to be or- 
ganized by Nakie Ilanum as the general director. I 
became their inspector-general and adviser. 

Nakie Ilanum soon succeeded in creating a hard- 
working, sincere, and capable body of teachers. She 
Was greatly helped by the young graduates of the col- 
lege whom we had ourselves trained. Her schools 
immediately became the best primary schools in 

3.51 



MEMOIRS OF HAI.IDE EDIB 

Istamboul. The best specialists on educational subjects 
offered to train her teachers, and her own central school 
in Sultan Ahmed acquired an atmosphere of learning 
and happy camaraderie among the old and young ele- 
ments of evkaff. Hussein Jahid, Adnan, Edih, Djavid, 
and Youssouf Akchura Beys were among the stall' 
who regularly lectured to her teachers. 

Keuk-Alp Zia was numbered among the friends ol' 
the school. But when Shukri Bey advanced the theory 
of unity of education, using ‘the expression in a sense 
which means centralization, that is, to have all the 
schools under the ministry of public instruction, Keuk- 
Alp Zia fav'ored the idea, as well as Shukri Bey’s plea 
that no schools should he under the evkoff, which is a 
religious institution. But the curriculum of the evkaff 
schools at the time was more secular than obtained in 
the schools of the public instruction. 

The school centers were in the poorest and farthest 
quarters of the city, in places where 1 had never been, 
and I got on close terms with i)eople with whom I 
should never have come in contact except in my capacity 
as an inspector who made weekly visits to those (quarters, 
studied the little ones, and got to know their parents. 

There was also at this time some change in my house- 
hold. iSfahmoure Ahla, with her five children and her 
husband who had returned from Adrianople, came to 
live with me. Nighiar, my sister, who graduated in 
1912 from the college and had become a teacher to 
Kakie Hanum’s school, came to me also. 

There were seven pairs of childish feet that wore out 

352 



My EDUCATIONAl- ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

the oil-cloth on my stairs hut brought a new world of 
life, youth, and joyful bustle to the house. 

Granny was living with me as usual, but I had lost 
the old sense of nearness to her for the moment. I was 
constantly out for lessons and lectures, the club de- 
manded much of my time, and my circle of friends had 
had a great deal happen to it. 

My writing I had to do after ten o’elock at night 
when the noisy little house slept and left me quiet in 
my room. Granny also enjoyed those (juiet hours ; she 
came to me for talks then. She was much shocked by 
the new women. Their talk, their walk, their dress, and 
tlieir general aspect hurt her. She felt lonely, like a 
stranger in a world where she felt she had stayed too 
long, like a visitor who has outstayed his ivelcome; it 
was as if the newly arrived guests had taken all the 
room, and they looked ever so different from her. She 
sulfered because they shook their arms as they walked, 
looked into men’s eyes, had loud voices, and smoked in 
l)uhlic; above all they did not iron their clothes as she 
(lid every morning. In spite of every difference we 
found certain inner contacts where w'e met on common 
{ground and understood each other. 

In the middle of a diflicult passage when my hero- 
ines had to be tended through their hysterical outbursts 
and follies (I had a special capacity for describing 
folly) she walked into my writing-room and said, “liet 
ns talk. Halide; 1 have not opened my mouth for days.” 
Sometimes we did talk to her heart’s desire, but at times 
I could not talk; the heroine or the hero absorbed me 

353 



MEMOIRS or HALIDE EDIB 

more than granny, and then she walked back to her 
room with a sadness which spoiled my work, even kept 
me awake with remorse. She was eighty years old by 
this time but still appeared in good health, and always 
clean and dainty with a very correct taste, her clothes 
beautifully ironed; and she never missed any of her five 
long prayers daily. 

Now and then she spoke of her longing for the old 
houses with the wisteria, tlie spacious rooms with many 
ivindows, and the blazing lights of Istamboul seen 
through clean white curtains, with simple divans about. 
The chairs and heavy curtains and the little rooms of 
my house distressed her. I must have had some secret 
longing also, for we set out in search of big old houses 
with large gardens. We both knew tliat I could not 
change my house in Fazli Pasha. It had its own asso- 
ciations, its particular scenery ; it had helped me to stand 
on my feet at a moment when I was broken physically 
and spiritually, and I had written the youngest and 
most passionate if not the best of my work there. 

Once we found a house in a little street behind Sultan 
Ahmed which answered the description — the double 
stairs, the wisteria, the bath-room with old and beauti- 
fully carved basins, and the pointed door covered with 
red cloth and golden clasps. 

We did not take it, but we talked of it, of the bath, 
of the double basins, and of Sultan Ahmed Mos(iue, 
from which one could hear the evening prayers and see 
the lights on its minarets in Ramazan nights. 

Very early one morning 1 was awakened by a (pieer 

354 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

noise outside my door. I walked out almost into 
Mahmoure Abla, who spoke in undertones: 

“It is granny,” she said. 

She had fallen at my door with a fit of that horrible 
thing, apoplexy. 

She could not talk or move, but her eyes had their 
comprehending look, intensified with new knowledge, 
wiiich made her regard the ignorant ones around her 
with a sort of pathetic pity. Her unfailing humor still 
dickering in her eyes, she moved her right hand (she 
could still do that) and made the sign of three with her 
fingers. It was her usual sign in her other sicknesses, 
signifying, “I will live only three days.” I telephoned 
to the doctor, but I also sent for hod j as who would chant 
the Koran softly and breathe its healing effects over 
lier, which soothed her and made her feel safe on her 
road to heaven. 

The only doctor she could tolerate was Dr. Adnan, 
the family doctor and friend whom she loved as a son, 
both on account of his old-world manners and for an 
imagined resemblance to Uncle Kemal. It was hard 
to get him at once.' 

1 As Enver Bey had come, back from his march to Adrianople with a 
severe attack of appendicitis, Asnan as his friend stayed with him through 
his illness and its two grave operations. 

r)r. Adnan was intimate with Enver in Germany, and he speaks of 
Enver in those days as a man of incredible purity of life and spirit. Xo 
force of feminine charm, no amount of temjitation and pleasure, could 
draw him away from his hard-working life and priest-like abstinence. He 
was engaged to Princess Nadjie, whom he saw during this illness and mar- 
ked a few months later. 

Dr. Adnan’s intimacy with E'nver stopped very soon afterward. He 
buried himself in the organization of the Red Crescent and in his lectures 

3.55 



MEMOIRS OE HALIUE EDIB 

I well remember taking Dr. Adnan to her room for 
the first time after her attack of apoplexy. I saw ji 
look of horror in her face instead of the pleasure I had 
expected, and it puzzled me greatly. But he walked to 
her bed, took her white veil, which had been taken off 
to put ice on her head, and covered her head, whicli 
immediately brought back the usual look to her ej^es. 

After the third day she fell into a nervous agitation ; 
it was as if she was ashamed of not having kept her word 
to die promjitly on tlie third day. In the days when slie 
had seemed far aAvay from death and had spoken to 
me of it I used to think that her dcatli would not make 
much difference in my life, but when I saw the moment 
of her final departure so near I suffered atrociously. 
I realized how much I wanted her and what a link she 
was to all that counts so much in a jioor human’s past. 

On the morning of the ninth day of her illness she 
seemed calm, and I had hopes of lier recovery, a hope 
she seemed to read with gratitvule in my eyes. I am 
sure that she wanted to feel tliat she had not been a 
burden, a feeling whicli all the old carry so pathetically 
in the dejiths of their childi.sh hearts. She called me 
with her eyes as I entered. I ran and laid my cheek 
against her cheek. That wonderful elean and jiersonal 
perfume, which only the old women of her class and 


in the medical faculty. lie was obliged to jicrftirni his military service as 
the assistant ad interim to the chief of the field sanitary department, wherr 
lie came under Knver’s command. Their relations ru*ver resumed the old 
footing. The beloved hhiver Hey of lOOH and of Tripoli was now th&lt;‘. bath'd 
military dictator. Dr. Adnan often rejieated the saying of our famous 
writer Suleyman Xazif, “Knver Pasha has killeti Knver Ik*y.” 

356 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 
generation had, penetrated me. I knew that I would 
never experience it again ; it was passing away with her. 
An instant of infinite tenderness, something like reli- 
gious ecstasy, enveloped both of us. I kissed her hands 
reverently, with the chastened and repenting pain which 
I still have at times, wondering if I had done all that it 
was in niy power to do for her liap])iness in her last days. 

As I left her room I thought of something she had 
said in the late hours of the night. 

“I am afraid,” she had said, “of the earth in death, 
but somehow the little cemetery on that Sultan Tepe 
hill, the cemetery of the Tekke” — the monastery where 
I liave taken refuge twice — “would not he so lonely. 
1 would not mind being there.” 

None of her beloved ones were buried there, but it 
was the tiny cemetery of the Euzheks, where a few of 
the homeless Eiizheks fi’om Tashkend and a few sheiks 
belonging to the order were buried. The place has 
infinite s|)acc, (piiet, and beauty. As death then had 
seemed a myth to me in the undying energy of my youth 
1 had said, “I will come there too. granny, and w'e shall 
have the midnight talks over again.” 

'riiis had soothed her and she had confidentially added, 
“Even in a cemetery I hate crowds and hustle.” 

This conversation haunted me that night. That same 
night she j)assed awaiy. and we buried her in the humble 
cemetery on the lonely hilltop. 

It was Kurban llairam the next day. and I had the 
room full of friends who offered me more than a 
llairam felicitation. Keuk-iVlj) Zia was the last to 

357 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

leave, as Dr. Adnan entered. I was glad to see that 
the doctor could steal away from Enver Bey for a 
Bairam visit and for condolence. But I was pinned 
to my chair when I tried to rise by the strange pain 
which I had had during granny’s illness, and I groaned 
involuntarily. 

“What is it?” he asked. 

“The pain in my side,” I answered. 

“It must be appendicitis,” he said laughingly. 
“There are dozens of cases that I know of in the city 
— quite an epidemic.” 

It was in fact a grave case of appendicitis, with high 
fever and the familiar severe pain. I felt very grate- 
ful for the attack, which left me alone with myself dur- 
ing this time. 

Eight days later I was transferred to the German 
hospital to be operated on, and Dr. Adnan took up his 
watch by my bed. I was up in a fortnight, altliough 
I stayed on for another week in the hospital. The ex- 
pressions of sympathy and interest which I received 
during my illness touched me deeply. 

Talaat Pasha called with Dr. Nazim and laughingly 
declared that he was sent by the Committee of Union 
and Progress. Then he fell into a childish mood about 
Adrianople, which they had recently recovered. lie 
had paid the recovered city a visit that very week, and 
the impression of it was fre.sh in his mind. However 
patriotic a man may be for the whole of his countiy, 
there is always one town about which he must be senti- 
mental, and Talaat was sentimental about Adrianople- 



MY EDUCATIONAI, ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

“I come from a village near Adrianople,” he said, 
“and I shall never forget my joy at the sight of Selimie 
Mosque when my father drove me to the city for the 
first time. When I went there this time I felt just the 
same.” I looked away, that he might give free play to 
his emotion, which was evidently such a rare thing with 
him. He looked like the simple boy of the days when 
he was driven to Adrianople in his father’s cart, at the 
sight of the matchless minarets of Selimie. 

Some months before the outbreak of the World War 
Talaat Pasha called on me with an unusually happy ex- 
pression. 

“I have good news for you,” he said. “We have 
begged Miss Fry to come to Turkey to organize wom- 
en’s education. She has agreed to come and study the 
situation before taking any decisive step. You see 
that we are really serious enough about education, so 
I beg you to persuade her to undertake the work.” 

I told him firmly that I should stay on in the evkaff 
schools but said I would do my very best to persuade 
IVIiss Fry. 

When Miss F ry arrived I was rather miserable with 
the after-effects of appendicitis plus a weak heart. But 
it was a great joy to have her. Talaat Pasha and the 
other leaders of the party who met her were charmed 
Mith her simplicity and sincerity and hoped that she 
•night stay. But she was unable to come tt) an under- 
standing with Sbukri Bey on certain points which she 
regarded as essential, and she left Turkey after a 
month’s visit. Little did we think when we parted that 

3o!) 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

an endless stretch of war years lay between us until the 
time when we should meet again. 

When we opened the schools of evkaff in September, 
1914, I went to see Hairi Effendi, the sheik-ul-Islatn, 
to discuss some changes I wanted made in the schools. 
The building of Sheik-ul-Islamat was one of those old 
and very Turkish departments looking over the Cioldcu 
Horn. The chief secretary, a young man with an im- 
maculate turban and graceful manners, introduced mo 
to the state room of the sheik-ui-Islam. 

It was an immense square room along three sides of 
which stretched a low couch. The floor had a red and 
blue carpet. There was a big bronze brazier in the 
middle of the room, and a single beautiful crystal clam- 
delier hung from the middle of the ceiling. The .sense 
of space, simplicity, and comfort was only disturbed l)y 
the modern American desk, which seemed out of har- 
mony and too small. 

Beneath the windows the Golden Horn stretched out; 
numberless old sailing-boats danced on the waters, sails 
down and masts waving in the .sun. Hairi Eff'endi’s tall 
figure cut .strangely across the view, as he walked down 
the room in the immense folds of his black gown. lie 
had a dark face with a long, hooked and crooked nose, 
bright black eyes, and his white turban very gracefully 
wound around his fez. 

In spite of the unusual beauty of the place and the 
picturesque garments of the sheik-ul-Islam, there was 

360 





MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

something so simple in his handclasp and cordial man- 
ners that I immediately sat down by the desk and took 
out my note-book. He leaned forward and listened 
(he was slightly deaf) , one hand busily taking notes as I 
spoke. When I had finished, he read his notes and told 
me which of my proposals were possible and which were 
not, in clear and businesslike language. I took leave 
of him with an immense respect for his wisdom and 
practical sense. It is a great pity that he also was 
beaten by the military policy of the Unionist regime, 
llarely had a regime such a large collection of able and 
intelligent men at its eommand, but its narrowness and 
diort-sightedness, fostered by the clique who wished to 
snatch material advantages from the ugly seenes of war, 
caused it to annihilate its own chanees as well as those 
of Turkey. 

My last meeting with ITairi Effendi was in 1922 in the 
tiny room of my house in the village of Kalaba near 
Angora. He had the same sort of picturesque gown 
and turban, and he was as stately as ever, bending graee- 
fiilly in order to get under the low ceiling of the room, 
lie had come back from Malta, and I believe he paid me 
the first visit he paid to any one then. It was just be- 
fore he retired to his own place in Anatolia to die. He 
had that mystic knowledge of life w'hich made him fly 
from it. He would have been of infinite value if he had 
stayed and worked in the forming of the neAv govern- 
nient. “I am ill and on the verge of the grave,” he said 
sadly but resolutely. 


361 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

It was on a winter’s day in the same year that I had 
something of an adventure in one of the back streets of 
Istamboul. The street is called Arasta. A series of 
old holes-in-the-wall, which are used as habitations by 
a certain class of poor of the city, form the street, and it 
is an adventure to go through it. 1 left Nakie Hanuin’s 
school rather late in the afternoon with her, and we tried 
to take a short cut through Arasta in order to get to 
the main road and a carriage. Perhaps we were also 
prompted by curiosity. 

1 had the fashionable black charshaf and veil of my 
class. On my inspection tours in the farthest corners 
of poor Istamboul I used to wear a loose old-fashioned 
charshaf, and I never pinned the cape so tight as to make 
the form of my head and hair apparent; and I took care 
to have my face opeti, although I carefully hid my hair 
and neck. But I had not thought of going through 
Arasta on that day. 

Up and down walked a scries of little girls as we en- 
tered the narrow street, 'rhey had print dresses of the 
poorest sort, and bare feet shod with wooden clogs which 
they dragged painfully, but they had a saucy and ag- 
gressive way' of walking in s})ite of this impediment. 
One had a dirty' baby' in her arms, half her own si/c, and 
the baby'’s nose was running all the time. Another had 
a broken silk umbrella, which must hav'c had a pros- 
perous past and was evidently' stolen })r()perty. All 
lifted their dresses in mock imitation of the chic women 
of the city; all strutted in a make-believe promenade of 
great ladies. I must admit that they' niadc me ashani- 

3()2 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

edly conscious of how ridiculous our class could be. 
There was finished mockery and insult and the bitterest 
irony in their every gesture, when with my fashionable 
black charshaf I found myself in their midst. 

“Oh, oh, look at her!” shouted the girl with the um- 
brella — there was neither rain nor sunshine. “On her 
head she has a caldron," a peshtemal ^ around her belly 
has she. She has a well-ring around her throat and 
wrists,^ and her shoes are bath-clogs.” 

A unanimous .shout of laughter, accompanied by 
savage and significant movements, inimitable imitations 
but operdy hostile to me, greeted her speech. It ap- 
peared to me like a delicious piece of realistic comedy, 
and I would have givTn anything to throw off the offend- 
ing garments, which displayed my class, at whose ex- 
pense they were laughing, and join in their play. As it 
was, I was in real danger of being badly stoned, or of 
having my dress torn in a way that would have been 
worse than inconvenient. 

I immediately lifted my veil and joined in the conver- 
sation. 'riie human face. es])ecially the human eyes, 
have their force among their kind. A human being 
whose eyes and face are invisible is easier to attack. 

2 This was meant for my hair, which was ])iled on mv head. The women 
of the ])e()])le sensihly plait tlieir hair and leave it on their hack. 

* A silk or cotton shawl which women wrap around the body rather 
tifihtly in public baths. 

^ White cuffs and collars which showed throuirh my veil and which they 
likened to the marble rin^s around old wells in Turkey. 

^ This was aimed at my hi^di heels. Hath-eloirs are very high, very dif- 
ferent from the low clogs which tlie poor women and children wear in the 
streets. 


363 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

“What a beautiful umbrella!” I said admiringly. 
This sobered the owner of the umbrella, who was strut- 
ting about, her thin body in mock contortions of the 
fashionable walk. ISIy back against the wall, I faced 
her thin face with its sharp vicious outlines and feverish 
eyes. Calm, amused, laughing with them at their gibes 
and sarcastic remarks, I disarmed the little crowd for u 
moment. But the moment I made the slightest show of 
movement they all bent down, picked up stones from tlie 
old pavement, and got ready in case 1 should e.scape. 1 
had to advance very carefully, keejiing them amused 
with my conversation. 'Fhe little girl carrying the big 
baby in her arms became my enemy instantly. She re- 
sented my compliment to the umbrella, wliose owner she 
evidently disliked. 

“She has a caldron on her head,” .she began again, re- 
peating the rest in a very clever rhythm. 

The owner of the umbrella interfered. “Thou shut 
up, thou faceless [shameless] one. Thy sister has also 
a tight charshaf, a red one. She goes to the mos(|uc in 
it. She 2 )uts i)owder on her face and ])aints her cheeks.” 

“Of course. It suits her. She will do as she likes. 
\Vhat is it to thee, thou monkey-face?” 

This was from my adversary. But the umbrella was 
equal to anything. 

“Thou art a monkey-face. Thy sister is black, and 
she looks like egg-plant with yogurt over it when she 
puts on powder.” 

“Her lover gives her all that. Docs thy sister have a 
lover ? Answer that, or I throw stones at thee.” 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

“She cannot,” said the umbrella to me consolingly. 
“She has that Gipsy bastard in her arms.” 

The pantomime and the comical quarrel had drawn 
the little mob’s attention away from me, so I talked and 
edged along the wall, still facing the crowd. So long 
as they were not aware of my efforts to escape they did 
not attack, but the moment they realized the meaning 
of my movements they united against me. 

“Shame to thee! Thou hast taken sides with the 
stranger” (every one outside Arasta is a stranger) ; this 
was from the little girl with the baby to the umbrella. 

1 stuck fast to the umbrella and flattered her shame- 
lessly. “Who is her sister’s lover?” I asked. 

I’lio other one answered with rage: “What is it to 
tliee? It is the driver Noah. lie brings her the pow- 
der and the red charshaf. Does her sister have a lover? 
'I’cll me now.” 

’I’hey nearly came to blows over Xoah, but we were 
iKJw near the corner, 'Fhe butcher and the seller of 
pickles ran with sticks as they saw us coming wdth the 
queer little mob after us. At sight of them the mob 
dispersed with wild shrieks. 

The butcher looked as proud as a medieval knight who 
had just rescued a lady. “Never pass along that street 
when it is dark, especially dressed as you arc,” he said. 
“'I’hey stone and tear people’s clothes. I have saved a 
mimber of people.” 

I did not believe in the heroic rescues of the butcher, 
hut I thought his advice both sound and useful. In the 
streets of Fatih, Jihanghir. and Kassim Pasha 1 always 

3 (),) 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

took care to let dress resemble that of the other 
women of the neighborhood, and I never closed my veil. 
I made friends with many children similar to those of 
Arasta, and they even gave me their henna-covered but 
dirty little hands and led me through the intricate back 
streets, telling me about their people and tlieir personal 
affairs and calling me “lady aunt” in a sweet and slightly 
protecting way. 

None of the old teachers of cvhaff lost their place 
when Nakie Ilanuin undertook to modernize the mos(|ue 
schools. She trained them, giving them only Koran, 
domestic science, and sometimes history courses to teach. 
They made a great effort to accustom themselves to the 
new atmosphere, for material reasons at first, but later 
on because the warm fraternity of the organization at- 
tracted them genuinely. In some ways the older ones 
seemed more familiar with the peculiar needs of the cliil- 
dren and their families than did the younger ones, and 
some of them had the charm of old-fashioned 'rurkisli 
manners, which one rarely found in the new generation 
of teachers, although the younger ones had better and 
more up-to-date training. 

There was one little school in Jihanghir with a wonian 
at the head who came from an old family and had gone 
into teaching for financial reasons. She had the old 
Arabic and T’ersian culture and was well trained in 
Oriental history. Her name was Fikrie ITanum, and I 
can never forget the clear pious expression of her face, 
so mild and so serious and tolerant. 

366 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

Her school was always full of flowers, and the old bare 
boards were always scrubbed and clean, while her white 
curtains were always gleaming. Her little ones had ac- 
quired something of her personal charm of manners; 
they were individual little women and little men instead 
of only students. They took care of the flowers in the 
garden, felt proud of their hapi)y little j)lace, and talked 
to one with unconscious grace and freedom. Their gar- 
den was like an eagle’s nest, j)ci-ehcd over the wonderful 
beauty of the Bosphorus, with countless ledges of 
l)rightly colored earth and here and there plantations 
between the garden and the foaming blue waters of the 
narrow winding Bosi)horu.s. The garden was full of 
geraniums and carnations, lovely bright reds; and the 
j)lace had wooden .stools made by the little boy students, 
where one could sit and watch the children })lay. 

Nakie Ilanum gave her a young assistant who intro- 
duced more scientific teaching, while she went on wdth 
the general care and religious teaching. Youth and 
change had appeared to her harsh and ugly at first, but 
in time she became one of Xakie Ilanum’s most loyal 
and loving hands. The little schools with three grades 
had usually these older ladies with young assistants; but 
the six-graded ones, which were being newly opened in 
larger centers with modern buildings, were run with 
completely young staffs. It was good to see them grap- 
ple with their problems and meet their successes and 
failures. 

An event in the old school which we had left with 

3()7 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Nakie Hanum brought about a public discussion be- 
tween Shukri Bey and myself, which made our breach 
wider. We had tried to create a discipline on more 
positive lines, based on the responsibility and the self- 
respect of the students. The old system of the punish- 
ment and exposure of youthful sins and faults was 
avoided, and a relation of much greater friendliness and 
respect was springing up between the teacher and tlie 
taught when we left the school. 

Nakie Hanum’s successor had brought in the system 
of the convent with its exposure of faults and public 
punishments. The resentment which followed had 
broken out into what was almost rebellion when a foolish 
and inexperienced young teacher called the graduating 
class “rude donkeys.” The indignation of the students 
developed into a regular riot, and the teacher had to fly 
through a back door to a carriage, the students pursuing. 

The inspector who went to incjuii’e into the cause of 
the trouble ended by fastening the blame on five of tlie 
first class and expelling them. These students would 
have had only three more moriths to finish their course, 
and all belonged to a class of people who are obliged to 
work; the di.sgrace would mean lifelong unemployment. 
Knowing this to be the case the inspector called on them 
and told the students that if they would sign a pa[)er 
stating that Halide and Xakie Ilaruims had had the riot 
arranged, they should have their diplomas. As the girls 
had not .seen either of us for months, they honorably re- 
fused to sign such a false document, though the inspector 
tried hard to make them do it, I cannot believe that 

308 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

Shukri Bey would have stooped to such a low trick. 
The inspector, knowing our difference with Shukri Bey, 
probably wanted to get promotion by this means. A 
public discussion between me and Shukri Bey in the 
papers made Shukri Bey keener to get the schools of 
evkaff into the ministry of public instruction through 
the pretext of unity of instruction. A violent propa- 
ganda for this change began. Ilairi Effendi being a 
moderate and Shukri Bey an extremist in the party in 
those days, Shukri Bey gradually carried his point, and 
Hairi Effendi resigned. 

I met Shukri Bey personally in 1924. His efforts 
with German aid for the improvement of the higher 
schools and the university since 1916 had resulted in 
raising the standards. I saw that with years he had 
also realized the importance of the quality of his teach- 
ing, and he was doing his best. I sometimes think that it 
might have been worth while for Xakie Hanum at least 
to have come to an agreement with Shukri Bey. 

In 1914 I wrote a little play for Xakie Hanum’s chil- 
dren. It gave me much childish joy, and it took me 
only six hours, one single evening, to write it. It was 
called “The Shepherds of Canaan.” The subject was 
the story of Joseph and his bretliren. It had three pro- 
logues and three acts. It was never puhli.shed in book 
form, except in a much shortened form as the libretto of 
an opera composed by Vedi Sabra, a celebrated Syrian 
&gt;»usician. 

Yahia Kemal, the purist i)oet of the Turkish 

369 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

language, rehearsed the children and I worked with 
Ertogrul Mouhsin, our famous actor, to design the stage 
and the costumes. The stage was white, as well as the 
curtains. A single archaic white arch was the entrance. 
In the background there were real palms in the first act. 
These, with Pharaoh’s throne in the second and third 
acts, were the only furniture on the stage. The little 
ones liad gorgeous colored mantles in every brilliant 
shade, head-dresses, and bare feet. The glare of mixed 
color against the white backgi-ound, and the childish 
groups moving and acting as only children can act, satis- 
fied me completely. A few artists and intellectuals 
found pleasure in the setting, but the play was criticized 
by the general public. The performance took place in 
the Turk Ojak before a very large audience. It had 
caused us some hesitation to put a prophet and a passage 
of sacred history on the stage, but there was no public 
displeasure over this. 

The Ojak pulpit and hall were during these years 
open for lectures, plays, and concerts meant to elevate 
the taste of the general public. It was here that the 
custom of mixed audiences was first begun. Thanks to 
the discreet and really perfect manners of the young 
men then in the Ojak the event passed without any gos- 
sip or critici.sm. It is in that same hall that I addressed 
a large audience of men. Within a year this came to 
seem quite natural, and I had to do a great deal of puhlie 
speaking to audiences of every description in and outside 
the Ojak. 


370 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

It is in that hall that I came to know Goumitas Varta- 
bet, the Armenian priest, musician, and composer. He 
was one of those musicians, actors, and lecturers of 
fame whom the Ojak invited to address its weekly audi- 
ences.® 

Goumitas had become very famous with the Anatolian 
songs and the music of the old Gregorian chants which 
he had collected during years of patient labor in Con- 
stantinople and Anatolia. He had trained a choir of 
the Armenian youth and was considered a great leader 
among the Armenians. 

As he appeared in the long black coat of the priest, 
his dark face as naive as any simple Anatolian’s, and his 
eyes full of the pathos and longing which his voice ex- 
pressed in its pure strong notes, I felt him an embodi- 
ment of Anatolian folk-lore and music. 

The airs were the ones I had often heard our servants 
from Kemah and Erzeroum sing. He had simply 
turned the words into Armenian. Hut I did not pay 
any attention to the language; I only felt the inner sig- 
nificance of that tender and desolate melody from the 
lonely wastes of Anatolia. 

The acquaintance that began that day continued, 
Goumitas often coming to my house to sing. He con- 
tinued to come even after the Armenians and Turks 
were massacring each other. We both silently suffered 

® Opinion was divided in the Ojak about the program for the weekly 
performances. Some wanted only Turkish things to he given, wliile others 
insisted that it would have a more widening effect to have the beauty and 
the culture of other nations. The latter point of view triumphed at the 
time. 


371 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

under the condition of things, but neither of us men- 
tioned it. Mehemmed Emin and Yahia Kemal Beys, 
both great poets who had always taken a humanitarian 
view of nationalism, were interested in his personality 
and came to hear him. Youssouf Akchura also came, 
prompted by his love of music, but he declared that Gou- 
mitas had done a great harm to the Turk by stealing his 
popular culture in the form of music and songs. 

Goumitas came from Kutahia and was of very poor 
parents. They knew no Armenian, and Goumitas 
learned it only in later life. His parents were probably 
of Turkish descent, from the Turkis who had joined the 
Gregorian Church. The Bj’^zantine rulers had called 
in Turkish tribes to form a barrier against the Saracenic 
invasions, and though these were mostly put along the 
southern frontiers, some might have moved elsewhere.’ 

Goumitas’s voice had attracted the attention of the 
Armenian church leaders in Kutahia, and he was sent 
to Rome very early to be trained in music as well as to 
be made a priest. He was an Armenian nationalist 
whether his origin was Turkish or Armenian, but in 
temperament and heart he was a real Anatolian Turk if 
unconsciously. His musical vein was inherited. I re- 
member the very words he spoke which gave me the clue. 

7 A ^reat number of the Christian minority, mostly Greek and sonic 
Armenian, spoke only 7'urki.sh and looked very Turki.sh, It wa.s a mistake 
I believe and not good policy to let them enter into the exchange in the 
Lausanne Conference. If a Turkish church had been recognized inde- 
pendently of the Greek and Armenian churches, there wore enough con- 
scious Christian Turks, and a very valuable element too, who would have 
stayed in Turkey. 


372 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1918-14 

“I inherited from my parents a pair of red shoes 
and a song,” he said. “The shoes were from my father, 
but the song was from my mother; she composed the 
music, and made the words.” 

It was a simple song about two white pigeons, and 
in the purest Anatolian dialect. To this day it is the 
women in Anatolia who compose songs and make folk- 
poetry. It goes from mouth to mouth, and the best 
naturally survives. 

As a man and as an artist Goumitas was of a quality 
one rarely meets. His asceticism, the pure and beauti- 
ful simplicity with which he taught the Armenians, 
might well have been imitated by other nationalists. 
His way of expressing Anatolia both in song and in feel- 
ing was profoundly worth hearing. 

Goumitas one day sang an Ave Maria in Armenian 
which belonged to the sixth century, a thing of rare mys- 
tical beauty ; and the utter ecstasy and religious emotion 
of the air so fascinated me that I asked him if he had set 
any of the Psalms to music. 

“Yes,” he said, “the one-hundred-and-first.” 

“Are you too tired to sing it?” I asked. 

He had thrown himself into the low chair near the 
piano, and his face was white and full of strange lines 
of pain. 

He began singing without moving from the chair. 
As he began to sing I felt that the air had none of the 
sacred and humble beauty of the Ave INIaria. It began 
like a hissing curse, bitter, rebellious, and angry ; as he 

373 



MEMOIRS OE HALlDi: EDIB 

went on he rose slowly, looking like the apparition of 
Mephisto in “Faust,” drawing himself to his full height 
as he reached the last words. Then with his arms raised, 
his face like a white flame, and his eyes like two black 
flashes, his tones ended like a peal of echoing thunder. 
It awed me and made me feel strange. I instinctively 
took the Bible from the bookcase near me and found the 
last stanzas of Psalm 101. 

I will early destroy all the wicked of the land: that 
I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the 
Lord. 

It was the cry of the hatred and vengeance of his soul 
for my people. He had such a look of madness and 
suffering that I tried to be absolutely calm and (juiet, but 
he looked embarrassed ; he knew that we hud looked into 
each other’s souls. We were seeing each other, with 
the Armenian and Turkish blood, and Armenian and 
Turkish suffering, as an increasing flood between us. 

In 1915 the Ojak generously used its influence to 
have him spared from deportation, but in 1910 he had a 
serious disturbance in his mind, which gave w'ay under 
the strain of those horrible times. Dr. Adnan begged 
Talaat Pasha to allow him to go to Paris for a cure, and 
this was accorded to him. He is still in an asylum. 

He was not the only one to be afflicted by polities, 
translated into human wickedness. I saw in Angora in 
1922 a Turkish woman from Krzeroum, who had pitched 
a frail tent by the waters of Tchoubouk, She had been 
a refugee since 1917 and had been wandering all over 

:J7l 



MY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES, 1913-14 

Anatolia with her husband.® I see her now, tall, her 
weather-beaten face like a piece of wrinkled leather, 
only the brilliant blue eyes and their black fringes de- 
noting her youth. I remember her very words as she 
told me how her four boys, the eldest eight and the 
youngest two, had been massacred, how she had had to 
leave them among flames and blood and escape with her 
life, and how .she heard their call every night. She did 
not sing her pain in Psalms, but it was the selfsame pain 
of Goumitas in my rofwn at Fazli Pasha. I know a 
man, an Erzeroum member of the first national as- 
sembly, who would not hear of mere}' to the Armenians 
because sev'en members of bis family, including his 
young wife and his sister-in-law, had been butchered by 
Armenians. I knew a poor Armenian in Syria who 
had lost his speech and wandered in the night crying like 
a dumb tortured animal because he imagined his two 
boys, who were separated from him, had been .shot. I 
know . . . never mind what I know. I have seen, I 
have gone through, a land full of aching hearts and tor- 
turing remembrances, and I have lived in an age when 
the politicians jdayed with these human hearts as ordi- 
nary gamblers })lay with their cards. 

I who had dreamed of a nationalism which will create 
a happy land of beauty, understanding, and love, I have 
seen nothing but mutual ma.s.saere and mutual hatred; 

^ I have written her story as she told it to me under the title of “A 
Woman from l’'rzerouni.” The women of Angora became very much in- 
terested in her and visited her and tried to help her. She left for Erzeroum 
in one of the groups of refugees that were sent back to their country by 
the government. 


375 



MEMOIES 01-&gt; HALIDE EDIB 

I have seen nothing but ideals used as instruments for 
creating human carnage and misery. 

There were great idealists and lovers of humanity in 
Russia who have suffered and died in order to demolish 
the barriers between classes and nations and to bring 
brotherhood and happiness to their kind. The result is 
just as ugly as what I myself have seen. 

When will true heart and understanding come to hu- 
manity? — not merely in name and principles. Now I 
can only say with Kant, “Ce n’est pas sans une violentc 
repulsion que Ton pent contempler I’entree en scene des 
hommes sur le thejitre du monde; encore plus grande 
que le mal fait aux hommes par la nature est celui qu’il 
se font reciproquement.” 


876 



