VIII 


THE YOUNG TUBES 

H ardly twenty years had passed after the 
Tanzimat reform, and the men who instituted 
it were still in power, struggling painfully 
to carry it out, when a younger generation of writers 
and thinkers went a step further and demanded a con- 
stitution. An absolute monarchy with a mere royal 
edict to guarantee the personal rights of citizens did 
not satisfy them any more. They demanded represen- 
tation ; they wanted a national assembly. The political 
ideals of the Reshid Pasha trio appeared old; these men 
were influenced bj^ the fresher ideals of the Frencli 
revolutionaries. Under the leadership of Meheined 
Bey, Namik Kemal, and Noury (whom I have already 
mentioned), with some other young thinkers of note, 
they formed a secret society called the Young Ottomans. 
Their meeting at Sancta Sojdiia was found out by the 
government, and they escaped to Paris to avoid punish- 
ment. All the Ottoman students in Paris as well as the 
French youth who were opposed to Napoleon III 
joined them, and they were favorably received in I’reneh 
circles. The name of Young Turks was given to the 
Young Ottomans at this period. The leader and rep- 
resentative of the Young I'urks in politics, the man 

246 



THE YOUNG TURKS 


who was to carry out their ideals in politics, was Midhat 
Pasha. 

The political adherents of the Young Turks in Con- 
stantinople decided to dethrone Abdul Aziz (1861-76), 
the successor of Abdul Med j id; and they had an under- 
standing, on which they founded considerable hopes, 
with Murad, the heir to the throne, who promised to 
call a national assembly. Abdul Aziz was dethroned 
and committed suicide in 1876. This was taken as a 
pretext by the reactionaries and Abdul Hamid to accuse 
the constitutional reform cabinet of having murdered 
Abdul Aziz. Sultan Murad V, on whom the Young 
Turk party depended, became mentally deranged 
after a reign of three months, which left the throne 
for Abdul Hamid in 1876. The new sultan affected 
a liberal attitude and promised to call a national as- 
sembly. The Young Turks returned from Paris, and 
Namik Kemal published the newspaper “Ibret,” which 
became the medium of expression for liberty and prog- 
ress. 

Midhat Pasha as the prime minister called a council 
to draft the constitution, with Xamik Kemal as one of 
the members. After six months of labor the council 
presented a draft. 

IVIidhat Pasha announced the constitution to the peo- 
ple by a royal edict of Abdul Hamid, which he caused 
to be read in the big open place behind the Sublime 
I’orte. The historian Abdurrahman Sheref, who died 
recently at the age of eighty-four, having lived through 
the great reform, tells of the event in his “Historical 

247 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDID 

Talks.” “It was a rainy day, but the place was full. 
I had to push and be pushed by elbows and umbrellas 
till I found myself a place near the pulpit. The secre- 
tary, Mahmoud Bey, read the edict, and Midhat Pasha 
gave a benedictional speech. It was the only time I had 
seen and heard Midliat Pasha, and I still remember 
the tremor and the emotion of his voice. . . . Later 
on as a young liberal I took an active part in the 
elections which were to take place for the first time in 
Turkey. The old men in my quarter were extremely 
cautious and hesitating. When one of them had to sign 
the voting paper he said, ‘My son, I owe some arrears 
of tax; will they take it from me if I sign?’ ” 

Although Abdurrahman Sheref by this sentence 
showed how little prepared the ])eople were for repre- 
sentative government, still as one reads the accounts 
of the parliamentary discussions and speeches of the 
first assembly, which lived only a few months, one is 
struck by the courageous and liberal spirit of the mem- 
bers. Their denunciation of tyranny is surprising and 
gives one the idea that some of the men at least were 
ripe for constitutionalism. 

Before the national assembly met in Constantinople, 
Abdul Hamid in a moment of fear betrayed the tyran- 
nical side of his nature by arresting ISIidhat Pasha and 
sending him out of Turkey. The assembly, for which 
Midhat Pasha suffered so much, opened in the last 
months of 1876 and was dissolved in 1877, the pretext 
for its dissolution being the Russian war and Turkey s 
internal diffculties. 


248 



THE YOUNG TURKS 


In 1878 the general amnesty brought back Midhat 
Pasha ; he was appointed governor first to the Rumelian 
provinces, and then to Damascus and Syria. His 
achievements as a governor are unique. A series of 
public works, a real conception of good and just ad- 
ministration unparalleled before and after, a modern 
attitude toward accepting the equality of individual 
rights of all citizens are the traditions he has left be- 
hind him. But his high ideals and unsullied integrity 
were to be his undoing, for these were the characteristics 
that the treacherous and sinister mind of Abdul Hamid 
most feared and hated. It was while Midhat Pasha 
was governor of Smyrna that he was summoned to 
Vikliz, there to appear before the Supreme Court, which 
charged him with the murder of Abdul Aziz. Forged 
evidence was brought against him, paid witnesses per- 
jured themselves freely, and INIidhat Pasha w^as con- 
demned to death, when, to the surprise of all, Abdul 
Hamid, suddenly assuming the guise of the merciful 
monarch, commuted his sentence to imprisonment for 
life. He was sent to the dungeons of Faif with some 
other members of his cabinet. Hardly two j'ears passed 
when Abdul Hamid, once more frightened at the pos- 
sibility of JMidhat Pasha’s release, sent Hi/a Pasha, who 
was his minister of Avar for years; and Hiza Pasha had 
Midhat Pasha, Avith a few others sentenced at the Yildiz 
trial, strangled in the dungeons of Taif. Thus died 
Midhat Pasha, one of the greatest of Turkish patriots, 
paying the highest price Avhich Turks haA’^e paid for 
patriotism. 


249 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Namik Kemal’s newspaper was stopped, but he, with 
Noury Bey, Zia Pasha, and some other Turkish writers, 
was at the head of the Guedik Pasha Theater, present- 
ing their translated or created plays, when Nainik 
Kemal’s “Vatan” (Fatherland) was produced. It 
caused such an outburst of applause that an enormous 
mass of people followed Namik Kemal home, applaud- 
ing and shouting, “Long live Vatan, long live Liberty.” 
The very next night at the second presentation of the 
play Namik Kemal was arrested and exiled, where 
he also had to exjiiate his love and service to his 
country. 

A dark reign of tyranny and of despotism, a .system 
of terror and espionage, is the story of the rest of Abdul 
Hamid’s reign. The words “patriotism,” “fatherland.” 
and other expressions of liberty w'ere abolished from 
the dictionaries; the collections of Tanzimat literature 
were destroyed wherever they were found and the 
owners punished with pcr})etual banishment. A few 
newspapers w'ere published, beginning with a prayer 
for the .sultan and filling the rest of their pages Avith 
lists of promotions and articles on science or travel. 

The.se were the paper.si I saw in my childhood and 
early youth. All the great leaders had expired and left 
the sultan supreme. ISIost of the Young 'I’urks with 
some exceptions had lost either their ideals or their 
hopes. Some used their liberal views as a pretext to 
extract money from the sultan; it was in some eases 
political blackmail. In fact very few of the figures 
who emerged during the revolution of 1908 were found 

250 



THE YOUNG TURKS 

among the political refugees in Europe ; they were not 
Europeanized men such as the Tanzimatists and the 
first Young Turks. There was an anonymous and 
strong revolutionary element, with vaguer tendencies 
of mind, who translated such thought as they had 
into action with the energy and ferocious power of the 
Macedonians. At the beginning of 1908 no serious 
likelihood could be seen that the regime would be op- 
posed. The Turkish people had to grin and bear the 
existing state of things, which was then of thirty years’ 
standing. 


251 



