XVI 


THE WORLD WAR, 1914-16 

I T began with the assassination of the Austrian 
crown prince and ended with the declaration of the 
World War. Xo one in Turkey during those 
first days dared to imagine that it would end with such 
world-wide disaster. I will not discuss the responsibil- 
ity for it in the general sense. If the economic and mil- 
itary growdh of Germany as well as its materialistic 
philosophy were among the contributing causes, we have 
since learned that there were causes and long prepara- 
tions of equally materialistic and aggressive kind on the 
part of the Allies. 

But it is most interesting, although extremely painful, 
to review the j)ros and cons on our own side which led us 
into the general catastrophe that resulted in the length- 
ening of the war by four years in the Near East, to the 
discomfort of the w’orld in general and to the cost of 
Turkey in particular of many lives and much avoidable 
suffering. Before giving a rough outline of our rea- 
sons, I want to draw the attention of my readers to three 
of the principal works which are illuminating to the 
greatest degree. The first one is Professor Earle’s 
“The Bagdad Railway,” which was published in 1923. 
Having a non-prejudiced mind and a desire to see the 

377 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

truth, and writing at a period when the thick cloud of 
propaganda on both sides has thinned away with time, 
he sees matters very clearly; and as the work is purely 
economic, any one who wishes to understand the eco- 
nomic dilemma which led to the great struggle finds an 
excellent and unbiased authority in the book. 

The second is the “Le Sort de I’Empire Ottoman,” 
by A. Mandlestan, the first dragoman of the Russian 
embassy in Constantinople till 1914. The book was 
published in 1917. He has gathered an extraordinary 
amount of data on the Young Turk regime and on the 
causes which led Turkey to enter the war on the Ger- 
man side. He has one single aim, and all his data is 
grouped and even twisted to prove his point. It is more 
or less the point of view blindly, passionately, and 
narrowly held b\' the allied world in those days. The 
spirit of his arguments is that the Ottoman empire must 
be torn to pieces, and the Turks must not be considered 
as ordinary human beings, and the Young Turks are 
ordinary criminals, having massacred the Armenians. 
There is a detailed account of Armenian massacres and 
a series of exaggerated accusations with reference to the 
other minorities, w’hom he a.s.serts the Turks meant to 
exterminate. I do not, however, find a word about the 
great massacre of the I'urks by the Bulgarians nor its 
accompaniment of atrocities in 1912, not a word about 
the great massacre of the Turks by the iVrmenians who 
entered Oriental Turkey in 1915 with the Russian army, 
which has been simply told by the Russian officers of 
the .same Russian army who revolted against the Ar- 

378 



THE WORLD WAR, 1914-16 

mcnian cruelties. The book, in spite of its data, made 
me see for the first time the incurable narrowness and 
one-sidedness of the European mind of those days con- 
cerning my country and my people, and for the first 
time I saw clearly that the arguments of the Young 
Turks had real force. However, the declarations of a 
former grand vizir,* which he puts into his book in order 
to refute its contents, possess very strong and irrefut- 
able arguments and data on the Turkish side. 

In opposition to Mandlestan’s views is the third book 
called “Les Causes de la Guerre,” by Boghitchevitch, 
which has recently appeared in Paris. This work gives 
a detailed account of the principal policies dominating 
the world before the war, that of czarist Russia which 
had aimed at the crushing of Austria and Turkey in the 
Balkans, and that of France which upheld Russia in 
order to crush Germany and recover Alsace-Lorraine. 
Boghitchevitch, as an old Serbian diplomat during the 
preparation of these policies and during the World 
War, gives interesting political documents on the sub- 
ject. 

I am against war in general, and so I cannot defend 
our going into it on any side, but if one disentangles the 
mass of knotted political arguments of the day and 
tries to see clearly the psychology of the Young Turk 
leaders who entered the war, one sees these causes: 
First, the desire for complete independence; that is, the 
abolition of the capitulations. The Young Turks tried 
hard, but in vain, to enlist the sympathies of the Allies. 

^“Le Sort de I’Enipirc Ottoman,'’ p. IOC. 

379 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

But the AlKes wanted their neutrality without paying 
anything in return. Secondly, the inherited and justi- 
fied fear of Russian imperialism. Whether Constan- 
tinople was promised in 1914 or in 1916 to Russia, the 
Young Turk leaders believed that England must use 
Turkey as a bait to catch Russia, to whom she was a 
traditional and political enemy. Thirdly, the deplor- 
able financial position of Turkey. Even to insure 
neutrality sbe needed financial aid, and she could not 
procure it from the Allies. A well known statesman of 
to-day told me once that after the refusal of England to 
pay for the war-ships she had confiscated, the govern- 
ment was strongly carried away by the pro- war element. 
If this is not the whole of the truth it is at least a signifi- 
cant part of it, and it shows the sore need of Turkey for 
financial aid. Fourthly, the decided and openly prej- 
udiced pro-Christian attitude of the Allies, who always 
helped the Christian minorities to gain economic, even 
political predominance against the interests of the Mos- 
lem and Turkish majorities. Fifthly, the psychological 
insight of Germany^ into the weak spots of the Turkish 
situation, and her cleverness in seizing the right moment. 

The Young Turk leaders used all the available argu- 
ments to justify their entry into the war and to turn 
the Turkish people against the Allies, who were still 
very popular in Turkey. It is queer to observe that 
public opinion turned against the Allies and began to 
feel the arguments of the Young Turks justifiable only 
after the Young Turks had passed out of power. The 

380 



THE WOBLD WAR, 1914-16 

Greek occupation and atrocities under British patron- 
age, and the Armenian atrocities against Adana under 
the patronage of the French, were talked of as the symp- 
toms of the allied justice and rule in Turkey foreseen 
by the Unionists before the war. 

In 1914 not only the masses but most of the intellec- 
tual and leading forces of the Unionists were against the 
war. Only Enver Pasha and a certain convinced mil- 
itary group, along with the profiteers, were in favor of 
war. Somehow the war seemed an impossibility, al- 
though a great many people feared it and felt uneasy, 
knowing the strength of military dictatorship in Turkey. 

I received two different visits and had two memorable 
conversations during the first days of October. First 
came Djemal Pasha, the minister of marine, who took 
tea in my house with Madame Djemal Pa.sha. 

“I am afraid our government is drifting into war,” 
I said point-blank. 

He laughed as if I had said something absurd and 
childish. 1 remember the determined expression of his 
face as he said tliese very words : 

“No, Halide Hanum, we will not go into war.” 

“How will you manage that?” 

“I have power enough to persuade them not to. If I 
fail I resign. It would be extreme folly.” 

Three days later Djavid Bey called. He had an air 
of despondency and looked seriously troubled. 

I asked him the same question. 

“If they go into war, I resign,” he said. “It will be 

381 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

our ruin even if we win. There are others who will 
resign as well, but we hope to prevent it. Talaat is 
against it at the moment.” 

On the eighteenth of the same month Turkey entered 
the war. 

Djavid Bey with some of his colleagues resigned. 
Djemal Pasha did not resign. 

He called soon after to take leave. He was ap- 
pointed commander of the third army; that is, on the 
Russian front. He seemed in good spirits and tried to 
explain his change of opinion. His chief argument was 
the Russian one. He already believed that Constan- 
tinople would pass to Russia if the allied forces won, 
and as the Allies did not give sufficient guarantee in re- 
turn for our neutrality, the supreme duty of the Turk- 
ish army was to help the side opposing Russia; and in 
the event of German and Turkish victory, in which he 
firmly believed, he thought that the Turks would be 
free as they have never been before, and that the cap- 
itulations and foreign interference generally would 
cease. 

It is very sad to think to-day that if the Allies had 
consented to the abolition of the capitulations and given 
some assurance about Constantinople the military party 
could not have driven Turkey into w'ar. 

Djavid Bey was in disgrace and was keenly watched. 
He did not leave his house for some time. He was 
sharply attacked and even called a traitor by the ex- 
treme Unionists. 


382 



THE AVOBU) WAR, 1914-16 

Djemal Pasha’s destination was changed to Syria as 
the commander of the fourth army. He was to attack 
Egypt and try to keep the English busy and make them 
concentrate great forces on the Syrian front. 

The terrific defense of Gallipoli was the first great 
event of the World War in Turkey. I will not speak of 
its almost superhuman heroism and sacrifice. For me, 
all the honor is due to the common Turkish soldier whose 
name no one knoAvs and who cannot appear in moving 
pictures as the hero of the day. Mr. Masefield’s book, 
“Gallipoli,” makes one realize the great human and 
great Avar material which such a nation as the British 
has lost, and it makes one realize at the same time the 
fighting value of the Turkish army which could suc- 
cessfully defend Gallipoli against the allied forces and 
fleets. There was a keen sense in the men of defending 
the gates to the main Turkish lands; there was a more 
than keen sense of fighting against the Russian hallu- 
cination projected in their brains by the allied forces. 

With the allied attack on the Dardanelles, many 
families once more left Constantinople, and I had to 
send my children away to Broussa. 

It was about the time of the great battle of IMarch 5 
that Youssouf Akehura invited the nationalist writers to 
gather in the offices of “Turk Yourdu” and seriously 
discuss their future plans if the Allies should force the 
straits and enter Constantinople. They Avere to de- 
cide in case of such disaster whether they were to stay 

383 



MEMOIRS OF HALmi: EDIB 

on in Constantinople and go on keepmg the ideals of 
nationalism in the hearts of the people or pass on and 
work in safer and more favorable lands. 

There was a series of lengthy gatherings and long 
discussions, which in the end took a somewhat melo- 
dramatic turn. But they never lost their hot and pas- 
sionate character. Dr. Adnan was asked to preside as 
the most cool-headed person present. 

First every one was to define his nationalistic creed. 
The yoimger writers, Kuprulu Fuad and Omer Seifed- 
dine, declared that nationalism was the search and the 
discovery of a nation’s ego, and the teaching of it to the 
individuals of the nation. As to the fundamental ele- 
ments of the national ego, they were vague. Omer, who 
became my friend in later years, confessed to me in his 
humorous way that Keuk-Alp Zia, their master, who 
was not in Constantinople then, was always changing the 
fimdamental elements of the national ego; they could 
never be definite for fear they might be called on to 
formulate something quite different on the same subject. 

Aga Oglou Ahmed, as an old nationalist, declared 
that nationalism was a common mentality composed of 
four different elements ; namely, language, religion, I 
origin, and common customs. And around these four ’ 
elements and the order of their importance the discus- 
sion raged. As political tendencies in Turkish nation- 
alism depended very much on the order of their impor- 
tance, it made the discussions instructive and illuminat- 
ing. Hussein Zade Ali, a venerable old unionist and 
nationalist, declared that religion and language were 

384 





THE WORLD WAR, 1914-16 

the foremost elements, and origin came next. “A Mos- 
lem negro who speaks Turkish and calls himself a Turk 
is nearer to me than the originally Turkish Magyar,” 
he said. Thus he stuck to Pan-Islamism in a mild way, 
while the younger generation insisted more on origin 
and language, regarding religion as the least important, 
and thus stuck to Pan-Turanistic tendencies.^ 

Finally the meeting tried to decide with rather melo- 
dramatic speeches whether or not the writers who sym- 
bolize Turkish nationalism should stay on in Constan- 
tinople or go elsewhere. It was then that Mehemmed 
Ali Tewfik, a young journalist, made a most emphatic 
speech full of rhetorical effect enthusiastically suggest- 
ing that these writers should not only stay but should 
even find some way of being martyred, and thus seal the 
sacred cause of nationalism with their blood. Although 
in those days it was easy enough to get oneself killed, 
still the writers thus complimented as being worthy of 
death looked a little queer. Mehemmed Emin, whose 
name was the first, sat with his hands folded, con- 
templating, and my humble self, who was also among 
the chosen, wondered what sort of death Mehemmed 
Emin contemplated. There were twinkles in many 
friendly eyes. And I really think that it was the su- 
preme joke in those tragic days. 


2 Although the younger nationalists tried to disregard religion in the 
national ego, in practice they have been far from doing so. There are 
purely Turkish Orthodox Christians who were exchanged by the Lausanne 
Treaty because of their church difference. And it is strange to think that 
Hiza Kour Bey, who was one of the Turkish delegates, signed the treaty 
although he is a strong nationalist on the basis of origin and language. 

885 



MEMOIRS OE HALIDE EDIB 

The Dardanelles attack passed, but there was trouble 
on the East Anatolian front. There were rumors about 
Armenian deportations and their bloody consequences. 
There was talk of the Armenians having burned Turk- 
ish villages at the front and having massacred Turks, 
and talk of the danger they were creating behind the 
Turkish army by their revolutionary centers. It was 
long after this event that the government published a 
book on the subject exposing the crimes in eastern 
Anatolia. When the deportations became general pub- 
lic opinion was sincerely against the govermnent. But 
the country was tlien in the thick of tlie fight, and 
nothing was published on the subject. It was an ex- 
tremely difficult time for the Turkish population; in 
spite of the public disapproval of the government’s acts, 
every Turk was deeply conscious of Turkey’s danger, 
and that it would mean complete spoliation and exter- 
mination of the Turks if the Turkish army should be 
defeated. One naturally felt that Armenian revolu- 
tionary centers were used as the strategic points to carry 
out allied policy against the Turks. Besides this polit- 
ical argument, which the Armenians did their best to 
justify by their own bloody deeds, there was a strong 
economic one, morally supported by the (Germans. 
This was to end the economic supremacy of the Arme- 
nians, thereby clearing the markets for the Turks and 
the Germans, There is no doubt that the foreign policy 
which caused the elimination of Armenians and Turks 
in the vast lands of Turkey took well into account that 
nature fills up the open spaces of economic value, and 

386 



THE WOELD WAE, 1914-16 

that the spaces left empty by the mutual massacre of the 
peoples in Turkey would be taken up by the European 
countries with surplus populations. 

There are two factors which lead man to the exter- 
mination of his kind: the principles advocated by the 
idealists, and the material interest which the conse- 
(pences of doing so afford certain classes. The idealists 
are the more dangerous, for one is obliged to respect 
them even if one cannot agree with them. Talaat was 
of that kind. I saw Talaat very rarely after the Arme- 
nian deportations. I remember well one day when he 
nearly lost his temper in discussing the question and said 
in a severe tone : “Look here, Halide Ilanum. I have 
a heart as good as yours, and it keeps me awake at night 
to think of the human suffering. But that is a personal 
thing, and I am here on this earth to think of my people 
and not of my sensibilities. If a Macedonian or Arme- 
nian leader gets the chance and the excuse he never ne- 
glects it. There was an equal number of Turks and 
Moslems massacred during the Balkan Avar, yet the 
world kept a criminal silence. I have the conviction 
that as long as a nation does the best for its oAA'n inter- 
ests, and succeeds, the world admires it and thinks it 
moral. I am ready to die for Avhat I have done, and I 
know that I shall die for it.” In 1922 he was shot by an 
Armenian in Berlin. 

In 1916 I spoke to a A'ery large audience, mostly 
Unionists, in the Turk Ojak on the Armenian question 
and national economics. I saw the Armenian question 
quite differently from tlie way I see it to-day, I did not 

387 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

know about the Armenian crimes, and I had not realized 
that in similar cases others could be d hundred times 
worse than the Turks. So I spoke with conviction 
against bloodshed, which I believed would hurt those 
who indulge in it more than it hurt their victims. There 
were some seven hundred present. As I finished, the 
youth in the Ojak cheered, while a young medical stu- 
dent called Shukri Eflatoun rose and called out to Ham- 
dullah Soubhi: “]Mr. President, I want to speak, I 
want to prove the right to be on the other side.” An- 
other member rose and said that the Ojak should not 
allow Shukri Eflatoun to speak as he wished. They 
would not hear a word about it. This seemed to me un- 
fair, but the president failed to get a hearing for Shukri 
Eflatoun. I received the next day a great volume about 
the massacre of the Turks by the Armenians. WTiat is 
more I heard that some of the Unionists were furious 
with me and that they proposed to have me punished, 
which Talaat Pasha refused. “She serves her country 
in the way she believes,” he had said. “Let her speak 
her mind; she is sincere.” But the number of young in- 
tellectuals who came to my house decreased to a con- 
siderable degree. Talaat Pasha himself, however, did 
not change his friendly attitude. 


388 



