III 


OUR VARIOUS HOMES IX SCUTARI 

T he new house was in Selimie, an old Turkish 
quarter looking over to the Marmora across the 
inky cypress line of the Karadja Ahmed Ceme- 
tery on one side, while on the other hand the misty 
Istamboul Point with its hundreds of minarets rose 
softly into the blue dome of sky beyond the Bosiihorus. 
The house belonged to an old minister of war, and one 
half was still occupied by the owners. But our side 
was even as large as our old house in Beshiktash, while 
a wild garden, especially full of rose-bushes, stretched 
toward the cemeteries, giving us an ample sense of space 
and freedom. The whole quarter had a number of im- 
mense wooden houses purpled with age and on the brink 
of decay, each belonging to some grand vizir of half a 
century ago. Cranny, repelled by the raw ugliness of 
new things, unerringly ehose these beautiful old places 
in spite of their being half tumbled down. The house 
itself and a great part of the whole quarter is now 
burned, but I have several times since wandered among 
its ashes in my visits to the old haunts. Besides the 
rose-bushes, the garden had a very big walnut-tree, up 
which Mahmoure Abla used to climb daily. Its height 
made me dizzy even to look up at it. 

113 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

The imam of Selimie was engaged after our arrival to 
come and teach us every evening. Before long father 
came to live with us too, bringing Abla and his whole 
household. There was a new baby girl now, Nighiar, 
who took Neiliifer’s place as the most despotic and 
spoiled creature in the household. My life slowly 
drifted from the harem to the selamlik, which was, how- 
ever, now no longer as important a place as it had been 
in grandfather’s lifetime. The men-servants interested 
me more than Abla’s Anatolian maids and Fikriyar. 
There Avere no more evening talks in Hava Ilanum’s 
room, for she had taken charge of Xeiliifer, and the child 
was put to bed in her room early in the evening. 

Suleiman Aga stayed only for a short time, for on 
account of being a distant relation he took on such airs 
that he displeased granny. To me he was distinctly at- 
tractive, for he was full of fairy-stories of Eastern 
Anatolia, and also of personal adventures, which I 
thought even more wonderful. Mahmourc Ahla teased 
him incessantly, because she found out that he had three 
wives in Kemah. He explained the reason for his polyg- 
amy in words which I cannot forget, and Avhich I think 
made me feel that he was justified. He classed his 
wives according to their capacity to cook pilaf f “My 
first wife,” he would say. “cooked it badly. It was 
much too dry. so I married the second, hoping for some- 
thing better; but .she, not knowing my taste in pilaf, ami 
thinking to please me by her economy, cooked it dri(‘i' 

• Known to the K.njjlish ns ‘‘pilau"- the naticnal dish made of rice wliicli 
ai)pfared at the end of almost everj" Turkish meal. 

114 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 

still. So I married a third before the second had been 
with me forty days. Lo 1 a pilaf appeared delicious and 
buttery, so much so that the butter dripped down from 
nay mustache and beard. Then I felt that I had found 
the woman I wanted, and I have never married again 
since.” 

After Suleiman Aga appeared Ahmed Aga, a short, 
small man from Eghin, dark, sly, and intelligent; a man 
who could read and write and handle, or rather rule, 
his masters with psychological insight. From him I 
got a great deal of my early education. The fact that it 
was not given in lesson form made it all the more ef- 
fective and appealed to the more artistic part of my na- 
ture. It was by a mere chance that I fell under the in- 
fluence of a man of liis type, hut it was this chance that 
opened to me the folk-lore, the popular Turkish litera- 
ture, which none of the rest of my generation of writers 
liave enjoyed. 

As some one had discovered a musical talent in me, 
which I never j)ossessed, I began to take piano-lessons 
about this time. It must have l)een a funny proceed- 
ing, for 1 had to he lifted on the chair, and my hands, 
though naturally big, were not yet big enough to strike 
the notes properly. Still I worked on at it earnestly, 
as I did with the rest of mv lessons, hut I lived onlv 
when Ahmed Aga was reading stories or when we w-ere 
wandering together in the cemeteries or over the mead- 
ows stretching toward Haidar I’asha. 

The reading t)f ^Vhmed ^\ga covers a period of 
nearly three years; that is. from the time when he first 

iir&gt; 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

came until I had been at the American College for my 
first year. The first story I had from him was “Battal 
Gazi.” I found Ahmed Aga reading a big black book 
one day and asked him to tell me the story. He read 
something which charmed me so intensely that I got hold 
of the book and struggled on by myself, reading aloud 
and asking him a thoui;and questions about things I did 
not understand. So this crude story, which was the 
great military epic of the janizaries and had fired their 
imagination in their martial feats, was my first plunge 
into the heroic fiction of olden times. 

Battal Gazi,' a man from Malatia, really lived and 
fought against tlic Byzantines. 1 1 is tomb is in Seid 
Gazi, a place near Eskishehir, the scene of hard battles 
between the Greeks and the 'rurkish Nationalists in 
1921. 

It was not so much the meager historical facts in the 
book but its Oriental imagination which took hold of me. 
It was as long as the African travels, .so that despite hard 
reading it took me more than six months to get through. 
The book is a .series of battles; and the color, the force, 
and the sound of fighting are there. Battal’s war-cry 
sends twenty infidels to hell, their eternal abode as he 
calls it. He is .so big. .such a .symbol of force and fear, 
that the Greek women sent their naughty children to 
sleep by frightening them with his name, 'rherc is an- 
other mighty man with him. three hundred years old, 
once a companion of the Holy Prophet, who has, how- 

^Oazi is an old Moslem title piven to those who fight for the Faith ami 
who arc thereby entitled to a place in paradi.se. 

116 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 

ever, left him behind on earth so that he may help the 
Gazi in this world. 

Battal kidnaps one Greek princess after another, and 
the Byzantine Caesar builds the Leander Tower in the 
middle of the Bosphorus to hide the most beautiful one 
from the great Gazi. But of course he finds and mar- 
ries her all the same. The struggle goes on for a gen- 
eration, but the name of the Byzantine Caesar is always 
Ileraclius; his army each time is exactly three hundred 
thousand men, while the (Nazi’s army numbers only a 
few thousand. It is, however, not the men of the Turk- 
ish army but the Gazi and the Old Man who caused the 
Greek routs and killed more by their very war-cries 
than the Greeks could by real fighting. So said the 
hook, with its tremendous din of battle, the high dust- 
clouds rising under the tramp of armies, the danger, the 
clever escapes, and the great victories. The hook could 
not have charmed the early janizary ancestors of ours 
more than it did me and Ahmed ^Vga. 

'riie next hook of Ahmed Aga’s was on the same kind 
of funny yellow paper and in the same had Persian 
print as the first. It was in verse, and told all about 
.iVhamouslin Ilorassani. This was the Persian hero who 
took the part of the fallen house of ..Vhhassides against 
the Ommiads. The struggle was long, bloody, and cruel 
beyond human endurance. It almost provides a parallel 
to the Inquisition in Spain. I confess that the book 
gave me cold .shudders, and I liked it distinctly less than 
Battal’s frank and picturesque story, hut through it I 
got an insight into the subtle and complicated Asiatic 

117 



MEMOIKS OF HALID:fe EDIB 

soul, with its inheritance from how many forgotten civi- 
lizations permeating the chivalrous Islamic Arabic 
world and introducing there its germs of decay, which 
completely destroyed its political unity and independ- 
ence. 

The wonderful Islamic democracy, based on the peo- 
ple’s choice of great and idealist leaders, full of hu- 
manity and common sense, became an Asiatic despotism 
of djTiasties, based on personal ambition, distrust, and 
mutual hatred, leading to the unscrupulous and diabolic 
destruction of each other and of hordes of innocent peo- 
ple supposed to be on one or the other side. 

The hook seemed to s(jueeze my heart in an iron hand, 
tightening with the ugly passions and demonstrations of 
power of the famous heroes. I wondered all the time 
what the sim})le little childreii were doing when all this 
bloody and cruel struggle was going on in a country, 
whether they dared to go into the streets and j)lay, and 
what .sort of nights they had and what dreams the\’ 
dreamed. Years after when in Syria I was walking in 
the Beirut streets with Colonel Fuad Bey, the chief of 
.staff, and the little Arab children saluted him, as they 
usually do salute uniforms, he suddenly turned to me 
and said: “The saluting of children shows that there 
is something wrong in our rule. 'Fhey should not he 
aware of us.” Whenever I .see or read of a great mili- 
tary hero performing his deeds, and of history or lit- 
erature recording them, I wonder iri the same way, not 
about the children only, hut ahf)ut the simple grown-uj) 
people as well. If only history would refu.se to record 

118 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 
martial glories, and literature and art to immortalize 
them, there might be some semblance of peace and rela- 
tive human happiness in the world. 

Neither Battal Gazi nor Abamouslin Ilorassani were 
my personal heroes. It was rather the grandiose 
scenario of their lives, and the ensemble of the dramatic 
events in which they took part, which riveted my imag- 
ination. Hut I found my hero at last in Ali, the fourth 
caliph, the l.(ion of Allah and the son-in-law of the 
Prophet. 

The .stories of Ali were also war-tales, but I never 
wondered about the fate of children and the simple 
crowd under his sway. On the contrary I felt confident 
that they had a greater peace of mind and felt safer 
simply because Ali lived among them. Ali mo.stly 
killed dragons who ate peoj)le up. He destroyed the 
personified fear of the primitive mind against which 
the others of his time bad not the strength to stand. 
There is a strange similarity in the popular heroes of 
all peoples. 'I'lie fighters of great battles, the .slayers 
of men, even when these are the enemies of their coun- 
tries. are admired, but feared at the same time: and their 
fame rises or falls according to the outlook of the times. 
Napoleon or Alexander have not kept their position; but 
the heroes of the popular mind, the killers (if dragons, 
are eternally beloved, whether it is the northern Sieg- 
fried, the Russian .St. George, or the .Arabic .iVli. Alan 
always has a tender spot for such in his heart. In some 
way they e.xpress the fight against darkness and fear, 
the hero who docs not stand in the historical arena for 

119 



MEMOIRS OF HALID^i EDIB 

personal success but for the peace of his fellow-men’s 
minds and their moral security. 

From the material and the political point of view, Ali 
is the least successful Islamic hero. Every adversary 
of his takes advantage of his nobility of heart. In the 
Battle of Saffein his enemies, unable to conquer him in 
fair fight, put Korans on the ends of their speai’s and ap- 
peal to his veneration for the sacred word. Ayesha, the 
great woman warrior and orator, the widow of ISIoham- 
med, merciless when she wins, is forever taking advan- 
tage of his chivalrous respect for women and of his ad- 
miration of the Prophet. lie finally dies unsuccessful 
but undaunted, always morally clean, manly and hu- 
mane to his enemies, tender and good to the weak. No 
wonder there are so many religious sects that worsliip 
him, not only as a great hero but even as the incarna- 
tion of Allah. The Western mind’s conception of 
Christ’s achievement of success in the highest spiritual 
domain, obtained at the cf)st of suffering, shame, and a 
humiliating death, has its counterpart in the mind of tlie 
Moslem in the personality of Ali. 

During our own early republican struggles at i\n- 
gora, Mustafa Kcmal Pasha was studying the epoch- 
making struggles of the Islamic Uepublie in the sevenlh 
century a, d. I was intereste&lt;l to observe his contempt 
for what he considered Ali’s weakne.ss. “Ali was a 
fool,” he used to say. 

Mahmoure Abla was eleven years old now and wort 
the veil when she was outside; but nothing would pcf- 

120 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 

suade her to do so in the garden, although it was exposed 
to the view of the passers-by, having only a low railing 
instead of a wall. She ran out and played there like 
any tomboy, usually perched on a high branch. A 
([ueer scene took place under the walnut-tree one after- 
noon. She was up in the tree picking walnuts and 
throwing them down to me, when Fikriyar came run- 
ning out and told us the geuruju ’ had come for Mah- 
inoure, and she must come in instantly to get ready to 
see them. This Mahmoure Abla obstinately refused to 
do, and she did not move till the whole household had 
gathered under the tree, including granny, who begged 
her for some time most ineffectively. Although granny 
(lid not think of marrying her off so young, still the geu- 
riijii could not be refused lest they should never come 
again. 

Finally she descended and went in. They dressed 
her, I remember, in some of our stepmother's clothes — 
her (nvn grand grown-up dresses not being, I suppose, 
yet fully prepared for her— -and she followed Fikriyar, 
who went in before her carrying the coffee. The best 
chair in the house was put in the middle of the room for 
her. She made the proper graceful salutation to the 
company and then sat down, while the ladies slowly 
sipped their coffee. ins])ected her carefully, smiled their 
formal smiles, and made formal remarks about the 

T/iturally, tlu* .soer.'s. Whun a pirl is known to tn* of inarriapeable age, 
l-'wlies from neighboring families will call to lo&lt;ik at her and report on her 
to a would-be bridegroom. If a girl does not show herself on 
bueh occasions, the word will probably go round that it is useless to seek 
her hand. 


121 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

weather and the social position of the bridegroom. 
When the first lady put her cup on the tray this was the 
signal for the departure of the would-be bride. She 
saluted and retired. The time taken by the geurUjU 
in drinking their coffee was the clue to their opinion of 
the girl. One often heard it asked with painful excite- 
ment after a geuriijii visit whether they had handed 
back their coffee-cups too soon or not. Although tlie 
first time was exciting enough, the business was in real- 
ity a dull and unl)earahle ceremony. Thit it was the key 
to the entrance to life for the Turkish girls of that time. 

One afternoon granny sent us to the theater in Haidar 
Pasha with Hava Hanum. We were to see Ahduraz- 
zak, the famous Turkish comedian of that time. When 
Turkish art is properly studied he will have an acknowl- 
edged place as the Xassireddin Hodja of the Turkish 
stage. 

The Turkish theater had two origins. 'Hie first was 
the national one, orta ojfoun,^ which corresponds in some 
w^ays wdth the first Kuropean open-air plays. These 
representations consisted mostly of reviews, skits on the 
peculiarities of all the different nationalities and classes 
in the country, satires on social vices, or veiled criticism 
of the political evils of the day. It was mostly impro- 
vised by the actors on the stage, although of course 
based on some sort of ]&gt;lan or story agreed on bef(we- 
hand. 

The second origin was entirely French. This was in- 
troduced by Namik Kemal, Noury, and Ahmed Midhat 


« Open-air plays. 


122 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 

Beys. They founded the Guedik Pasha Theater about 
1867 and translated or adapted plays from the French 
for performance there. Giilly Agop, an Armenian, a 
talented actor, with his troupe, really started the roman- 
tic style of acting in Turkey. lie and his whole com- 
pany were trained in Turkish pronunciation by Namik 
Kemal. Ahmed Vefik Pasha’s adaiitation of Moliere 
and the translations of Dumas fils furnished the Turk- 
ish stage with comedy and romantic drama to begin 
with; and Kemal himself wrote some patriotic plays 
which became very j)opular. This Europeanized sehool 
continues to the present time and has formed the origin 
and the basis of the Turkish stage of to-day. AVe have 
now good Turkish actors, although the influence of the 
French stage is still very marked. 

iVt the same time the open-air national theater, the 
aria oyonn, was affected by this change. It migrated 
from the ojien air to fragile wooden stages with closed 
roofs, 'rhese were most affected by Moliere’s humor in 
their comic plays, but they continued to give old Turkish 
love-legends such as “Leila ^Icjnoun” and “Asli Ke- 
rein” for their romantic dramas, (jiieerly dram.atized by 
the actors themselves. 'I’liis still goes on in the second- 
rate theaters to which the })oorer classes go. 

My first impression of the Turkish theater was the 
crowded condition of the place. It was crammed. The 
women’s part, divided off by lattices, smelled of every 
imaginable thing. Every one was eating all kinds of 
f ruit and sweets, throwing the hits on the floor, drinking 
syrups, calling for more; and through all this eager 

12.3 



MEMOIRS OF HALlDi: EDIB 

business the play went on as an exciting accompaniment. 

The entry of Abdi aroused a perfect thunder of ap- 
plause. He was a fine middle-aged man, with a round 
brown beard and eyes such as only great comedians have. 
They seemed to me to have points in them; they were 
smiling, mocking, and at the same time very, very sad. 
Their liquid mobility of expression was wonderful as 
they passed from one mood to another. The continual 
roar of laughter, the fond and loving gaiety his presence 
aroused, could be only explained by the subtle immate- 
rial quality of a real artist. The recital of any of liis 
scenes may not mean much to a European reader now, 
but every one who went to see him was infected with his 
humor, which was as much that of the masses as Nassir- 
eddin Hodja’s and the Karageuz’s. 

xVbdul Hamid feared the popularity of two men, Os- 
man Pasha and Abdurazzak. He kept Osman Pasha 
away from the public by attaching him to his royal per- 
son, and he followed the same tactics with Abdi. The 
famous comedian w^as taken into the royal Music and 
Amusement Department and was forbidden to play in 
public. A despot is not a real despot if he is not jealous 
of every popular talent not exclusively used for his royal 
pleasure, and permitted to the public only through him. 
It is not perhaps political supremacy that has the great- 
est influence on the people. Art has a still greater 
power, and once it has gained sway, it cannot be de- 
throned from the public heart. Nero’s theatrical ca- 
price was only a despot’s natural desire for lasting 
power. Abdi’s life in the palace created a series of leg- 

124 



OUE VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTAEI 

ends, and he was restored to the public after the Consti- 
tutional Revolution of 1908. But the interval of his 
absence corresponded with such a poor and imitative 
period in our theatrical life that the public taste was 
utterly perverted. I saw him in 1914, and it was really 
a pitiful spectacle. He had had to act in some vile films 
in order to regain the notice of the public, and when he 
appeared between the acts with his famous broom, in the 
dress of the stupid servant, there were only a dozen small 
children and six grown-ups present. I shall never for- 
get him as he came on the stage. We clapped with all 
the sincerity of his old audiences, and he stood leaning 
on his hroom and smiling at us in a friendly and intimate 
way. The sadness and the conscious deception of that 
artistic smile actually hurt one. 

About this time father took us to a circus, and the 
young girl in the jockey’s costume who made the horses 
jump took my breath away with such admiration that 
for a long time afterward I had the greatest ambition 
to be a circus girl. 

At this time in my wanderings in the cemeteries of 
Karadja Ahmed with Ahmed Aga I often saw an old 
man with white beard and untidy clothes walking aim- 
lessly among the graves. One day I met him with 
granny, and to my great surprise she walked up to him 
and asked him how he was. Later she told us his story, 
which impressed me strangely. He was a man hardly 
forty years old, but he had lost his wife about fifteen 
years ago, and his mind had wandered after her so that 
for a whole year he had raved, trying to open her grave 

125 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

and see her once more. Finally, after consulting reli- 
gious opinion, they had the grave opened. The sight 
of the half-decayed body of his wife brought his senses 
back, but he still haunted the tomb. In that cemetery 
of forgotten and half-destroyed graves his wife’s always 
had flowers and a nightly lantern burning over it. 

After moving to several houses of the same type as 
the one I have already described, we took one at Ayaznia 
by the sea-shore, on the Scutari side of the Bosphorus. 
This also was spacious and had a lovely back garden 
with a rich cluster of plum-trees. In front of the house 
men used to come to wash in the sea the pretty printed 
muslins which are made by the hundreds in Turkey. 
Hung on strings between sticks stuck in the sand, they 
fluttered their colors above the bright beach, of wliieh 
at times each pebble would seem to catch the evening 
sun, all together glistening in a thousand hues, while the 
sea- waves with their frothy crests washed them in a slow 
harmony. I^eander’s Tower was only about a hundred 
meters away in the .sea, in front of the house. I both- 
ered Ahmed Aga so much about this that he hired a 
caique one day and t&lt;)ok me to .see the inside of it. It 
was only a prosaic lighthouse after all, kept by guards, 
who, however, happened to be from his country. I 
wanted to know from exactly which chamber the Greek 
princess had been stolen, but no one in the place was able 
to gratify my curiosity. 

Not long after we had taken this hou.se a letter ad- 
dressed to father arrived frtmi Mahmourc i\bl:i’s father, 
yUi Shamil, who was then in exile. It was now that I 

126 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 

learned the dramatic episode of father’s friendship with 
his wife’s first husband. Putting together Hava 
Hanum’s tales and my father’s version of the meeting 
in Mecca, 1 was able later to piece together the story of 
my mother’s two marriages and the friendship of her 
two husbands afterward. 

Bedirhan Pasha, the famous Kurdish chieftain, was 
brought to Istamboul after a rebellion in Kurdistan. 
The government, wanting to keep some sort of hold over 
him on aceount of his prestige in his own country, gave 
him a big konak for himself, his forty children, and his 
ten wives, and allotted salaries to each member of the 
family in exchange for their vast property in Kurdistan, 
which had been requisitioned. 

One of the younger, and perhaps the handsomest of 
these numerous children. Ali Shamil, at the time a young 
lieutenant, married my mother, then a girl of fifteen. 
In my mother’s ease it w'as arranged that her husband 
should make his home with his parents-in-law. This is 
called ichcrriyc aimak (literally, to take ijiside; i. e., the 
hridegroom). In the opposite arrangement, when the 
bride goes to her parents-in-law, it is called disliariya- 
verviek (literally, to give outside: i. e., the bride). In 
some ea.ses, however, the young couple started in a sepa- 
rate house of their own. Love was not lacking between 
the youthful couple, and .^Vli Shamil with his countless 
brothers, wdio were constantly visiting him, introduced a 
ffay but very W'ild tone into the sober (juiet house, 

An oUi-fiisliioiied Turkish town house, Iwlonpiint to a person of con- 
siderable standing. 


127 



MKMOIRS OF HAUDi: EDIB 

completely disturbing its traditional routine. Very 
often there was music, dancing, drinking, singing, and 
sometimes shooting for the mere fun of it in the garden. 
Ali Shamil, however, went further than shooting out- 
side and one day fired through the ceiling of the room 
where he was roistering, the bullet going through the* 
legs of poor Trigiil Hanum, who happened to be in bed 
just above. The hole was still in the ceiling when I was 
a child, and granny used always to tell about it in the 
same excited tones of horror. After three or four years 
of this sort of thing the quiet Anatolian Turk in grand- 
father could bear it no longer, and he obtained my 
mother’s divorce. I can imagine her, with those sweet 
eyes of hers, quietly obeying her parents’ wdslies. 
Mahmoure Abla was a baby of two when she married 
again, after some discreet flirtations through the win- 
dows. This time it was a young palace secretary who 
had come to live in their quarter. Father must Inive 
been very much in love with her, and he was very fond 
too of the little girl. To this day indeed he is perba])s 
more attached to her than even to some of his own chil- 
dren. 

Before many months had passed after their marriage 
Abdul Hamid decided to send an extraordinary commis- 
sion of inquiry to Mecca with orders to set up iVbdilhdi 
Pasha, whom they took wdth them, as the .sherif of 
Mecca, and to depose the .sherif Abdullah, who had been 
the cause of some political agitation. Father went as 
the secretary of the commission under I^ebib Kffondi, 
one of our greatest judges and a man of high moral 

128 








OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 
standing. It happened that Ali Shamil was appointed 
as aide-de-camp of the new sherif. Their adventures 
in crossing the Mediterranean might have been the 
model for Harry Dwight’s “Leopard of the Sea,” As 
a matter of fact, all government commissions and voy- 
ages in official boats in those days were the same. Ab- 
dul Hamid, afraid of his own navy, kept all his war-ships 
shut up in the Golden Horn. When a special commis- 
sion was to go anywhere, one of these old hulks was 
brought out and despatched in an absolutely unsea- 
worthy condition. The obedience due to the sultan 
forced his envoys to accept all risks without demur, but 
each of them took farewell of his family knowing well 
that it might very probably be his last, and many made 
their wills before starting. 

Their journey through the desert was quite as extraor- 
ilinary — no railways, only camels to ride, and naked 
Arab bandits buried in the yellow sand, lying in wait 
and rising at the approach of the caravans. Fi- 
nally, however, they arrived in Mecca and read the 
firman ® to the thousands of ])ilgrims assembled on 
Arafat. 

The usual cholera in Mecca was a little worse that 
year, and the commission tried hard to avoid contagion. 
Hut the young Kurdish aide-de-cam[) was obstinately 
neglectful of all hygienic measures and caught the epi- 
ilcmie. Xo one cared to go near him, but the young 
secretary, for whom Ali .Shamil had already shown a 

A firrnan i.s an fdiot. Abdul Hamid us caliph had authority over the 
^^’hole Moslem world. 


129 



MEMOIRS OF HAIJDE EDIB 

decided inclination, stayed by him and nursed him. 
This episode of manly affection between the two men 
must have been full of dramatic effect, for Ali Shamil 
did not know who father was, while father all the time 
knew him to have been the fir.st husband of his own wife. 
In one agonizing moment when Ali Shamil felt that he 
was dying, he spoke about a young wife, the daughter of 
Ali Effendi, whom he had been forced to divorce, and 
the babj' girl he had left with her. lie begged his new 
friend to take them his watch and his few belongings and 
his last blessings when he died. I’hen father told him 
that he was the man who had married iVli l^liffendi’s 
daughter and that be loved the little girl as his own child, 
so that her father could die iji peace. He covered Ali 
Shamil with his fur coat, which he kept as a souvenir 
for years. But the voung soldier did not die. lie had 
.still further to fulfil his eventful destiny, sometimes very 
brilliant, but sad and ugly iri the end. /Mi .Shamil gave 
me his version of the story many years later. 

On his return from Mecca he had brought on himself 
Abdul Hamid’s anger bv attacking in a savage brawl 
the court astrologer, Kbiil Hilda. He and some of his 
brothers were exiled to Damascus, but when later he was 
restored to favor be used t(» &lt;()nie often to see us all. 
For me he had a sj)ecially tender feeling. A very hand- 
some man, with burning beauliful eyes and an ea^dr 
nose, mighty shoulders, and a brilliant uniform, he is 
still vivid in my memorv. I Ic was a pasha then and one 
of the most influential men around Abdul H:imi(l. 1 
was about twelve years old, but he treated nu' 'vilh 

130 



OUE VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTAEI 
chivalrous and rather funny respect such as is generally 
only given to older women. With me he never even 
hinted at the risque stories which he was very apt to 
tell to others. “She has her mother in her,” he used to 
say. 

One particular morning, I remember, he had come 
early to our house in Sultan Tepe, and I met him in the 
garden. To be able to run comfortably, I had twisted 
my plait round my liead, and 1 smiled joyfulh' at the 
vision of strength and vitality which his very presence 
created. As I kissed bis hand I saw bis face take on a 
sad expression. “You bave ber look this morning. 
Halide,” be said, “that funny trick of tlie single dimple, 
and that hair-coil. 1 did love her so!” 

Then he drifted simply into the story of their life. 
iMany years bad passed since be had divorced mother, 
and he bad married nine women one after another since. 
Strangely indeed not one of his wives lived long except 
the last two. He tohl me that none had stirred his heart 
as my ([uiet and homely mother bad. “1 am glad she 
spent her last years with a better man than I,” he said 
generously, and then went on to tell me the story of 
Mecca— how he bad loved father and bow grateful he 
was to him, but bow be wanted to kill him when he 
learned that he was now her husband. Vet in his exile 
he was happy to feel that his daughter, after losing her 
mother, was .still in loving and fatherly 'hands. 

I am glad that father outgrew the bitterness of the 
finding of the portrait at mother’s death, and seemed 
sincerely fond of Ali Pasha. 'I’lie letter, whose arrival 

lai 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EOIB 

I mentioned at the beginning, was to ask for a photo- 
graph of Mahmoure. This father had taken and sent it 
to him in Damascus. 

From these stories of heroism and adventure I must 
pass on to the simple, tedious, but charming love-legends 
with ^ihmed Aga. They were also on yellow papei-, 
and in very poor print with the queerest of pictures. 
We often sat by the sea-shore, I eating my breakfast of 
bread and cheese and melons, and he reading aloud, 

A Turkish Wagner or Tennyson would have made 
wonderful music and poems out of them, for they are 
fully as beautiful as the medieval legends of Kurope. 
As it is, only I^eila and Mejnoun have passed into ini- 
mortality in the poems of Fuzully; the rest are still in 
their yellow paper and crude print, and I don’t believe 
any Turkish child reads them now. They are not the 
up-to-date love stories which everybody demands. 
There is, however, one among them, “Kerem and Asli. ’’ 
a very beautiful poem which an Azerbaijan musician has 
.set to music and has called it an oj)cra. 'Fhe story is 
this : 

The .shah of Ispahan had a beautiful son, Prince 
Kerem, who fell in love wdth the daughter of an .\r- 
menian priest. The priest, being a fanatical Christian, 
did not want his daughter to marry a Moslem prince. 
Too much afraid of the shah, however, to refuse, he gaM' 
his consent and named the marriag&lt;‘ day on which the 
royal procession was to come and fetch the bride from 
his house. 


182 



OUE VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 

On the appointed day a grand procession started with 
Prince Kerem at its head. As they approached the 
louse the prince stopped the procession and went on 
done. The doors were open and the house empty! 
The family had fled. Then Kerem all of a sudden be- 
^•ame a poet, like all the lovers of his type, and he began 
:o sing to the belongings of his beloved — her embroidery- 
frame, the divan she sat on. . . . And all the furniture 
jegan to answer him in song. 

Then Prince Kerem, changing his dress, took the 
simple garb of a bard and, with his lute, wandered away 
ill search of Aslihan. He sang, asking news of his be- 
loved from the clouds, the mountains, the fountains, the 
maidens washing clothes by the rivers, and the flying 
.•ranes. And each answered back in song. 

In one city he almost succeeded in his quest. Asli- 
lian’s mother had become a dentist. The prince discov- 
ered this, and pretending to have toothache, he went to 
her and asked her to [udl out his tooth. She placed his 
head on Aslihan’s knee so as to extract the tooth. So 
enraptured was he in this position that he begged to have 
all his teeth pulled out. In the middle of the process, 
however, he was recognized. 'Fids made the family flv 
once more. After endless further adventures and suf- 
fering he found them again in an .Anatolian town. 
Here he charmed the governor by his singing, and the 
notaliles of the city took his part, forcing the priest to 
give his daughter to Kerem. 

The priest, however, was well versed in witchcraft and 
proceeded to make a magic dress for Aslihan. which 

13 .} 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

buttoned from the neck right down to the hem of the 
skirt in such magical sort that no one could unbutton it. 

On the nuptial night, when the girl tried to divest 
herself of it, all her efforts were vain. Kerem had re- 
course to the help of his enchanted lute and his o^vn po- 
tent singing. Sure enough these availed. The buttons 
opened one after another down to the bottt)ni, b\it no 
sooner were they undone than they buttoned themselves 
up all over again. This exasperating scene lasted till 
morning, when the first light of dawn filtered through 
the windows. Kerem was in the last stages of torture. 
The fever in his heart was turning into real flames. 
With one last sigh a fire broke from his inoutli, and liis 
whole body was consumed and turned to ashes. 

Along with my attachment to i\hmed Aga, w])ieh 
filled the outdoor side of my life, was a growing affec- 
tion for Teize, which was as it were the indoor comple- 
ment of the other. I had become her child. K\ery 
morning I went into her room, where she bestowed ex- 
cellent eare upon me, including such persf)nal attention 
as brushing, combing, and w.ashing me. Then she kept 
me occupied according to the daily jdan which she had 
prepared. I had a feeling of really helonging to her. 
This sense of being .some one else’s projierty did not 
worry me in the least as it would have done later. It 
was a mild re])etition of the Kyria Kllenie affair. 
Mahmoure Abla, who was on rather bad terms with 
Teize, used to snub me and .say, “.She has designs on 
father.” As a matter of fact, I believe it was more a 
case of father’s having designs on her. 

134 



OUE VAEIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 

Several times that year on Ramazan nights I was al- 
lowed to go to “Karageuz” with Ahmed Aga. The en- 
tertainment took place in a large coffee-house in the 
Scutari market. The streets were lighted — a sign of 
festival in those days — and we passed through a mixed 
crowd of both sexes and children. 

Little wooden stools were placed in rows; and in a 
corner hung a small, white cloth,’ behind which burned 
brilliant torches. A queer colored picture of a dragon 
or a flower, cut in card, was showing from behind the 
cloth when we entered, and a mysterious buzzing sound, 
presumably emitted by this creature itself, kept the 
little crowd happy and expectant till the real play be- 
gan.® Alcantime the children made a tremendous noise, 
tapping their feet impatiently in a common rhythm and 
calling out all together: “Wilt thou begin? When 
shall we begin 

The tambourines r.^ttled, and the really pretty en- 
trance song began to be sung behiml the curtain. This 
of cour.se quiete»l the little audience. But Avhen 
Karageuz’s sly and feigned ly stupid profile appeared 

7 This cloth or screen, as in the shadow-plays one sometimes sees in Ku- 
rope, or as in the old-fashioned niairic-laiitern shows, was the stage on 
which the whole ])erforinanee was ettaeted. 'Thu performers — marionettes 
of a jteeiiliar kind- were figures cut in eamel-leatluT or some similar siih- 
stance, their faces, clothes, limbs, etc., heintr partly distinguished by color- 
ing, parti} by slits, cut something after the fash.iDu of an elaborate Jap- 
anese steneil-eard. The leather was naidered translucent and l&gt;oth shape 
and color were clearly visible when the torches threw them as mellow-tintcci 
bhadowhs on the screen. 

^This was the qeusttr vielik the advance sample (to translate very 
freely) of what was to come — and it vanished from the screen, giving place 
to the full excitement, when the proper moment arrived. 

i.‘r&gt; 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

near the top of the screen on one side and he began the 
dialogue with Haji Eivad, peeping out from the other, 
the general laughter started. At the leap of Karageuz 
to begin the traditional mutual beating between him aiul 
Haji Eivad, the small audience expressed its delight 
with uncontrollable roars. 

I was charmed beyond description. The music, the 
color, the humor, the absolutely original tone, the un- 
pretentious artistry, and the extraordinary ensemhk* 
have kept Turkish children, as well as the grown-up 
public, in thrall for centuries. It is one of the heart- 
breaking facts of to-day that our new taste, or ratlier 
laek of taste, has killed this wonderful and simple art. 
Its origin as known commonly among the Turks is this: 

Among the builders engaged upon the moscpie of 
Murad I there were two men: one, Haji Eivad, a sen- 
tentious, pomjxujs. and pedantic person with a solemn 
conceit in regard to his own merits; and Karageuz, his 
friend. The latter was a simple fellow, full of the most 
exaggerated common sen.se and a humor incorrigilily 
every-day. Although every incident of their story he- 
gan with a hearty fight, this merely served to clear the 
air comfortably, and one ap})reciates that a real and in- 
extinguishable attachment united them. 'I'heir funny 
conversations delighted the rdher builders, and it was a 
gay band that worked at that mosrpic. \Vhether it is 
really true that the work did not progress as a result of 
their presence, or whether their sallies were of the hind 
which make the powerful uneasy, we cannot now ascer- 
tain; but anyhow their conduct was unfavorably I'C- 

136 



OUR TARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 
ported to the sultan, and he ordered their heads cut off. 
It is not indeed their actual words that since those days 
have constantly attacked the great in veiled and humor- 
ous language; it is something of their spirit that has 
lived on and has continued to attack, not only social 
weaknesses, but political deficiencies, in the same irre- 
pressible manner. Karageuz, after his death, became 
something like a popular saint, and people light candles 
at bis grave to this day in Ilroussa. As in the orta 
oi/oun, a review of the different nationalities and their 
peculiarities, as well as a caricature of all social types, 
appears, though in coarser and cruder language, in 
“Karageuz.” Karageuz and Ilaji Kivad are deeply 
symbolic characters to me. Ilaji Kivad is a caricature 
of the Turkish intellectual class, while Karageuz is de- 
lightfully typical of the simple Turk, always badly 
treated, beaten, his apparent stupidity mocked at and 
taken advantage of, forever in such desperate situations 
that one is sure he will be done for, yet extricating him- 
self somehow, or beginning all over agaiti. I have often 
cried as a child when 1 have seen him beaten by the 
cruel eunuch, the drunkard, or the Albanian, sentenced 
to deatb by torture, and yet, lo and behold! by some 
subtle means there he always was in the ejid intact, safe 
— and his enemies, the cruel rulers, in ridiculous posi- 
tions. 

Kven the Jew, who is always rcj)rcsentcd as in per- 
petual fear of everybody else, becomes a pefeet bully 
toward Karageuz. 'rbere is a Ilairain scene, in which 
Karageuz has erected a swing fur children, and a Jew 

137 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

comes along and asks to be swung. “Now swing me,” 
he says. Hut as soon as Karageuz begins to swing him 
he screams and beats Karageuz for his stupidity. Thesi 
he calls out again, “Don’t swing me,” and Karageuz 
obediently stops the swing. Again he is beaten by the 
Jew for his stupidity. After a long scene of beating 
and quarreling, the Jew explains, “When I say, ‘Swirig,’ 
don’t swing; and when I say, ‘Don’t swing,’ swing.” 
The .sentence has bceonie proverbial of the Jews, and is 
used for anv one else who has the eliaraetcristic of likiiiir 

* tn 

to give trouble to people. 

His wife and his son are the only persons who beat 
Karageuz on his own ground. T’he little street hoy who 
comes in as his son makes the children wild with de- 
light. lie always catches Karageuz in his inisehievons 
escapades. There is a favorite scene when Karageuz 
has climbed up on the &lt;lome of a bath to steal the towels 
hung round it. The son aj)pears at the critical luoiueiit 
and takes away the ladder. A brilliant convcrsalioti 
follows, until the son manages to get whatever he wanl^ 
from his father, usually a few piasters to buy wahuits. 

As a stage performance “Karageuz” is now in a de- 
cadent state. The sim])le but famous artists who used 
these two characters in ever new and yet ever eharael( r- 
istie scenes arc all dead. \'ct Karageuz’s sj)irit lives. 
The humorous paper publi.shcd in lOOH under his iianit' 
continues to have a great circulation all over the comil ry. 
especially in Anatolia. It is really the Turkish 
“Punch.” 

Another childish amusement was the Punch and -ludy 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 

show, which we called the Dolls. A man went around 
the streets and, putting up the simple stage, made the 
dolls act the unique piece. It must be of Byzantine 
origin I believe, for it is acted both in Greek and Turk- 
ish, but always there is a Greek priest and a Greek 
funeral. 

In contrast with the foregoing, which may be classed 
as traditional or folk literature, there is very little 
luinior in the early written literature of tlie Turks. It 
is usually of the nature of rather heavy satire (soine- 
tiiiies of an obscene kind) and contains a great deal of 
very bitter irony. One feels in reading it a contraction 
of mind, a j)erpetual tone of hatred, combined with, or 
perhaps indeed rising out of, a sense of heli)lessness in 
tlie s])irits of the old writers themselves. 'Fhe more ex- 
aggerated and bitter, even foul-mouthed, they are in 
writing of their enemies, the hap])ier they appear to feel. 
It is this glaring difference between the satiric wit of the 
literary men and the innate humor of the people which 
makes me see humor as an internal expansion and a 
healthy, sometimes even a tender, thing: while satires 
of really important writers seem more like a nervous 
paralysis, which ultimately cripj)les the mind and the 
sympathies. But we cannot be surprised, even though 
we may condemn this morbid tendency toward bitter- 
ness, for every person who gave signs of the slightest 
power of criticism or originality was exposed to un- 
scrupulous extermination, or at best to eontinual op- 
pression. Kvery great poet had to have some great 
protector, and it w’as hanl to please the great without 

I.'IP 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDIB EDIB 

incurring danger from some opposite quarter. A satire 
was wanted for a rival, but who could tell how soon those 
rivals might not be holding the lives of the writers in 
their hands? As an instance of this insecurity, I may 
refer to Nefi. He was one of the four greatest of our 
early poets and belongs to the seventeenth century. 
He was protected by Murad IV, the eruelest but tlie 
most powerful of all our sultans. One can imagine 
Nefi, of all men, feeling pretty safe. He was the writer 
of the most famous kasmic “ in Turkisli, praising all tlie 
greatest men of his time, while describing his sovereign's 
wars in glowing colors in other poems. With an arro- 
gant pride in his art, however, he allowed himself to 
praise equally his own talents and artistic achievements, 
ranking himself as incomparably superior to every (jtlu r 
human being. His satiric vein led him on to attack 
Bairam Pasha, the powerful vizir. The sultan e\i- 
dently encouraged him to the extent of hearing him read 
these satires, but nevertheless advised him not to in- 
dulge in any more of them. Sometime later, at a mo- 
ment when he was high in favor, Bairam Pasha procured 
from the sultan a sentence of death on his critic. Nell 
was imprisoned in the wood-houses of the Sublime Porte, 
strangled, and his body thrown into the sea in a sack. 
Not even a grave notes the meuiory of the man who cre- 
ated so many beautiful things. Another story is told 
illustrating his disdainful temj)cr. When he was lying 
in the .Sublime J’orte the head eunuch saw and pitied 
him. Calling him in, he impiired into Nefi’s eirciini- 

'J A jwxitic ouloffy of it sultan or other preiit iniin. 

I (0 



oua VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 
stances, and himself wrote a petition to the sultan asking 
for pardon. Nefi’s satiric vein got the better of him 
as he saw the good negro writing and dropping his ink 
clumsily on the paper. “The aga is feeling hot,” he 
said. “I see the drops falling on the paper from his 
forehead.” The insult doubtless made the eunuch re- 
gret his intervention, and he left Nefi to his fate. 

One may not condone Xefi, but one can see that this 
sort of treatment of poets did not encourage humor 
among the intellectuals. But the ])eoi)le, further away 
from the court, passed their delicious stories from 
mouth to mouth, unnoticed and safe. 

At this period of my life it seems to me 1 was hardly 
aware of the activities of the grown-ups at home. My 
life was centered in mv stf)ry books, the outside world, 
my lessons, and .^Vhmed ..Aga, when a sudden event 
startled me and made me feel intensely my family cir- 
eiimstanees. 

One incident might have suggested to me the possibil- 
ity of the event, if I had been a few years older. Teize 
read me a letter in her room one morning. It was a 
polite and formal demand of marriage. As I was ac- 
customed to seeing girls marry before they were twenty 
and had been fed u]) on stories oi’ child marriages, I 
never connected Te'ize with this very youthful phase of 
life — as I always regarded it. 1 was a little stu])elicd 
and did not make out the reason of her reading it. In 
some dim way I felt that she was expecting something 
of me, but I sat and stared stupidly till she said, “If I 

141 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIH 

marry I go away of course.” Then I realized that it 
was my personal calamity she was announcing, and all 
of a sudden I began to cry quietly and helplessly. 
Granny suddenly appeared and scolded Teize, so far as 
it was in her to scold any one, for reading such a lettcc 
to me. The incident evidently affected me more than it 
was in me to express, for Granny told me much later 
that afterward I developed a habit of walking and talk- 
ing in my sleep which made her very anxious, and we 
paid a visit to xVrzie Ilanum. She had a regular con- 
sultation with the peris, breathed some prayers over iny 
head, burned some pungent things in her silver 1k)w1, and 
made me inhale some smoke. 

She said I was troubled in the spirit and probably 
had the evil eye, and that I must not he pressed with 
much study. Every evening before I slept granny sat 
by my bed and made me say the two .vh/t.s* of the Koran, 
and in addition I repeated after her: “I lie on my ri&lt;i[lit 
and turn to my left. Let angels witness my faith. 
There is no (Jod but Allah, and Mohammed is his 
I*ropbet.” 1 must confess that these simple words 
soothed me to a curious degree. 

One day s(K)n after, .^Vhla went to spend a iveek with 
.some old lady friends in Heshiktash, and in her abseiicc 
father married Teize. I cannot say that the event 
either j)lea.sed or comforted me, although there was no 
longer the danger of her le.aving me. 

The event was received coldly by the household, and 
wnth the marriage ceremony there .settled uikhi the 
hitherto .serene atmosphere of the hou.se an oppressive 

142 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 
feeling, a feeling of uneasiness and wonder at the pos- 
sibility of unpleasant conseiiuences, which never left it 
again. Sympathy and pity, as well as conjectures as 
to how Abla would receive the news, filled all our 
minds, and I fancy a rather violent scene was expected. 

If there is an ecstasy and excitement in times of suc- 
cess, there is a deejier feeling of being singled out for 
importance when a great and recognized misfortune 
()\'crtakes one. When a woman suffers because of her 
husband’s secret love-affairs, the pain may be keen, but 
its quality is different. When a seeond w'ife enters her 
home and usurps half her power, .she is a public martyr 
and feels herself an object of curiosity and pity. How- 
ever humiliating this may be, the position gives a 
woman in this ease an umiuestioned j)rominence and 
isolation. So mu.st Abla have felt now. The entire 
household was excited at her return. As she walked 
up-stairs and entered the sitting-room, she found only 
'IVize standing in the mid&lt;lle of it. l&gt;ut the rest must 
have been somewhere in the corridors, for every one wit- 
nessed the simple .scene of their encounter, 'rei/.e was 
the more miserable of the two. She was crying. Ahla, 
who had somehow learned what awaited her home- 
coining while she was .still away, walked up to her and 
kissed her, saying. “Never mind; it was Kismet.” 
Then .she walked away to her own room while her serv- 
ant .Jemile wept aloud in the hall. I lava Ilanum. 
whose heart was with i\hla, probably because of her own 
past experience, .scolded .Temile: "Is it thy husband or 
tby lady’s who was married^ What is it to theeT’ 



MElktOlRS OF HALID^ EDIB 

Although this dramatic introduction to polygamy 
may seem to promise the sugared life of harems pictured 
in the “Haremlik” of Mrs. Kenneth Brown, it was not 
so in the least. I have heard polygamy discussed as a 
future possibility in Europe in recent years by sincere 
and intellectual people of both sexes. “As there is in- 
formal polygamy and man is polygamous by nature, 
why not have the sanction of the law?” they say. 

Whatever theories people may hold as to what should 
or should not be the ideal tendencies as regards the 
family constitution, there remains one irrefutable fact 
about the human heart, to whichever sex it may belong. 
It is almost organic in us to suffer when we have to 
share the object of our love, whether that love he sexual 
or otherwise. I believe indeed that there are as many 
degrees and forms of jealousy as there are degrees and 
forms of human affection. But even supposing that 
time and education are able to tone down this very ele- 
mental feeling, the family problem will still not he 
solved; for the family is the primary unit of human so- 
ciety, and it is the integrity of this .smallest division 
which is, as a matter of fact, in question. The nature 
and con.sequenccs of the suffering of a wife, who in the 

1'^‘Thr word haremlik does not exist in Turkish. It is nn inventeil forru. 
no doubt due to a mistaken idea that “selamlik” (litertilly, the phm- for 
salutations or frreetinir, i. e., the reception-room, and tiierefore, ai loiij! 
Moslems, the men’.s apartments) could have a corresponding feminine 1 Tin, 
which would he “haremlik." The word Is, however, a verbal monstr«^iiy- 
‘‘Harem" is an Arabic word with the original sense of a shrine, a scdnhfi 
place (cf. Harem sherif, the Holy of HoIie.s in the Kanha at M&lt;*&lt; t‘d). 
Hcnee it came to be identified with the serlu.sion of women, either l)y « 
of the veil or by confinement in separate apartments; and hence aga i H 
came to be used for those apartments themselves. 

144 





OUK VARIOUS HOMES IN SCIUTAKI 

same house shares a husband lawfully with a second and ' 
equal partner, differs both in kind and in degree from 
that of the woman who shares him with a temporary 
mistress. In the former case, it must also be borne in 
mind, the suffering extends to two very often consider- 
able groups of people — children, servants, and relations 

two whole groups whose interests are from the very 

nature of the case more or less antagonistic, and who are 
living in a destructive atmosphere of mutual distrust and 
a struggle for supremacy. 

On my own childhood, polygamy and its results pro- 
duced a very ugly and distressing impression. The con- 
stant tension in our home made every simple family 
ceremony seem like a physical pain, and the conscious- 
ness of it hardly ever left me. 

The rooms of the wives were opposite each other, 
and my father visited them by turns. When it was 
Teize’s turn every one in the liouse showed a tender 
sympathy to Abla, while when it was her turn no one 
heeded the obvious grief of 'reize. It was she indeed 
wlio could conceal her suffering least. She would leave 
the table with eyes full of tears, and one could be sure 
of finding her in her room either crying or fainting. 
Very soon I noticed that father left her alone with her 
grief. 

And father too was suffering in more than one way. 
As a man of liberal and modern ideas, his marriage was 
very unfavorably regarded by his frieiuls, especially by 
llakky Bey, to W’hose opinion he attached the greatest 
"‘iportance. 


145 



MEMOIRS OF HiVLIDE EDIB 

He suffered again from the consciousness of having 
deceived Abla. He had married her when she was a 
mere girl, and it now looked as if he had taken advantage 
of her youth and inexperience. One saw as time went 
on how patiently and penitently he was trying to make 
up to her for what he had done. 

Among the household too he felt that he had fallen 
in general esteem, and he cast about for some justifieu- 
tion of his conduct which Avould reinstate him. “It was 
for Halide that I married her.” he used to say. “If 
Teize had married another man Halide would have 
died.” And, “It is for the child’s sake I have married 
her father,” Teize used to say. “She would have died 
if I had married any one else.” Granny took the sen- 
sible view. “They wanted to marry each other. Wliiit 
has a little girl to do with their marriage f” 

The unhappiness even manifested itself in the rela- 
tion between granny and Hava Hanum. 'I'he latter 
criticized granny severely for not having put a stop to it 
before things had gone too far. and granny felt iiidig 
nant to have the blame thrown u})on her by a dejjcnd- 
ent for an affair she so intensely disliked. 

Teize, with her superior show of learning and her in- 
tellectual character, must have dominated father at 
first, but with closer contact, the pialantic turn of lat 
mind, which gave her talk a constant didactic tone, innst 
ha%'e wearied him. For in the intimate compatiionsiifp 
of every-day life nothing bores one metre than a |»a'' 
tentiou.s style of talk involving constant intellectual 
effort. Poor 'reize’s enalition and intelligence were Irt 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 
outstanding qualities, and she used and abused them to 
a maddening degree. When, after her dull and lonely 
life, she gave herself, heart and soul, to a man, the dis- 
illusionment of finding herself once more uncared for 
rendered her very bitter; and she either talked contin- 
ually of her personal pain or else of some high topic, 
too difficult to be understood by the person she was talk- 
ing to. Somehow her efforts to dethrone her rival 
from the heart of her husband lacked the instinctive ca- 
pacity of the younger woman’s, and it was only granny 
and poor me that sympathized and suffered with her in 
a grief which did not interest any one else. 

The wives never (piarrcled, and tliey were always ex- 
ternally polite, but one felt a deep and mutual hatred 
accumulating in their hearts, to which they gave vent 
only when each was alone with father. lie wore the 
look of a man who was getting more than his just pun- 
ishment now. Finally he took to having a separate 
room, where he usually sat alone. Hut he could not 
escape the gathering storm in his new life. Ilava 
Ilanum not inaptly likened his marriage to that of Xas- 
sireddin Ilodja. .She told it to us as if she was glad to 
.sec father unhaj)py. ’Fhc hodja also wanted to taste the 
blessed state of {)olyga!ny. and took to himself a young 
second wife. Before many montlis were out his friends 
found the hodja completely bald, and asked him the rea- 
son. “My old wife pulls out all my black hairs so that 
1 may look as old as .she; my young wife pulls out my 
'vliite hairs so that 1 may look as young as she. Be- 
''•‘■eii them I am bald.” 


117 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

The final storm, kept in check for some time by the 
good-mannered self-control of the ladies, broke out in 
the servants’ quarter. Fikriyar and Jemile were al- 
ways running down each other’s mistresses. Fikriyar 
called Abla common and ignorant, and Jemile called 
Teize old and ugly. “Besides, she is a thief of other 
women's husbands,’’ she added. One day the quarrel 
grew so distracting that the ladies had to interfere, 
and for the first time they exchanged bitter words. 
That evening father went up to Abla’s room first, and 
he did not come down to dinner. The next inorniiif)' 
it was announced that father was going with Abla and 
her little girls to Beshiktash to the wisteria-covered 
house, and we, the rest of the composite family, were 
to take a house near the college," and my education was 
to begin seriously. 

It was in 189.*} or 1894 that I went to the college for 
the first time. I was perhaps the youngest student, and 
my age had to he considerably padded in order to get 
me in; and no amount of persuasion was available to 
have me taken as a hoarder, so that father’s plan to re 
move me from the influence of “that W'oman ” as he no' 
called Tcizc had to he postponed. 

My impressions of the ctrllegc at this time are ratlic 
vague. I learned b.nglish fast enougli, but my pleasin' 
in the new language only began when I could read ii 

o TIk' American Celleffe for (iirls as it was then culled: an Instilidi'” 
founded hy American inis.sionarie.s for educating; K'fls in the Orient. It i 
now' represented hy tlje ('on.staritinojde (’ollejfc f.ir (iirls, hut it is no lonr^ 
eonn.'cted with any missionary .siM ielies. It was at first hou.scd in an 
picturcwiue Armenian house in Scutari. 

148 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 

the original the childish stories chosen for me by Woods 
pasha, a fine English gentleman in the service of the 
Turkish navy, and a very good friend of father’s. 

I made no friends, but a big and beautiful Turkish 
girl called Gul Paris used to speak to me sometimes. 
JVIiss Fensham became a little interested in me also, and, 
knowing Turkish, sbe used to take me up to her room 
and help me in my translations. Miss Dodd was an- 
other good friend. Sbe generously offered to teach me 
at home when a year later 1 had to leave the college in 
obedience to an imperial irade.'- 

Ahmed Aga and ’reize f)bjected to certain points of 
my English education, and this caused me some trouble. 
Ahmed Aga regularly took out the eyes from all the 
pictures in my reading book. lie said it was sinful to 
make pictures of man, who is created in the image of 
Allah. When I asked him why he did not mind the 
pictures in the Turkish story-books be said: “Those 
are not like men. lint look at these; they are as good 
as created, aiul if they did not lack tongues they would 
speak to one.’’ 

Teize was horrified at the sight of the Bible. “Thou 
wilt become a C'hristian before thou art aware of it,” 
she .said. 1 could have been made into neither a Chris- 
tian nor anything else by the verses from the Psalms I 
laid to learn by heart. I did not understand their mean- 
'iig in the lea.st, and the Old Testament stories the 
teacher told us about David and his time sounded to me 

^2 An iradt^ was an order made by the .‘?ultan having the force of law. 
It could be made, as in this case, to have rt'ference to a sin^de individual. 

149 



MEMOIRS OF HAI.IDE EDIB 

SO like Battal Gazi stories that I did not associate them 
with anything religious. It was not therefore on the 
score of orthodoxy that I was troubled, but by some- 
thing quite different. I soon found that every new 
Bible disappeared mysteriously as soon as I brought it 
home; and I despaired. Without a Bible I could not 
learn my verses by heart, although I managed to re- 
member the longer stories told by tbe teacher. I was 
too timid to ask any of the girls to lend me her Bible, and 
I had no special friend, as all the girls were considerably 
older than myself. I bought three Bibles from the col- 
lege book-room with my own money, but had I bought a 
Bible daily it would have disappeared. 1 bated beiiiji 
scolded at school, and this continual struggle at hoiiK 
about the Bible embittered my life during my first yeai 
at the college, although I did not speak of it to any one. 
Mahmoure Abla teased me mercilessly about the Hihk 
too. “Thou art a C’hristian atid thou wilt burn in hell,'' 
she w'ould say. Hava Hanum consoled me: “All chil- 
dren are Moslem-born, and till they are nine years old 
they go straight to heaven if they die, whatever tliev 
are,” she said. But the old horrors of “'riie Adventure 
of Death” were awakerjed in me in addition to the 
trouble oi' not being able to get a Bible, which sounds 
funny perhaps now l)ut was very tragic then. 

A big and very stupid Jewish girl was in the same 
class with me. She had been in the college for s(»me 
years but had not yet learned enough to talk Knghsh. 
Her stupidity was proverbial. Her eyes opened with 
fear and wonder at any one who addressed her. ^’1“’ 

1.30 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 
seemed always to be expecting a blow or some sort of 
assault and appeared as if she were wondering when it 
would be delivered. I believe it was the unconscious 
mark of a persecuted race. Strangely enough, Svhen 
the great persecution and break-up of Turkey began 
after the Armistice of 1918, I remembered that look and 
wondered in horror whether the Turkish race would 
come to have it too and how many years it would take 
to give the proud face of the Turk that piteous aspect. 

One day the teacher asked me to help tliis girl to learn 
her verses bj'^ heart. This gave me a sudden hope. I 
would learn from her llihle. Tint to my dismay 1 found 
tliat she was in the same i)osition as 1 and had the self- 
same domestic troubles. ‘T know I shall go to hell, 
and that makes me very miserable; and the people at 
home w'lio take my llihle away make it worse," slie said. 
But she was slightly better off tlian I was. 'riic teacher, 
taking her stupidity as an excuse tor the loss of her 
Bibles, wrote out on a paper the sentences that .she was 
to learn. 

About this time Teizc had a little daughter and left 
me in peace about the Bible for a while. The baby had 
convulsions, which brought into relief the real diver- 
gence of opinion about treatment of diseases between 
granny and father. C’onvvdsi*)ns were eauseil by peris, 
according to Arzie Ilanum. Father insisted on a doc- 
tor. Arzic Ilanum 's intelligent attitude toward doctors 
saved the situation. She strongly recommended the 
ladies to have a doctor in addition to her own remedies. 

We had a jolly winter. The Christian (|uartcr, where 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

we lived, had a gay carnival, very bourgeois but very 
hearty. If I had not had bad dreams like Hamlet, if 
I had not seen Teize getting more and more miserable 
because of the increasing supremacy of her rival, if I 
had not had the beginning of chaotic doubts about re- 
ligion. I should have been happy. For the reading of 
the Turkish stories was still going on, and we had besidejj 
the Turkish theater opposite our house. It was Has- 
san wdio was the chief actor then, a successor to Abdi 
and almost equally popular. I gave my daily money 
to Ahmed ^Vga to save for Sundays, when we went f)ff 
together to the theater. ITassan was a tall slender man 
and had very brilliant eyes, black and smiling, with a 
strange oblique look in the corners. He ])layed and 
danced and did the part of the stupid servant. Ilis very 
walk, as well as his .speeches, brought the house down. 
It was a series t)f roars. He was indeed the last famous 
comedian of the old Turkisli theater. They used to 
play the stories I read in the old yellow Persian-printed 
books, d'he lady star, I’erouse II anum. an Armenian 
who was said to be sixty years old at that time, was 
e.speeially admired for her dancing. Her popularity 
was almost equal to Hassan's. and I believe her imita- 
tion f)f a drunken man and her duets with Ilassan were 
.sometimes (juite realistic. 

I used to .see a dried-up old man at the door of tlie 
theater. He wore blue heads on his fez against the 
evil eye, and there was an ex])res.sif)n of beatitude on 
his face. Perouse Hanum bought him xinuds (rolls) 
and gave him money as she left the theater and entered 

1.52 



OUR VARIOUS HOMES IN SCUTARI 


her carriage in state. Ahmed Aga’s explanation of this 
proceeding was that she had eaten his money and burned 
his heart and thus reduced him to this state. “He was 
not her only victim,” he would add, “thanks to lier lovely 
eyes.” Her eyes after this made me very uneasy. I 
imagined her literally burning people’s hearts with fire 
which she held with tongs, and eating, even chewing, 
their gold with her white teeth. 

h’ather came to sec us once a week, but sometimes 
lie could not come, and then he sent his groom to take 
me over to Ilesliiktasli, where I spent the night. These 
visits made me miserable. Teize did not like me to go, 
fearing the influence of the other woman; and I felt 
an atrnospliere, if not cold, at least unwelcoming. At 
my return home 1 was exposed to a cross-examination, 
and it cost me a great deal to sit and kec}) my mouth 
shut. Anything belonging to lleshiktash. such as a 
handkerchief of father’s, made 'I'c'r/.c swoon with hj’s- 
teria. She declared it to be bewitched; she imagined 
Ahla and her mother going from one hodja to another 
to get charms for father and charms to destroy herself. 
The .same .sort of belief jirevailed at Ahla's house. She 
would also become hysterical at the sight of a handker- 
chief or a shirt given to father by 'I'eize and would tear 
it to pieces at once. 

I was now obliged to leave the college. Abdul 
Hamid did not want 'Furks to send their ehihlren to 
foreign sclunds. lie feareil that somehow liberal ideas 
'Right he learned later. “'Fhev can have governesses,” 
lie used to say. So as there was no more reason to stay 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

near the college, this time we began to look for a house 
in a Turkish quarter. Granny soon found one in the 
Grande Rue of Scutari — one of those old-fashioned 
houses with the same sort of space and garden that she 
always chose — and we moved on there. 

The invisible struggle between granny, Tei'ze, and 
father ended now in father’s complete triumph. One 
day granny told me that I was to go and live with father 
in Beshiktash. I said nothing, but the idea of their 
giving me up so easih' to the other house broke some- 
thing in my heart. My only consolation was that 
Ahmed Aga was leaving us to go back to his own 
country. 

Granny had made me a red charshaf which I used al- 
ready to wear sometimes; but 1 used often to take it 
off in the middle of the street and give it to Ahmed Aga 
to carry. Dressed in this and witli a valise containing 
my little wardrobe, I started wdth granny to the steamer 
for Beshiktash. We walked up from the landing- 
station together, but granny never entered the wisteria- 
covered house, both on account of her own past sorrow 
and the presence there of iVbla. .Tust before wx* reached 
it she left me with an old neighbor, and as she walked 
away wdth intense sadness on her big white face I felt 
lonely and abandoned beyond expression. Kept from 
tears only by a pride that w'ould not give way, I went 
into the wisteria-covered house, with the old lady and her 
servant carrying my belongings. 


154 



