From Coronation Street to aConsummate ChemistBrian HaltonFrom Coronation Street to aConsummate ChemistBrian Haltoni -Clarity arisis in the spaces in betweenFrom The Fifth Woman by Henning Mankell published by Harvill Pressand used by permission of the Random House Group Limitediii -About the coversThe  painting  that  adorns  the  front  cover  is  the  1901  watercolour  entitled  Victo-ria College: First Chemistry Laboratory, 1901, painted by Sybil Johnson. It wasdonated to the Victoria University of Wellington Art Collection in 1949 by LadyEasterfield, wife of the first Professor of Chemistry and hangs in Laby 101, theLevel 1 Office of the School of Chemical and Physical Sciences in the Laby Build-ing. The laboratory was not on the Kelburn campus but housed in an upstairs roomof the then Wellington Technical School in Victoria Street.The photograph on the back cover is of the author at age 70 years, taken by SeanCraig in 2011.iv -ForewordBrian Halton’s autobiography tells the story of one of New Zealand’s most dis-tinguished organic chemists, from his birth and early life in Lancashire, his uni-versity education at Southampton, his migration to New Zealand in 1968, and hissubsequent life as an international research chemist and academic from his baseat Victoria University of Wellington. The book is full of contemporary detail andillustrated  with  interesting  pictures  and  diagrams.  Professor  Halton  tells  of  theintricate interplay of events and interactions which led him through various way-points and junctions on his remarkable professional career. Many other charactersappear, individuals who will be known to many of Professor Halton’s professionalcolleagues. This adds to the book’s interest. For those who seek to understand whatmakes some scientists ‘tick’, I commend this book as a fascinating, highly person-alised account of one man’s life journey.Professor Sir Paul Callaghan GZNM FRS FRSNZv -vi -PrefaceMany biographies and autobiographies of famous chemists have been publishedover the years, perhaps none better known than those from the American ChemicalSociety. So, one may ask: ‘Why one from a not so famous (infamous?) chemist?’The reason is simple enough. On his retirement from Monash University in Mel-bourne in 1996, Roger Brown encouraged retired and retiring chemists to providean account of their careers. As few such documents exist in New Zealand, and asmy life has been one immersed in chemistry, I can see no better way to move mycareer closer to its end than by recalling those things that have served me so wellfor so many years. In so doing, my more than 40 years at Victoria University ofWellington form the essence of what follows.This book is for all those colleagues around the world, named or not, who haveinfluenced my life, my research and my being, for the students who worked withme, and for those whose horizons have been expanded because of me; they haveall made my life in chemistry so much the better. Whatever has been achieved hasbeen made possible only because of the love and support of my family. This bookis dedicated to them.I  am  particularly  grateful  to  my  wife,  Margaret,  for  proof  reading  the  entiremanuscript through various stages of production and Rebecca Hurrell, the manag-ing Editor of Chemistry in New Zealand, who has transposed the text and its il-lustrations into the book form that Canterbury Educational Printing Services haveso professionally produced. Dr. Joanne Harvey (Victoria University of Wellington)has proof read most of the text in her typically astute and attentive manner and I amespecially grateful to her for her perceptive comments. The School of Chemicaland Physical Sciences at Victoria University of Wellington has been particularlysupportive during the time from the concept of the book to its ultimate appearanceand the New Zealand Institute of Chemistry has assisted with the production. Allremaining errors are the sole responsibility of the author.My  appreciation  goes  to  John  Spencer  (Head  of  School)  and  my  colleaguesin Chemical and Physical Sciences at Victoria University of Wellington for theirpatience, tolerance and good humour over many years.BHWellington, August 2011vii -viii -ContentsForeword by Professor Sir Paul CallaghanPrefaceThe Early Years – Lancashire and LondonUniversity Years – SouthamptonUndergraduate DaysPostgraduate StudyThe ResearchFlorida in the Mid-1960sA New Life, a New Place, and an Emerging CareerVoyage to the AntipodesThe First MonthsTime to Settle InA Career DevelopsThe Australian ExperienceSabbatical Leave and New ColleaguesA Young Family, a Career, and MomentumSabbatical in Salt Lake CityAdvances in Chemistry – At What Cost?Chemistry and ServiceA Postdoc for Planar StrainService in New Zealand and BeyondMore Chemistry and Some RecognitionFrom Recognition to RetirementA New DirectionNew Staff, New Challenges, and a New HomeThe Joys of Emeritus Professor – What Better Role?So what about the Bread and Butter?PostscriptThat Which I Regard as the BestReferencesAppendicesAppendix IAppendix IIAppendix IIIAppendix IVix -vvii1101014162132323539424852596569777781859494103129136140140143147147149161164x -The Early YearsLancashire and LondonMary (Halton) Spencer 1912-1996John Henry Halton 1906-1965Life for me began at about 6 am on Sunday the 9th of March in 1941 at a maternityhome in the Lancastrian town of Accrington (Lancashire) in northwest England,the first and only child of Mary (May) and John Henry Halton. After what was inthose war days considered an appropriate time, I was taken home to 13 Corona-tion  Street in  Great Harwood,  a  nearby  cotton  town  then  of  some  8000  people.Coronation Street remains small and terraced, and is located close to the top leftof the aerial photograph (above what became the Oxo Factory in 1938).1 It was anunmade road, then paved with cobblestones and ultimately surfaced convention-ally in the 1950s.March 9 has few noted events save for the birth of Mickey Spillane (1918-2006), the US author who wrote the Mike Hammer detective novels, and YuriGagarin (1934-1968). Michael Dewar reported2 solidifying liquid air to the Roy-al Society on this day in 1893, and the Barbie doll was launched on it in 1959when I was 18!The  town  of  Great  Harwood  lies  within  sight  of  Pendle  Hill  and  easy  reachof the Ribble Valley, but it has always been just off the main road and, like many1 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistLeft: Outside 13 Coronation St, spring 1941. Centre: With gate in 1997. An uncle and aunt lived atNo. 17 (satellite dish) from 1948 to 1995. Right: Gt. Harwood from the Air.small towns or large villages, it is quite unremarkable. Indeed, it is not on a majorroad,  and  one  does  not  pass  through  it  on  the  way  to  somewhere  else.  Its  onlybuildings of significance are the Town Hall and Mercer Memorial Clock, and theMercer Hall (now the public recreation centre). It has had many distinguished sonsand daughters though not many who are famous.1Gt. Harwood (left): Clock Tower and Town Hall; (right): Mercer Leisure Centre(photos kindly provided Ian Fairclough).The most renowned citizen was John Mercer who, in 1844, devised a process tocause cotton fibres to swell upon treatment with sodium hydroxide. In the originalversion of his process the fibres swelled and caused the overall size of the fabricto shrink, making it stronger and easier to dye. The process became popular afterH. A. Lowe improved it in 1890 by holding the cotton during treatment to preventit from shrinking. On doing this, the fibre gains a lustrous appearance and repre-sents the modern form of the process. The self-taught Mercer became famous andwealthy; he excelled in the dye industry working in the Oakenshaw Calico PrintWorks (where he became a partner) ‘dyeing cloth with certain colours and figureson  a  ground  of  a  different  hue’. The  factory  was  located  in  what  is  now  Clay-ton-le-Moors and close to the Hyndburn river. His development of chemistry andchemical processes became widely recognised and he became one of the foundingmembers of the Chemical Society (1842), joined its Council in 1860, and remains2 -The Early Yearsthe only ‘Harroder’ to be elected to the Royal Society (1852) upon nomination byJames Thomson, Thomas Graham, Walter Crum and Lord Playfair.And so I was raised for my first years at No. 13 Coronation Street. My mother,a nurse of the mentally handicapped (the terminology of those days), remained athome as was the custom, while my father worked as a male nurse in Calderstones.This was a mental institution that had been converted into a wartime children’shospital, but the children were evacuated shortly before the troops came back fromDunkirk. It is set in lovely country near Whalley with beautifully kept grounds, andit lies in the Ribble Valley some three miles from what was our home. It still ex-ists, but is now a UK National Trust Home providing specialist services to peoplewith a learning disability. I do not know when Dad became a male nurse as, duringthe ‘great depression’, he had been a full-time musician (saxophone and clarinets)touring Ireland as a member of the Elite Orchestra – a dance band comprising hiselder brothers (Bob and Eddie) and two friends – and they still did Saturday dancesfrom time to time. I recall being on-stage with the band in the Mercer Hall for apost-war dance, probably during the 1945-1946 winter and I have always regrettednot taking up drums, likely from the impact of that single event!3 Shaftesbury Ave13 Coronation St.54A Park Rd.My part of Gt. Harwood. My maternal grandparents lived at 3 Shaftesbury Ave., Uncle Ted and AuntMary at 17 Coronation St. (from 1948) and Uncle Bob and Aunt Alice on Park Ave. (2nd from topleft) until 1950.Apparently I was a sickly child and caused my parents much concern as medi-cations and food were not easy to come by with the rationing system then in place.My earliest memory of those war-time years is of my father arriving home fromwork at about 8 o’clock in the evening having cycled or taken a bus. Our next doorneighbour at No. 11 was the local coalman, and I remember him, and the milkman3 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistfrom the nearby farm, with their horse-drawn carts making deliveries in the streetthat was, at the time, merely an unmade road. He, with his half-leather jacket, tak-ing hundred weight sacks off the cart onto his back to carry them to the outdoorcoal-hole,  and  the  milkman  transferring  gill,  pint  and  quart  measures  from  thechurn into the jugs and pans left for them; pasteurization was yet to come. WhileI do not have any memory of the barrage balloons that floated above the nearbyrecreation ground or the last day of the war, I do remember the celebrations thatensued and straddling lower Queen Street (see bottom of map) with many otherfamilies, presumably well intoxicated, as we returned from the festivity on thatauspicious night. Being on the northern edge of the Lancashire cotton towns, Gt.Harwood  escaped  damage  as  the  German  bombers  concentrated  on  Manchesterand  Liverpool;  the  closest  they  got  was  with  an  unspent  payload  dropped  nearWhalley to speed the return home.I do not know precisely when it was that my parents told me that Dad was toleave Calderstones and that we were moving to the fish and chip shop at 54A ParkRoad (less than a hundred yards down the next street over as can be seen from themap), but it was 1945. I do remember the horse and cart (from the coalman) inthe back street (that not labelled between Park Rd. and Coronation St.) and all ourbelongings being loaded on, and then making our way down to the rear entrance of54A. The row of houses of which this was a part was demolished in the late 1980sbut in those days the back street crossed Salisbury and ran down to Balfour St.The chip shop was located opposite the recreation ground just beyond the junctionwith Windsor Rd., and about three houses above Balfour St. We remained therefor four years.Over the next few years (1946-48) I went through a phase of contracting allthe childhood diseases (measles, German measles, whooping cough, diphtheria).These kept me away from St. Hubert’s Primary School, where I had started whenI was 5 years old, and then St Wulstan’s to which we all transferred at age 7. Theculmination of these events was a sizeable swelling on my left neck that, ultimate-ly, proved to be a result of bovine tuberculosis contracted from contaminated milk.At that time it was a rare condition in humans and no simple remedy was availablein  NW  England.  Eventually,  my  parents  located  a  specialist  practising  at  GreatOrmond Street Children’s Hospital in London who was able to excise the abscessfrom  a  small  incision.  Surgery  wasperformed  on  the  15th  of  November1948,  the  date  remembered  becausePrince  Charles  was  born  the  even-ing  before  and  the  street  outside  myward window was decorated and thepassing  trams  were  decked  in  flags.Left ca. 1942; Right, with father, 19484 -Recuperation was slow and I was required to spend time in the country air. I wasabsent from school for most of 1948 and 1949 and spent the summer months of’49 with my father’s eldest sister, my Aunt Mary and Uncle Tom (Aspey) at theirhome ‘Key Hills’ at Martin Top, near the small village of Rimington, some 20 kmnortheast of Gt. Harwood in glorious countryside.The Early YearsLeft: Key Hills (1997) – largely unchanged from 1949. Right: Stonyhurst PO ca. 1953 (Copyright:The Francis Frith Collection – reproduced with permission).In the autumn of 1949 we moved from Gt. Harwood to Stonyhurst whose famelies in its Jesuit public school which, at the time, comprised three colleges for boysand young men – Hodder House, St. Mary’s Hall and Stonyhurst College – locatedclose to each other in the delightful countryside bordering the Hodder River in theRibble Valley. My father became the Stonyhurst sub-postmaster, the office housedwithin our small local store in the hamlet of Woodfields; we stayed there until thesummer of 1956. Having lost almost two years of schooling through illness, I didnot take to full time school easily, but the two staff of St. Joseph’s Primary Schoolin the nearby Hurst Green, Miss Hall (junior) and Miss Burns (senior), sorted meout and I passed the all important 11+ exam in 1952. My time at Woodfields re-mains very special and I retain fond memories of the place and the people.Passage  through  the  11+  headed  me  to  grammar  school  in  September  1952.However,  Stonyhurst  was  some  25  km  from  Preston  and  the  nearest  grammarschool, a journey of 70 minutes involving a 10 minute walk to the bus stop, 45minutes on the bus and then 15 minutes from the bus terminal to the college, all tobe repeated for the trip home. Instead, I entered St. Joseph’s College, Blackpool,in  early  September  1952  as  one  of  about  eight  new  Form  II  boarders.  It  was  aschool run by the Irish Christian Brothers and attended by a good number of thelocal grammar boys. The excessive disciplinary demands, whims and fancies ofthe Brothers were hard to adapt to and life was completely regimented. Being aCatholic institution run by a religious order, Mass was held daily, but we only hadto  attend  on  five  weekdays  as  Wednesday  and  Saturday  were  designated  lie-indays, and Sunday Mass was held at the late hour of 8.30 am. Typical of the gram-mar schools of the day, classes for 11+ entrants started in Form II and involved5 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistEnglish  Language,  English  Literature,  Maths,  Science,  French,  Geography  andHistory, with Religious Studies from noon to 12.30 pm daily and Music once ortwice per week. Wednesday afternoon was sports (the boarders had sport every dayafter school from 4-5 pm) and, to make up the teaching time, school was held from9-12 am on Saturdays.Age 14 signified entry into the Lower Fifth form and choices had to be madeas the syllabus split into arts and sciences. I had little capacity for languages eventhough I enjoyed my year of Latin, and so the choice was easy – it had to be thesciences. And so my journey into Chemistry, Physics and Mathematics at a moreserious level began. We retained French, selected between Geography and History,and were required to take both English Language and English Literature. This gaveus each seven subjects, plus the mandatory Religious Knowledge, for the GeneralCertificate of Education Ordinary Level programme that culminated with externalexaminations in the Upper Fifth form. The end of the 1955-1956 year marked ourdeparture from the Post Office to begin a life in southeast London where my par-ents subsequently purchased a larger (but still ‘corner’) grocery store in Lee SE12with a separate family home at 31 Heather Road, some 50 metres down the street.I returned to Blackpool in September 1956 for the Upper Fifth year and the‘O’ levels, the essential school leaving examinations for grammar schools of thatera. As mid-term breaks were but a Friday and Monday, there was no opportunityto return to London until the Christmas holidays. The prospect of spending thesebreaks  at  school  had  no  appeal  and  I  was  fortunate  to  have  my  father’s  eldestbrother and his wife (Uncle Bob and Aunt Alice) invite me to stay with them inGt. Harwood whenever I wanted to. They owned a lady’s and children’s outfitterson Queen Street, near the Town Gate and Clock and I spent every short break withthem until I left Blackpool. I always felt sorry for those boarders whose parentslived abroad and who had no choice but to stay at school through the mid-termrecesses.The ‘O’ levels came and went and I travelled south to London for the sum-mer holiday, worked in the shop, and awaited the results. I still have the card onwhich I had been required to enter my name and the subjects I had taken, withthe results added by hand by the then Headmaster (a Bro. Dolan) and mailed tome.  I  passed  six  of  the  seven  subjects,  missing  out  on  English  Language  by  afew percentage points. I elected to return to SJC despite my parents asking if Iwould prefer to attend a day school near home. Quite why I did this I will neverknow,  but  return  I  did  and  entered  the  Lower  Sixth  taking  Chemistry,  Physicsand Mathematics for Advanced (A) Level GCE in the new Science Block that bythen had been completed. The chemistry programme was taught by Bro. CorneliusSreenan and I think it was his knowledge and ability to put across the great logicof organic chemistry that directed me into my career in the subject. The precision6 -The Early Yearsof functional groups and their ability to provide logical derivatives in a predictivemanner was enough to convince me; Physics and Maths rounded things off, but Ihad markedly less interest in them. The demands of boarding school life and thecontinual removal of privileges from my peer group during that year persuaded methat there had to be a better way to gain an education and my departure from SJCin July 1958 was permanent, although at the time no one knew it.Despite the adverse publicity the Irish Brothers attracted in the late 20th cen-tury, the demise of the college was due solely to mismanagement. Bad decisionsin construction and the wish of every headmaster to have an edifice created duringhis tenure led to a loss of funding and its closure.3 An Old Boys Society exists andthere is a web site containing reminiscences of former pupils.3When I arrived in London for the summer holiday, my parents had arrangedfor me to attend St. Joseph’s Academy in Blackheath, London SE3, subject to asatisfactory interview with the Headmaster, a Brother Vincent. At that time, theAcademy was the most prestigious Catholic grammar school in South London andit saw a high proportion of senior pupils move on to university with good ‘A’ levelqualifications. I was accepted and began an entirely new lifestyle in the autumnof 1958.What my time at SJC taught and instilled into me more than anything was thediscipline of study and a capacity for work. This came from the routine of set studyhours, limited free time and few distractions – the boarders did have a 12 inch (25cm) TV that the seniors could watch from time to time. I was never a star in theclassroom  or  in  the  examinations  for  it was  the  day  boys  from  the  professionalfamilies that dominated, but nor was I a dunce.Not  only  was  my  boarding  school  background  ben-eficial as I started life at the ‘Academy’ but it has servedme well throughout life. The initial stages of Upper Sixthwere far from easy. Maths in the north was a single sub-ject comprising mainly ‘pure’ components, whereas theAcademy had distinct ‘Pure’ and ‘Applied’ programmesto  fit  the  London  GCE  courses.  There,  ‘A’  levels  com-prised four rather than the three subjects I had taken pre-viously, and catching up on a year of missed tuition withthe  prospects  of  calculating  the  friction  generated  by  abox sliding down a slope inclined at 20° did not impress;I had great difficulty in assimilating the missed work of‘Applied’. However, to my great delight, chemistry andphysics were taught by knowledgeable enthusiasts, Brother Austin (Casson) andMr. (Pussy) Catt, respectively.Bro. Austin 2002(courtesy Tony Hyman)7 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistAlthough the labs were old by comparison with the new SJC facility, there wasthe real advantage in the London County Council scheme that had expensive (by1958-59  standards)  laboratory  equipment  rotated  through  the  schools  on  a  loanbasis.  Life  was  a  ball!  We  even  had  tickets  to  the  Royal  Institution  ChristmasLectures. These were instigated by Sir Lawrence Bragg and seeing and hearingthat Fullerian Professor of Chemistry, who at age 25 had received a Nobel Prize,remains  a  highlight  of  my  life;  he  was  a  master  showman  as  well  as  a  brilliantscientist.The year at the Academy went well and I achieved good ‘A’-level passes in allbut ‘Applied’ for which I passed ‘O’-level. Despite a second attempt the followingNovember, I never made it to the echelons of such (to me) mysterious mathemati-cal manipulations. At that time, the examination periods consisted of a three-hourlaboratory practical in each of Chemistry and Physics and two three-hour writtenpapers in all subjects. Prior to the summer break and the examination period, it hadbeen suggested to me that I should return for a 7th-form year and take the Schol-arship exams. This I did. Perhaps it was this extra year at school that provided aneeded catch-up for me, for I have never regretted it. Kevin Prendergast, a locallad, and I were the only two taking science scholarship, both of us with chemistryand physics. We had lots of free periods and were encouraged to set up projectwork and write essays on all manner of topics using not simply the school facili-ties but also those of the neighbourhood and city. We were both prefects (there hadbeen a suggestion that I be Head Boy but my tenure in the school was too short forthe proposal to be taken seriously) and we had to make sure that we were on timewhen we were on duty, as ‘late comers’ were subject to detention. We attendedplays in the West End, concerts at the Festival Hall and, of course, a second RoyalInstitution Christmas lecture was not to be missed. It was some thirty years laterthat I chaired the first ever live-via-satellite science lecture from the UK to NZ byProf. (now Sir) John Cadogan, then President of the Royal Society of Chemistry,from that same lecture theatre late on a January evening. My audience was in theMassey University Marsden lecture theatre (Palmerston North) for the post-lunchplenary lecture of the 1987 ANZASS Congress held that January. Prof. Dick Battwas Congress Chairman.4Once again the year passed quickly and by the time the formal examinationscame around I had secured an unconditional offer from Southampton University.Initially a college of London University, it had been granted its own charter in 1952and was typical of the ‘red brick’ universities of the time. I had by then persuadedmy parents that to gain the full benefit of a university education I really needed tobe an integral part of it and that this could only be done by living away from home.I had applied to other institutions and (to keep faith at home) London’s University(UC), Imperial (IC), and Kings Colleges; I did not consider myself Oxbridge ma-8 -The Early Yearsterial. Southampton was the first to invite me to interview and it was conducted byDr. Kenneth Webb, a delightful inorganic chemist who spent his academic careerat Southampton, initially when it was a university college, through its formativeyears,  and  beyond.  Before  we  were  done  he  was  telling  me  what  I  should  andshould not do when I came down; the formal and unconditional offer came soonafterwards. In the event, the outcome of the scholarship year (A-levels plus oneadditional  three-hour  written  paper  for  each  scholarship  subject)  was  passes  inboth subjects and the offer of a State Scholarship to both Kevin and me (which Igather were limited to a total of 500 nationally): a first for the Academy. Althoughthe financial reward was formally no different from the London County Councilscholarship, there were advantages of kudos and in the parental income test beingmore lenient, with the cost of travel to and from the university also met. Several ofthe colleges that had not previously accepted me wrote offering a place based uponthe ‘State’ but, given the confidence Ken Webb and Southampton showed in me, Istayed with them, a decision that I have never regretted.The summer months were spent as a laboratory assistant in the HaematologyDepartment  of  Dulwich  Hospital,  a  part  of  the  King’s  College  Hospital  Group.This provided additional workplace and laboratory experience beyond that of theshop, cafe and departmental store gained during other school holidays. At the endof the first week of October 1960, I went down to Southampton to enter universityas a freshman.9 -University Years – SouthamptonUndergraduate DaysOctober  1960  saw  me  depart  from  Lee  and  move  to  Southampton  where  I  hadsecured lodgings with Mrs. Pritchard and her son David at 4 Bankside, WessexLane, in the suburb of Swaythling. This was a distance of some 2 km from the Uni-versity. I remained with them for two years. At that time, entry into a UniversityHall was not common for first-year men and only one of my schoolmates, classicsstudent Rick Collett, who had been the Academy Head Boy, gained such entry.He too was at Southampton and a resident of Connaught Hall, a little closer thanBankside to campus down Wessex Lane. I spent many happy hours there as Rickwas a competent guitarist and had a good voice; it was my own ‘Hall of Choice’and I spent my final undergraduate year as a resident there. Kevin Prendergast, myfriend  and  co-scholar  from  the Academy  elected to  attend Liverpool  Universityand subsequently moved to a career with Coates Bros. (of printing inks fame) inSt Mary’s Cray, Kent.Southampton  University  had  about  1500  students  of  whom  the  BSc  (Hons)Chemistry class of 1960 was 37; one was female. Lectures were held in the onlylecture theatre that the Department had and comprised the traditional Inorganic,Organic and Physical. The inorganic programme started with a course on Structureand Bonding given by Drs. Eddie Cartmell and Gerry Fowles and it followed theirrenowned textbook Valence and Molecular Structure initially published in 1956and as a 2nd edition in 1961 – I still have my copy of the latter with its 32/6 (£1-12-6; $NZ 3.25) price sticker inside the front cover.5 Organic was split betweenDrs. Ishbel Campbell and Eric Parker, and covered functional group chemistry inall its 1960s glory. The set texts were the two volumes of Finar and Cram & Ham-mond’s Organic Chemistry book.6 Ishbel was a delightful lady, one of the very fewfemale academics in science and whose fame lay in being the first to isolate chiralphosphorus  compounds;  her  research  was  dominantly  in  the  organophosphorus,arsenic, -antimony, and -tin areas in the era prior to most spectroscopies becomingcommonplace. She had few research students but Martin Hocking (who completedhis PhD in 1963 and was one of my laboratory demonstrators) rose to the rank ofProfessor at the University of Victoria in Canada. Ishbel was a chain smoker and inher first lecture she advised us that, as Southampton University forbade smoking in10 -University Years – Southamptonall lectures, her classes would be tutorials. She then lit her next cigarette from thestub she was holding, put out the stub under the bench tap, and launched into thefirst lecture! Eric Parker was very much the gentleman, even changing into a suitin his office prior to delivering most lectures. He was an excellent communicatorbut left academia for the Registrarship of the Royal Institute of Chemistry in 1962.Physical chemistry had Drs. H. M. Frey and A. C. Riddiford as the principal expo-nents; the latter was assigned as my tutor.The  first  term  of  university  involved  lectures,  no  formal  study  requirementsand only one assignment (in physical chemistry); it seemed to provide an easy en-try into university life. The needed shock to the system came with an end-of-termexamination that produced an average mark well below 30%. A more structuredregime  of  study  was  needed  and  the  SJC  idiom  was  reinstated!  In  those  days,there were no classes on Wednesday afternoons so that sporting activities could befollowed but, like SJC, to compensate, laboratory classes were held on Saturdaymornings, ostensibly from 9-12. Ostensibly, because the first term programme ofQualitative  and  Quantitative Analysis  had  the  requirement  of  results  being  pre-sented before the end of the laboratory period. While this seemed straight forwardenough – the time allocation was more than equitable – what was not pointed outto us was the level of accuracy required for the quantitative components. Volu-metric analyses had to have an uncertainty to ±0.5%, whilst the gravimetric com-ponents were somewhat more lenient with a mere ±0.75% – and with any resultfalling outside the limits it was back to the bench to start over again. The middayclose was a mere indicator as it was closer to 1 pm before everyone was finished,washed-up and out, sometimes much later depending upon the whim of the dem-onstrator. The rigours of that programme have meant that, even now, I can use abalance, a pipette and a burette with a precision far greater than most of the early21st century graduates.In the early 1960s the university BSc (Hons) programme comprised two parts,the first covering the first two years of study, and the second for year three. Allchemists were required to take one subsidiary subject (a maths, physics, or bio-chemistry option) and a non-examinable non-science offering, as well as gain apassing  grade  in  translating  a  scientific  paper  from  one  of  Russian,  German  orFrench into English, before being able to graduate. The French option was dis-couraged on the basis that few chemistry papers then were written in the language.My choices were Physics, International Law and German, of which the law op-tion was magical. Subsidiary physics and I engaged happily until the electricitycomponent ran to complex circuits and electronics, while the German translationwas left until 2nd year. The end of first year had no formal examinations as the PartI degree examinations applied only at the end of year two. However, this did notmean an easy ride for the freshmen. Departmental examinations were scheduled11 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistand these decided one’s fate – to remain in the Honours stream, to drop to the Or-dinary Degree (a BSc plain and simple), or to be ‘sent down’ with one’s universitydays ended. Thus, in late June 1961 the examinations began; for me two papers inphysics and three in chemistry scheduled over three days with only the afternoonof the second day free.Unlike today’s norm where courses are split into small components with muchin-course assessment and feedback, the 1960s had none of these. For us, the sum-mer  exams  were  the  first  since  the  disastrous  pre-Christmas  exercise  and  therewas some trepidation about the outcome. Again, and contrary to the mandatorypractices of the 21st century, the procedures did not comply with anything I haveseen  elsewhere.  Two  lists  were  posted  on  the  first  year  notice  board.  The  first,headed ‘The following candidates may proceed to the second year of the Honoursprogramme’  contained  an  alphabetical  list  of  family  names  with  given  initials.It comprised thirteen entries – 13 of the original 37 had made it beyond 1st year!The second list was similarly annotated and gave the list of candidates who wereallowed  to  proceed  to  the  second  year  of  the  ordinary  degree.  This  list  carriedfewer than the remaining 24 names. There were but two lists. If, after (frantically)searching, one had not found one’s name then a visit to the tutor was necessary,after all, the tutor was expected to nurture the student’s well being. I well remem-ber one such individual reiterating his experience of being told that ‘as far as thisinstitution is concerned you no longer exist’. For me, the news was good – I wasthrough to year two of Honours.Year two at Southampton saw a few changes. Dr. Ian Stevens had joined the or-ganic staff headed by Richard Cookson (1922-2008) who had taken over the Chairin Chemistry in 1957 from N. K. Adam and, at the time was the youngest Profes-sor of Chemistry in the UK at 35 years of age. Ishbel Campbell, Eric Parker andthe ‘new man’ provided the organic lecture courses, while Ken Webb continuedhis discourse of systematic inorganic chemistry from the green Partington,7 andGerry  Fowles  continued  with  coordination  chemistry.  Thermodynamics  formeda  good  part  of  Physical  Chemistry  and  the  entire  laboratory  programme  movedto a higher plane. I successfully completed the German translation programme inMay of that year when Eric Parker announced his impending move to London tobecome Secretary and Registrar of the Royal Institute of Chemistry. During 1962Drs. John Hudec and Leslie Johnson joined the organic staff.The  first  part  of  the  degree  examinations  that  counted  to  the  final  outcomefollowed in June 1962. Chemistry had three three-hour papers (one for each sub-discipline)  and  Physics  just  two.  They  began  at  9.30  on  Tuesday  June  12  withChemistry I and were completed by 12.30 on Thursday 14th with Physics II – fivepapers  in  two  and  a  half  days  with  a  one  and  a  half  hour  break  between  each.The  organic  and  inorganic  papers  were  regarded  by  us  as  essentially  what  was12 -University Years – Southamptonexpected, but the Physical Chemistry paper caused us problems; I gathered laterthat only three of the class of eleven actually passed it. Nonetheless, save for mygood friend Mike Gravestock, we proceeded to the final year of Honours; Mikemoved on to the Ordinary degree programme only to be vindicated the followingyear when he was invited to return for honours in a fourth year. This he did, subse-quently completing a PhD degree in Canada. Once again, the results were postedin the same indicative way.The second year at Southampton had seen the start of a new Chemistry build-ing to abut the existing two storey structure at its southern end creating an internalcourtyard. The impact on us was the construction of a corridor inside the easternwall of the lecture theatre reducing its size. This had minimal impact on our smallnumbers and the lecture programme continued. Richard Cookson, who had beeninvolved with (Sir) Derek Barton whilst at Birkbeck College (London) on the con-formational analysis work that led to the latter’s 1969 Nobel Prize, gave one of thecourses and our first exposure to him. Unfortunately, lecturing was not Richard’sstrong  point.  I  recall  one  lecture  in  which  the  blackboard  became  covered  withjottings and a series of lines joining them together in what appeared to be a com-pletely haphazard fashion. Nonetheless, he impressed with his breadth of knowl-edge and willingness to discuss. John Hudec and Ian Stevens were joined by JohnMellor who retired from the Department only in 2002 or thereabouts, while LeslieJohnston  had  little  contact  with  the  senior  class.  Physical  had  its  first  professorappointed and Graham Hills appeared before us for a good part of the year. By theChristmas break, the new edifice was almost ready for occupation and the springterm saw the new laboratories for ‘organic’ opened. The postgraduate students hadalready  moved  into  the  upper  level  labs  of  this  spacious  building  and,  with  theexpansion, came a drive to increase the postgraduate population by attracting stu-dents from elsewhere. I well remember Gerry Fowles more regularly stopping togive me a ride up the hill from the Swaything-Portswood Road to the rear entranceof the Department and I think that he was somewhat disappointed that organic wasmy preference to his co-ordination chemistry.The final examinations comprised the three-hour papers in each area of chem-istry followed by Paper IV that was designed to test the candidate’s breadth anddepth of knowledge in the subject. There was no syllabus, no formal lecture pro-gramme and anything (within reason) was fair game. Invariably, a question wouldbe based on a topic presented in one of the seminars by a visiting academic andthe interpretation of 60 MHz proton NMR spectra (the new technique) would bethere. Physical chemistry frequently drew upon one of the thermodynamic deriva-tions  and  Inorganic  offered  essay-style  review  topics. These  examinations  weregenerously spaced, being mornings only over four days from June 7. For these,Ishbel  Campbell  waited  with  us  outside  the  examination  hall  checking  that  we13 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistwere all there and wishing us the best. If one of a class failed to appear, she wouldpromptly rush away to bring the errant being in. I cannot remember just how longafter the exams it was before the results were announced, as it always depended onwhen the external examiner could attend. We were given a date and told to makeourselves available should we be required to attend for interview. As it happened,none  of  us  were  so  invited  and  we  all  gained  degrees. There  were  a  few  thirdsawarded, a good number of lower seconds and four upper second degrees, one ofwhich was mine – but no first class honours. Much to my surprise, I was awardedthe Smith Prize in Physical Chemistry while the organic equivalent went to a peerwho went on to do a ‘physical’ PhD. My clear preference for research study wasfor a PhD in organic chemistry and preferably under Cookson’s guidance.The  July  graduation  ceremony  involved  a  procession  through  the  centre  ofthe  city,  conferment  of  degrees  in  the  town  hall,  and  an  afternoon  reception  inthe  grounds  of  Stoneham  House,  adjacent  toConnaught Hall on Wessex Lane (now a partof the Wessex Lane Halls Complex). My par-ents came down from London for the day andenjoyed  the  success  that  I  gained.  That  finalundergraduate year had been spent as a Con-naught Hall resident in a room next to John L.(Jack) Frost who also gained an upper seconddegree  and  proceeded  to  a  PhD  with  GerryFowles.  Gerry  left  Southampton  in  1966  totake  up  a  Chair  at  Reading,  joining  MontyFrey (physical chemistry) who had made themove a year earlier. Our rooms in Connaughtfaced the entrance to the quadrangle and werebelow  the  accommodations  occupied  by  Dr.Webb (who never married and became a very longstanding member of the Con-naught  community,  even  well  into  his  retirement  years  I  believe).  I  heard  laterthat he and other academics resident in the Hall kept a ‘book’ of the degrees eachresident was expected to gain!Postgraduate StudyAfter the vacation, it was back to Southampton on a Science Research Councilscholarship for PhD study. As was customary, I found I was to be supervised joint-ly by Cookson and Ian Stevens whose expertise lay in the chemistryof small rings – azirines and diazirines – at least until he destroyedthe NMR probe of the newly installed Varian A60 during the early14 -University Years – Southamptonpart of 1964. Chris Watts (who with Mike Gravestock remain the only contempo-raries of those days with whom I have maintained contact) was likewise assigned.There were also additional recruits to organic from other places. John Henstockjoined our year while Brian Drake, who had graduated via the Royal Institution ofChemistry examination process, had started his postgraduate study a year earlier;both were with Richard and had John Hudec as co-supervisor.Organic chemistry was located on Level 5 of the research building with officesfor Ishbel, Ian and John at the eastern end and research laboratories occupying theremainder  of  the  floor.  John  Mellor  and  Leslie  Johnson  were  located  in  the  oldbuilding, while, as Head of Department, Cookson had his offices on Level 2. I wasallocated to Room 514 which comprised four research benches, each with a writ-ing space at the end, and two fume cupboards.Brian Drake and Golapudy Subrahmanyam (an Indian postdoctoral) were thefirst to move in and had taken the end benches with a fume hood behind them. Ihad a centre aisle bench facing west and the remaining vacant space behind mebecame the coffee centre for ‘organic’ for the duration of my PhD. Having had tomove out of Connaught Hall, I had secured a one bedroom apartment on HartleyAvenue, no more than 50 metres from the back entrance of the Chemistry Depart-ment, and I recall the tremendous thrill of letting myself into the building afterhours for the first time. The closeness to ‘work’, however, soon became a burdenas the sight of the building from my bedsit window was too much of a pull. I foundthat I was spending far too much time at the bench and I had to put more spacebetween ‘home’ and ‘office’; a move became essential.Mike  Gravestock  had  been  ‘in  residence’  with  the  Eaton’s  at  17  PhillimoreRoad, Swaythling, for some years. This family was known as providers of one ofthe very best of home-stay accommodations for Southampton students. While I donot recall the details, a vacancy unexpectedly arose and I was fortunate enoughto be accepted by them. I moved in at the end of October in 1963. Les Eaton hadbeen a Midland Bank Manager in the Eastleigh Branch but was recently retiredwhen I appeared on the scene. His wife Kay, formerly very active within South-ampton amateur dramatics, provided us with every home comfort, meals cookedon the Aga, freshly perked coffee with breakfast and dinner, and the ability to jointhem to watch TV in the evenings unless they were entertaining. Les was a devouthome brew enthusiast to the extent that he would only provide us (and our visitingfriends) with his ale if we were not driving; the potency was legion and a pint wasthe maximum intake. I remained with Kay and Les for the duration of my PhD andmaintained contact with them until they died. Even in 1974, when I was on leavein the UK with Margaret, my wife, and 2-year old son, Mark, Kay insisted that wecome down from Reading (where I was based) to spend a weekend with them; thelast time that I saw them was in 1985 when their health was clearly on the decline.15 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistThe ResearchIn 1963, cyclopropanones, e.g. 1, had not been isolated but their presence asintermediates had been demonstrated in a transformation known as the Favorskiireaction.  So  also  had  their  allene  oxide  resonance  isomers,  both  from  trappingstudies  as  illustrated  in  Scheme1.8  The  project  that  I  acceptedwas  designed  to  see  if  nitrogenanalogues  of  allene  oxides,  theisolable methyleneaziridines, e.g.2, behaved similarly. The known9amine  2  was  synthesized  from2,3-dibromopropene  by  aminefor  bromide  replacement  usingethylamine  with  subsequent  de-hydrobromination  using  amideion  in  liquid  ammonia  (Scheme2). The second step provided thefirst  exposure  to  the  use  of  lowtemperature  liquids.  The  needed  liquid  ammonia  was  dispensed  alongside  thebuilding loading bay and a fume cupboard in an unoccupied laboratory at the west-ern end of Floor 5 was used for the reaction. The isolated yield of 2 was dire – I hadnot used an appropriate trap and the product had co-distilled with the solvent undervacuum, an easy mistake for the novice and a lesson well heeded. Trapping reac-tions with a range of dipolarophiles were largely unsuccessful as only two of ninesuch reactants gave products, viz. 3 and 4, from tetracyanoeth-ylene (TCNE) and dimethyl acetylenedicarboxylate (DMAD),respectively. The structure of the more interesting pyrrole tri-ester 4 was confirmed by comparison with an authentic sam-ple. The route from 2 to 3 was clearly by a [2 + 2] addition,but that from 2 to 4 much less obvious (there were no rules for pericyclic reactionsthen). Although a lengthy pathway was proposed,10 I only returned to these stud-ies when Victoria University honoured me with a grand retirement symposium in2005. One of the participants, Dr. Andrew Grimsdale, represented Klaus Müllen,the Organic Chemistry Director of the Max Plank Institute for Polymer Research.I had met Andrew there and the issue of my PhD arose, the dipolar cycloadditionsdiscussed, and a few weeks later, the mechanistic explanation of Scheme 3 camefrom him. As is clear, methyl 2-butynoate should be detected. That it was not maysimply reflect loss during purification (bp 102 ºC 760 mm/Hg). Repetition of thesequence would seem to offer a promising honours year project.16 -University Years – SouthamptonWhile  these  studies  took  themost  part  of  a  year,  they  werenever going to extend for the re-maining two years of the doctoraldegree.  Chris  Watts,  who  wasawarded  a  Southampton  Schol-arship,  had  examined  a  differentaspect  of  the  Favorskii  interme-diate, namely the intermediate(s)in  the  thermal  rearrangement  ofFeist’s  ester  5.  He  showed  that  heating  inthe presence of furan (and cyclopentadiene)gave a single spirocycle, e.g. 6, from [4 + 2]cycloaddition rather than interception of thering  opened  zwitterion  7;  we  share  a  com-mon publication from our results.11We both needed new topics. Chris moved to study the cycloaddition chemistryof diethyl azodicarboxylate and Richard broached with me the subject of confor-mational analysis and the possibility of separating and isolating distinct conform-ers  (now  termed  rotamers)  of  one  molecule. The  pioneering  work  of  Sir  DerekBarton and the evolution of conformational analysis had made major inroads toorganic chemistry, but in 1964 the isolation of more than one conformer of a mol-ecule was still to be achieved; the challenge was too great to resist. The moleculethat had attracted Richard was cyclotriveratrylene (CTV, 8). It had been synthe-sized  by  Mrs.  Robinson12  in  1907  from  the  condensation  of  1,2-dimethoxyben-zene (veratrole) with formaldehyde, although it was only in 1963 that the correcttrimeric structure, depicted by ‘crown’ 8,appeared (Scheme 4).13 The compound iseasily  oxidized  to  a  monoketone,  whichhas significant conjugated aryl rings (υmax1685  cm-1)  and,  thus,  cannot  retain  thenon-conjugated  crown  arrangement.  Ithad  to  have  the  ‘saddle’  shape  9  shownin Scheme 4. Lithium aluminium hydridereduction  of  9  leads  to  alcohol  as  ex-pected but two conformers were detected–  the  less  stable  saddle  10  and  the  ther-modynamically more favoured crown 11.A separation of the conformers to providethe  independent  rotamers  was  not  easily17 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistfound until their solubility in tetrahydrofuran (THF) was discovered to be mark-edly different. Saddle 10 is essentially insoluble whereas crown 11 is very soluble;simply stirring in THF followed by filtration gave almost pure 10, stable for sev-eral days at -70 ºC. Crown 11 exhibits its methylene groups as a pair of doublets(3.48 and 4.65 ppm; J 14.0 Hz) with a singlet for the 18 methoxy protons (3.87ppm) in the (60 MHz) 1H NMR spectrum. In contrast, saddle 10 had an AB quartetcentred at 3.90 ppm (J 15.5 Hz) for the CH2 moieties and a split signal (3.85 and3.92 ppm) for the OMe protons. A kinetic study concluded that saddle 10 ionizessome 6 x 104 times faster that crown 11. The isolation and formal distinction ofthe α-10 and β-11 cyclotriveratrylenols formed my first scientific publication – acommunication in the Journal of the American Chemical Society jointly with N.K.Anand who had carried out some of the preliminary studies.14 Subsequent study ofa range of transformations and kinetic measurements provided a foundation of myPhD thesis and the full paper appeared later.15HF-6-31G**electron density potentials of crown (left) and saddle (right) 8, the second of each fromrotation and turningCalixarenes and crown ethers are now of major importance in host-guest chem-istry and the cyclotriveratrylenes have played their part. Nonetheless, CTV (8) wasnot revisited until recently. Out of interest, the equilibrium geometries and densitypotentials of the crown and saddle conformers of 8 were calculated at the HF-6-31G** level. As often happens with calculation, the pictorial outcome can haveartistic appearance. For me, this is especially true for the saddle, and especiallyfrom above as depicted in the figure at the right.In July 1965 my father, John, died. Shortly after returning from holiday in thesummer of 1964, he suffered a minor stroke. He was subsequently diagnosed witharterial sclerosis for which there was no simple remedy. Having been referred tothe specialist medical staff of Guy’s Hospital, he chose to undergo experimentalsurgery  to  clean  his  carotid  arteries.  Prior  to  his  hospitalization,  he  had  visitedme in Southampton and saw my work environment, met the Eaton’s and, I think,was happy and satisfied with what he found. The late July surgery never saw himregain consciousness and he died on the 31st. After the funeral and attending to theessential matters, I spent some time with friends at a chateau near Lyons in France.On  returning  to  Southampton  I  met  with  Prof.  Cookson  and  still  remember18 -University Years – Southamptonhis offer of financial assistance – chequebook in hand – to help out in what he wascertain had been difficult times. Richard’sgenerosity was well known as he had lentmoney to many students, often the travelcosts  to  get  to  an  overseas  postdoctoral,always  done  on  a  pay-me-back-whenyou-can basis. While the Cookson fam-ily were financially independent, havingowned what became British Steel, wealth was something Richard used to assistothers when he perceived a need; he was a delightful individual, a first-rate chem-ist and a generous man.Richard Cookson (1922-2008) and his wife inlater yearsAs with my peers, the final year of study brought thoughts of the future andcareer prospects, and this second only to completing the degree successfully. In mypre-University days I had contemplated reading textile chemistry but my father’sbrother, Edward, dissuaded me from it. He had worked his life in the Lancashiremill environment rising from a weaver to become Manager of Sabden’s StuddartMill; by the late 1950s he was convinced that a  future in textile chemistry wasnot a good idea. Nonetheless, the dyestuffs industry had appeal and I interviewedwith ICI (Dyestuffs Division) in Blakely, Manchester, but I was not convinced thenorthern environment was what I really wanted. Indeed, even before the outcomebecame known, I had convinced myself that travel was important, and that a post-doctoral position would be ideal. In the mid-1960s, the US economy was strong,postdoctorals were abundant and salaries good. The choice of potential supervi-sors combined with locations to provide a list of six. Highly ranked was Prof. NickTurro of Columbia University in New York City, but by February of 1966 he hadalready committed his funds. Others were similarly placed, but Prof. Turro prof-fered my name and an unsolicited offer came from Milton Orchin at the Universityof Cincinnati on March 30. By then, I was more attracted to small ring chemistryagain and the work of Merle Battiste (1933-2009) at the University of Florida heldgreatest appeal. I wrote expressing my preference to work with him rather thanbe in Cincinnati. I received a formal offer on April 12 that I accepted for a lateAugust/early September start on a salary of $US7200 pa – more than triple theexpected UK income at that time. Without doubt the most difficult next step was totell my mother of this decision, a mere nine months after my father’s death.Chris Watts and I were allocated the same external PhD examiner but were toldthat he was to leave on a one year sabbatical in late August. The choice was to havethe thesis written and in final draft form in six weeks or wait until he returned thefollowing year! Unbound copies of our theses went to him for examination aheadof the formal submission. Likely this was contrary to policy, but it happened and19 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistwe had our oral examinations sequentially on the sameday in August 1966. Chris was first, and I discovered thatour examiner was Prof. Ken Schofield of Exeter Univer-sity. When my time came, I was cheerfully greeted, andthen  there  was  a  silence  as  he  proceeded  to  delve  intohis briefcase. He produced a paper bag of broken Drei-ding Model parts and assured me that my statement onthe inability of the Dreiding model of crown 11 to invertto saddle conformer 10 was correct. His attempt to dis-prove this had cost him a comparatively new set of com-ponents! Chris and I were successful and awarded PhDdegrees conferred in abstentia at the graduation ceremony in 1967. Ken Schofieldand I next interacted in 1973 as he was then the Scientific Editor (Organic) for theCambridge Chemistry Texts in which the Coxon and Halton book Organic Pho-tochemistry appeared,16 and subsequently on his visit to New Zealand. Chris and Ithen left Southampton, me for Florida and Chris for Los Angeles where he had apostdoctoral with Prof. Saul Winstein.Chris WattsMy departure from England for the USA was on the Queen Mary from South-ampton to New York on Friday September 17, 1966. My mother, her twin sisterAnne and her daughter (my cousin Marian to whose son Nicholas I had becomegodfather  the  previous  October)  came  down  to  Southampton  to  see  me  off.  Inthose days, the fanfare of departure had bands playing on the quay, a myriad ofstreamers (provided by the Cunard Line) and the decks lined with the departingpassengers. For my event there was room for all of us along the rails as the boatwas far from fully booked, and the smaller number of passengers provided for amost pleasant journey.20 -Florida in the Mid-1960sMy berth on the Queen Mary was in a four-man cabin in the bowels of the boat– the least expensive – and, together with the subsequent rail journey from NewYork to Gainesville, allowed for a further three days holiday in the city coveredby the remains of my £500 legacy. The cabin, it transpired, was to be occupied byonly two passengers, a British jazz musician returning to New York for work andme. We proceeded to make the most of the five day journey, using the first classgolf driving range during the daytime (with 50% occupancy in steerage class andless in First the barriers were left open) and the bar in the evenings.Apart  from  the  usual  tourist  sites,  my  few  days  in  NYC  included  a  visit  toColumbia University to meet Nick Turro who, some months later wrote asking ifI was still interested in a post at Columbia for the following academic year. Theoffer came in a letter which stated: My postdoc stipend will be of the order of $US5,500. From your point of view, such a drastic pay cut would demand some otherdramatic compensation. Whether living in New York would make a difference, Idon’t know.The Saturday afternoon had me board the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad trainat New York’s Penn Station bound for Florida, with a train ‘relocation’ scheduledfor Jacksonville the next morning. With a single berth bedsit the journey was com-fortable and enjoyable. My evening meal in the dining car necessitated joining anelderly couple as the restaurant car was full. Even after 44 years, I recall those peo-ple being most convivial and hospitable. It transpired that their son was studyingat the University of Florida and dinner conversation revolved about life in Florida,the Gainesville campus and all the new things that I would see and experience;they happily befriended me and bought me dinner.Upon arrival in Jacksonville on the Sunday morning I was told that there wasample time to take a stroll and look around the station, which I did. On return to thetrack (no longer a British platform) I was horrified to see a long empty space withno train – the ‘relocation’ had occurred. Sanity was restored when I discovered thatthe train had split in half with the one for Central Florida and Tampa now at a dif-ferent track and the other already on its way south to Miami. The Gainesville stop21 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistcame up around noon with the external temperature close to 100 °F (37 °C). I wasthe only passenger to disembark. I phoned Prof. Battiste and waited what seemedlike hours in the blistering heat for him to arrive. He had not accepted that a trainactually stopped in Gainesville and had driven 35 minutes south to Ocala, only tolearn that ‘if he had gotten off then it had to be back in Gainesville as that was theonly halt’! We went directly to lunch, I rehydrated, and then we toured the townand the extensive campus, finally arriving at the Chemistry Department. Dinnerwas with Merle Battiste, wife Anita and son Mark. It was delightfully casual but,as the evening progressed, I became somewhat concerned about the accommoda-tion that Merle had said would be arranged for me; he had forgotten to mentionthat it was to be with the family for as long as it took to find an apartment.My first day on campus was taken with the usual signing-on paperwork, a visitto the Campus Police for issue of ID card and fingerprinting, and then downtownfor issue of a Social Security Card. All of this was done with the assistance of Dr.Rolf Rehberg, Merle’s first postdoctoral fellow who had been there some monthsand recently become married to his German fiancé, with Merle and Anita actingin loco parentis; they had accommodated Angelika ahead of the wedding. Somemonths later it became my turn to initiate the next postdoctoral down the line. Thiswas a simple enough task as the individual, one Dr. John Hill, also an Englishman,was a sabbatical visitor from Hobart and William Smith College of Geneva in up-state New York where he had a permanent post; he needed no introduction to UScustoms, just a bit of help finding places.Arriving in Gainesville in September (1966) meant that most of the apartmentshad already been rented to student groups and little was available. Anita was gen-erous in insisting that I did not rush into any agreement and regret the decision(typically a 12 month lease with a first and last month’s rent payable up front). Ittook only a few days to realize that a car was essential and, while I had saved whatI thought would be adequate for a US start-up, a car had not featured on my list!Rolf had me sorted out within an hour; we visited the Campus Staff Credit Unionof which I became a member on payment of $US2.00 and collected the applica-tion form for a loan! Being German, Rolf advocated the purchase of a VW Beetlefor a single postdoc and, knowing little about US Chevys, Buicks or Fords, I tookhis advice, went to the local dealership and agreed to a low mileage 1964 modelsubject to loan approval. My loan was approved within 24 hours and I had a redVW the next afternoon. Florida law in 1966 was a little confusing. As an overseasvisitor, I was able to drive on my British licence for about three months but, upontaking up residence in the State, I needed to take out a Florida one. No one wouldtell me for how long I could drive before I took the Florida test and so I decided towait for some weeks until I was sufficiently settled.At the end of my first week in Gainesville I found a semi-furnished one bed-22 -Florida in the Mid-1960sroom apartment on SW 14th Terrace, almost at the southern edge of the town as itwas then. The complex, Cheshire Apartments, was about a mile from the Chemis-try Department and set back by one block from Route 441 (13th Street), the mainhighway through the town. It was surrounded by woods, the trees covered in Span-ish moss that provided an eerie sensation when driving in at night. My experiencein gaining a Florida driver’s licence was not without its own drama. With a fewweeks of Florida driving behind me, I attended the Florida Highway Patrol Sta-tion. The large burly officer at the desk had me complete the paperwork, dismissedmy UK licence recording no licence on the form and wrote needs glasses after theeye test. I was then asked to wait outside for the road test where I was joined byanother man, who I assumed was also waiting for his test. Not so! He enquired asto how I had got myself to the testing station. I replied that I had driven my VWon my UK licence. ‘How so, you don’t have a licence’ I was told. Then: ‘since youhave been driving without a licence we should lock you up’. Battiste’s name wasgiven as surety and only after a considerable time was I told: ‘OK – if you can passthe practical we’ll let it go’. The one thing that no one had told me about drivingwas the difference between a UK and a US emergency stop. The former allows oneto lock the wheels, while this is anathema in the US; my examiner ended up on thefloor of my Beetle. I had all sorts of problems trying to convince him that this wasnormal where I came from and, eventually, he let me have another go doing it hisway. I was given a licence and had but two other interactions with the HighwayPatrol service, one when a prisoner had escaped jail in Georgia and I was subjectedto visual car search, the other on my penultimate day in the country.With my arrival, the Battiste group comprised nine students, an MSc, 6 PhDand 2 postdoctorals. My first full week in the lab was spent reading and coming togrips with the chosen project that was to involve the rearrangements of vinylcy-clopropenes. It had been opened up by MSc student Bobby Grubbs who had leftU of F for Columbia University (NY) and a PhD with Prof. Ron Breslow prior tomy arrival. Within a few weeks the rearrangement chemistry was well underwayand a series of physicochemical studies were subsequently completed and refinedfor publication. This provided Grubbs with his first scientific publication and mewith my first from the US, a Chemical Communication.17 For me this publicationhas  much  significance as  Grubbs  went  on  to  become a  2005  Nobel  Laureate inChemistry (with Yves Chauvin and Richard R. Schrock). As fate would have it,Bob gave a lecture at Victoria University (of Wellington) at noon on October 5,2005, some 10 hours before he was advised that he was recipient of the Prize; Ihave an off-print of that first communication duly signed and dated that day. I hadmet Bobby and his wife on a visit to Caltech (CIT) in late 1990 and was impressedby his generosity, not simply personally but also in his chemistry. At VUW he tookthe trouble to introduce me as someone involved with his early work and the role23 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistthat it played in his subsequent (glowing) career.The laboratory work went well with discussions frequent, informal and espe-cially beneficial. The work itself involved the rearrangements of tetraarylcyclopro-penes and the first phase concentrated upon the thermal process whereby triarylin-denes are formed. Whereas tetraphenylcyclopropene gives 1,2,3-triphenylindene(13, Ar = Ph) only, the anisyl- and mesityltriphenyl derivatives provided productsfrom ring closure on to each of the C3 substituents, e.g. 13 and 14, that are noweasily rationalized as resulting from [1,5] H and Me shifts as shown in Scheme5. The studies advanced to cover thefull  gambit  of  rearrangement  con-ditions.  The  photochemical  workshowed that 13 (Ar = Ph) is the pri-mary product from a singlet processinduced by 254 nm irradiation of 12(Ar  =  Ph)  and  that  triplet  sensitiza-tion or irradiation at 350 nm returnedunchanged starting material. Subse-quent separate irradiation of 13 (Ar =Ph) results in cyclodehydrogenationand  formation  of  13-phenyl-13H-indeno[1,2-l]phenanthrene (15).18 Inconjunction  with  Prof.  Gary  Griffinand his students at Louisiana State University, the work was extended to show thattetraphenylpropyne  (16)  is  a  suitable  starting  material  for  photosynthesis  of  12(Ar = Ph). Over short irradiation periods (ca. 1 h), 12 (R = Ph) is the sole product,while longer times are needed to produce firstly 13 (R = Ph), and then 15.18Electron impact induced fragmentation of 12 (Ar = Ph) causes loss of a phenylradical with formation of the triphenylcyclopropenyl cation (18) as base peak inthe mass spectrum (70 eV electron impact). Subsequent fragmentation is by wayof  cyclodehydrogenation  with  formation  of  the  cyclopropaphenanthrenyl  cation(19) (Scheme 6). These facts were established from the unambiguous generationof 18 in the mass spectrometer from volatil-ization of triphenylcyclopropenyl chloride,bromide and tetrafluoroborate (17) into theinstrument at temperatures well below theirmelting  points. The  high  melting  bromideand tetrafluoroborate are ionic whereas thelower  melting  chloride  has  some  covalentcharacter.  However,  the  tetrafluoroborate  provides  a  molecular  ion  compatiblewith 1-fluorotriphenylcyclopropene, which fragments to both 18 and its fluorodi-24 -Florida in the Mid-1960sphenyl analogue.19 This aspect of the programme demonstrated, for the first time,that carbonium ion salts can be excellent sources of the free cations in the massspectrometer.In the mid-1960s, a major issue with a postdoctoral position was how long tostay in one place before moving on. Two years provided a great opportunity to gainseveral good publications, whereas moving after the first twelve months providedtwo independent referees. Extending postdoctoral study to a third year was unu-sual; indeed, employers would often wonder why you had not gained a permanentpost within that time. I was fortunate in two ways. Firstly, I had had the offer fromNick Turro and, very soon after it arrived, Merle asked if I would be interested inan Assistant Professorship from September 1967. Florida was to change from a tri-mester to a quarter (10 week) system and junior academics were needed to smooththe transition. The opportunity to gain teaching experience without having to com-mit to anything more than a year had great merit and so, in short order, I applied forand was offered a post at a salary of $US 900 per month. I responded affirmatively,and then wrote to Turro to let him know what had happened.The first weeks in Gainesville provided numerous experiences in settling to lifein the US South. I was ill prepared, after all, the PC and internet with their instanta-neous worldwide communication had yet to be invented. In ordering my first lunchtime coffee, I was asked ‘How’d ya like it’, I responded with the traditional English‘white please’ – and only just managed to catch the cup as it careened across thecounter from the Negro (Afro-American) assistant; ‘with cream’ was immediatelysubstituted! In similar manner, going to a colleague’s place for supper at 8.15 didnot auger well; the family had waited to serve dinner until I arrived!I spent half of each Saturday tidying up the laboratory bench, writing up the re-sults and planning the next week of work. In contrast, Sunday was my day off andfor the first weeks it was spent seeing something of the local area. The east coasttown of St. Augustine, with its Fountain of Youth and Ponce de Leon’s 1513 claimof possession for the Spanish King, was one of the first places visited. Just southis Marineland of Florida and that was a must for, at that time, I had never seen adolphin or a decent sized turtle. Florida’s western Gulf coast has many fascinat-ing places, the nearest to Gainesville being Cedar Key, a sleepy little settlementin  those  days  that  had  much  scenic  appeal;  I  made  several  visits  there.  TarponSprings and its historic sponge industry was another. Much of central Florida iscovered in State Parks with springs bubbling fresh warm water year round. Manyhad swimming facilities but one needed to be aware of the alligators, something Idiscovered only after swimming on a winter’s afternoon when I found a reasonablesized specimen lazing a little further down the spring!Merle  had,  at  that  time,  just  the  one  son,  Mark,  about  3  years  old.  His  wife25 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistAnita was a full time mother and the family hosted the research group from timeto time. Nonetheless, Merle maintained long hours at the office, had lunch withsome of the group most days and held group meetings in the evenings, followingthem with a visit to one of the local bars. The structure and formalities of Englandwere forever lost. By early November, I was beginning to realize what Thanksgiv-ing meant and just how important it is to the average American. Most of my labmates were off home and Merle suggested that it would be a good time for me totake a trip, so I elected to go south to Miami and the Everglades. As I recall it, Idrove the 340 miles taking the Sunshine State Expressway toll road to ensure anearly arrival. I had made no motel booking but drove beach side to see the big (ex-pensive) hotels and then went back a few blocks to find something more suitable.Luck was with me as the first place I pulled into was operated by a Lancastrianand his wife. They recognized my accent and after a short chat about ‘home’, I wasgiven discounted accommodation and an invitation to return whenever I wantedat minimal cost. Having learned that Thanksgiving was a big thing, I decided tofind a good restaurant for dinner. Many places had private functions or were openonly for those with reservations, but eventually I found what seemed like a niceplace, and went in. Apparently the restaurant was fully booked, but the maître d’spoke to a lady who seemed to be in charge, and a small table was set up for me.To my surprise, the meal was from a designated menu with no choices, but it wasout of this world. I was graciously tended, exceptionally well fed, and somewhatconcerned about the likely cost – no matter it was a real experience! When I cameto pay the bill, the total was a trivial $US20.00; I questioned this but was told thatit was Thanksgiving and to enjoy my stay in Florida. After returning to GainesvilleI found the restaurant to be the most respected Jewish establishment in Miami withThanksgiving Dinner offered to their regular customers at a fraction of its real cost.One day in spring 1967, Merle came into the lab very excited about an idea he hadhad of how to demonstrate the dependence of cyclopropyl ring participation in sol-volyses as a function of the stereoelectonic environment. Earlier, he had shown thattricyclo[3.2.1.02,4]octen-8-one(20a) underwent facile decarbon-ylation (Scheme 7)20 and a reportby Clarke and Johnson21 had trig-gered his imagination. Thus, fourof us in the group began the workto  synthesize  and  then  decarbon-ylate  the  series  of  derivatives20  and  22.  As  I  had  studied  thetetraarylcyclopropene–to–indenerearrangement  kinetically  using26 -Florida in the Mid-1960s1H NMR methods, my role was to take the materials synthesized by the others anddetermine the first-order rate constants for decarbonylation. This was done over aquite short period of time. The endo-compounds 20 lost CO very easily, with ratesdependent upon the substituents present. In contrast, the exo-derivatives 22 weremarkedly more stable, 22b losing CO only at 400 ºC. The study led to the clearconclusion that the orientation of the three-membered ring in endo-20 is ideal forthe bent ‘banana’ bond of the bridge to overlap with the σ bonds holding the car-bonyl moiety in place. Through this interaction, concerted ejection of CO yieldsthe cycloheptatrienes 21a-d directly in their favoured conformations. The mark-edly more stable exo-22 provided cycloheptatriene product, but only by way of thenorcaradiene 23 that undergoes six-electron electrocyclic ring opening. The workwas completed in short order and subsequently published.22The  remainder  of  that  1966-67  academic  year  passed  quickly,  but  with  onenotable visitor to the university. Professor Emanuel Vogel (1927-2011), who heldthe senior Organic Chemistry Chair at the University of Cologne, was a visitingprofessor during the late spring quarter. He gave some first-rate research seminarsand  a  graduate  course  entitled  New  Trends  in Aromatic  Chemistry  –  The Annu-lenes. It soon became clear that his trademark was to draw impeccable structureson the blackboard, and deliver his lecture in perfect English. I was fortunate to beinvited, with Merle, to join him and his wife Christiane for afternoon tea and thatmeeting became what was the first of many throughout my career.Through my next door neighbour, Bill (Eaton), I widened my circle of (non-chemistry) friends and also started to play cricket for the U of F team – financed bysuccessful college football – and played at the MCC-affiliated Savannah (Georgia)Cricket Club. We enrolled a Canadian, John Haywood-Farmer who was Merle’sthird postdoc. Some years later he left chemistry for commerce and spent severalyears at Victoria University as a faculty member in the mid-to-late 1970s whereour friendship was renewed.My summer holiday of 1967 took the form of a tour up the east coast of theUS in early June covering Williamsburg, Washington DC and then Niagara Falls.Brian Odell, one of Cookson’s postdoctorals and former ‘514’ lab mate had movedto a second postdoctoral at Cornell University in Ithaca and so I stayed with himand wife Cathy for a few days prior to our both attending the 20th National OrganicChemistry Symposium of the American Chemical Society from June 18 in Burl-ington, Vermont. It was my first attendance at a specific organic meeting and it wasa real thrill to hear von Schleyer, Pettit, Closs, J. D. Roberts and Orville Chapmanpresenting their work. To me it was a grand affair, made all the more memorablefrom the ease of mixing and socializing. The feature lecture was by Nobel Laure-ate and Harvard great, R. B. Woodward, whose orbital symmetry rules (with Hoff-mann) had begun to have real impact. It was the only time that I heard him; it was27 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistsimply magical chemistry even though he did speak for close on two hours. Backon vacation, I headed north for Montreal and Expo ’67, and then back to Floridavia New Hampshire, into Portland (Maine) and the delightful coast (and lobsters)to Boston, where I stayed with friends for a couple of days. The move south by-passed New York and the main centres to allow time for the Shenandoah NationalPark, the spectacular Skyline Drive, and the Blue Ridge Parkway from just southof Front Royal and along the high Appalachian ridges into North Carolina. Fromthere  to  the  Great  Smokey  Mountains  National  Park  in  Tennessee  prior  to  tak-ing I-75 back to Gainesville. Shortly after returning to Gainesville, I moved fromCheshire Apartments across the woods to the brand new Williamsburg Apartments(No. 114) on SW 14th St. where Bill Eaton and I shared a place that served us well.I  started  teaching  first-year  chemistry  (CY201)  in  mid-September  2007,  thejunior  of  a  three-man  team  that  had  the  900+  candidates  in  almost  equal  sizedgroups, each with its own lecturer. Each class had to reach the same point everyFriday  so  that  a  common  quiz  could  be  sat  during  the  ensuing  week.  It  was  anexcellent way to start teaching, as Dick Dresdner and Bud (E. E.) Muchlitz werethe other lecturers and willing to help the novice as needed. I tried to communicateeffectively in the lecture room and, like most new to lecturing, I was keen to getquestions from the class. As time passed, my southern accent increased to the ex-tent that I was not understood when I arrived in New Zealand a year later.My formal appointment to the faculty of the university was marked by an invi-tation to an official reception hosted by the University President. As an interim ap-pointee, I had no real interest in attending, but my colleagues thought that it wouldbe a good experience and pressured me into accepting. Indeed, it was a grand andformal affair held on the lawn of the Presidential Residence on West UniversityAvenue. When I arrived there was already a lengthy reception line, which I passedalong like everyone else until I met the President’s wife, the last on the line. Sheintroduced herself and politely asked what I would like to drink. My response wasa simple: A scotch and water please. And that is why my colleagues had been soenthusiastic about my attendance! The President’s wife, a staunch Southern Bap-tist, was teetotal and proceeded to give me a lecture on the evils of alcohol. Theline froze for what seemed an aeon and I was ribbed about it the next day by thosewho had known exactly what would happen.Being the gentleman that he was, Merle had asked if I wanted to start my ownresearch work or continue on with him. I had decided that the small ring chemistrywe had underway was going too well to simply drop as at least two more publica-tions would come were I to continue with it; this I did. That fall quarter passedvery quickly and all too soon the winter quarter of 1968 arrived and was notablein that I had a class of my own. The content was inorganic structure and bond-ing for a group of students who needed a one-off course to take them through the28 -Florida in the Mid-1960stransition to the quarter system. It was a great time as I had the freedom to do as Iwished and it cemented my desire for a career in academia. The northern spring of1968 had my joint PhD supervisor, Ian Stevens (who had looked after the day-to-day running of the project), in the US and visit Florida to lecture. Whilst that wasenjoyable, the visit proved unforgettable. Bill and I had invited Ian and his wife,Jeanine, to dinner and it was a nice occasion but turned out a night to remember.Just after starting the meal the phone rang. It was Merle. The date was April 4 andMartin Luther King had just been assassinated. Shot on the balcony of his Mem-phis motel at 6.01, he was pronounced dead about an hour later after emergencysurgery. Riots erupted in many US cities, Gainesville being no exception with thecity streets taken over. The local TV and radio station advised everyone to stayindoors; the dinner party lasted longer than planned – until about 11.30 – by whichtime we were able to get our guests back to their hotel.I had started to look for a permanent post and, with the exception of an offerof a teaching fellowship at Bristol University (with the possibility of a permanentposition later), my approaches to UK institutions led only to offers of further post-doctorals. As I was in the USA as an exchange visitor, my stay was limited and so Ibegan to explore possibilities in Canada and further afield. Roger Brown, who hadspent a sabbatical with Cookson at Southampton during the latter part of my PhDtenure, wrote to let me know he was moving from the Australian National Univer-sity to a more senior position at Monash in Melbourne. His job was to be advertisedand he encouraged me to apply. This I did, but I also sought out other Australasianpossibilities as a few years in the antipodes had much appeal. Of the institutions Iwrote to, Victoria University of Wellington in New Zealand, responded advisingthat a lectureship was about to be advertised and would I care to apply and havereferee  reports  sent.  I  did,  and  some  months  later  enquired  of  both  universitiesabout the status of myapplications. Each toldme that I was on theirshort list but ANU ad-vised  that  no  decisionwould  be  made  forsome  months.  VUWresponded  withthenews  that  a  decisionwas  imminent  and,  onApril 8, I received a ca-ble offering me the lec-tureship  in  chemistry.Knowing  that  nothing29 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistwould come from ANU for some while, the decision was simple – I accepted theWellington position. Once again, fate played its role as, that day – April 9 in theUS but the 10th in NZ – the main item on the US TV news was of a terrible storm inCook Strait and the sinking of a passenger ferry, the T.E.V Wahine. The storm thatexploded upon Wellington was one of the worst ever recorded in New Zealand. Itsferocity was due to two fronts that by chance merged directly over Wellington atthe same time as the overnight Lyttelton-Wellington ferry approached the harbourentrance. When I reached the office the next day I was greeted by: ‘Is that whereyou want to go to’ and (by the less well educated): ‘Just where is that – somewherein the Baring Strait?’; world geography was not well studied in the US then andthe thought that New Zealand could be located between the easternmost point ofthe Asian continent and the westernmost point of North America was consideredlikely by more than a few!With  a  permanent  position  secured,  the  opportunity  to  pursue  research  wasgreater and the work with small-ring organics took on a new pace to get as muchcompleted as possible in the time remaining. The mass spectral study referred toalready was completed19 and, because of the belief that what happened when lightinteracted with an organic molecule was mirrored in the mass spectrometer, a pho-tochemical study of the arylcyclopropenes was initiated. This was my final contri-bution in Gainesville but it needed to be brought to a publishable state and this wasdone subsequently by Marty Kulig, one of Merle’s newer PhD students.18 The timein Florida had continued my excursion into non-natural (synthetic) products andthe sheer excitement of laboratory work aimed at providing something that had notbeen done before and the exhilaration of success had me hooked. A career involv-ing  unnatural  products,  compounds  made  because  they  did  not  otherwise  exist,that could then be explored in all facets of chemistry and predictions confirmed ordenied, was the direction I was determined to take.The Spring Quarter ran from about the end of March till early June. My teach-ing then was a repeat of CY201, the introductory chemistry programme, but witha small class that I handled alone. Outside of teaching, the research moved alongand my thoughts were more and more occupied by the move to the antipodes. Ihad written to the New Zealand embassy in Washington DC, enquiring of require-ments for immigration and, as a British subject, I was advised to ‘catch a planeor  a  boat  and  go’,  as  British  subjects  had  open  access  in  those  days.  VictoriaUniversity’s Registrar had written with the standard set of conditions and advisedon travel arrangements. The University was to meet the cost of economy air travelfrom Gainesville and put me on the salary from the day I left the US. However, Iwas not bound to air travel if I had a preference for surface, although the allow-ance would be no more than the airfare; salary would still be paid from the day ofdeparture from the US. In 1968, international air travel was not common and so I30 -Florida in the Mid-1960stook a berth on the Pacific and Orient (P&O) liner Oriana from Port Evergladeson Sunday, August 25th to take in the Bahamas, the Panama Canal, Acapulco, LosAngeles, San Francisco, Vancouver, Honolulu and Suva before arriving in Auck-land on September 21st. I advised my future employer that I was not accustomedto air travel and that a voyage was more appropriate. Nonetheless, I made a shortvisit (by air) to England after the teaching was over and arranged for my few pos-sessions to be shipped to New Zealand on the same sailing of the Oriana.The  return  to  Florida  was  into  Jacksonville  on  a  new  airline  to  service  thesoutheast. When  I  reconfirmed  in  New York  I  was  asked  what  I  would  like  fordinner and given a choice of six mains. That has never happened since, despite allthe flying I have done. I was met at Jacksonville and whisked back to Gainesvilleand the incessant humidity of Florida in the summer. The few weeks remainingwere spent bringing the research to a suitable point for handing over and writingthe essential reports. All too soon my final week arrived and all those myriad ofminor details that take so long were attended to. I got the essential tax clearance fordeparture from the US that was never checked, closed my accounts at the Bank andCredit Union, and I rented a large Ford convertible for the drive to Port Evergladeswith my luggage.My ticket for the Oriana arrived only on the morning I was to leave and, aftercollecting it, it was back to the apartment for the final time, sad goodbyes, andthen south to Fort Lauderdale and Port Everglades. The large car accommodatedthe trunk that I had bought for all the things that I now owned as well as my cabinbaggage. After some time cruising along the expressway, I noticed a flashing lightclosing up on me through the rear view mirror. It turned out to be a Florida High-way Patrolman who pulled me over and asked why I was going so fast. Bearing inmind that the maximum speed of a VW was 72 mph, I had no idea how fast I wastravelling. Apparently it was 85 with the limit at 65 mph. This officer was far nicerthan the ones I had dealt with when I got my licence. Seeing the trunk on the rearseat, he asked where I was going. Discovering that it was New Zealand he said‘And if I give you a ticket I suppose you’ll toss it off the rear of the boat as soon asyou sail’. ‘No officer’ I said, ‘I would never dream of polluting US waters; I wouldwait until we were outside the US limit.’ I was asked to slow down but given noticket! On arriving in Ft. Lauderdale, I found a motel for the night and then haddinner, which was a lonely affair. My two years in the US had been the best of mylife to date. I had been successful in my job, made advances in my career that I hadnever expected, and had made some really good friends. I was financially soundand had I been able to stay in the US then I would have done everything I could tohave secured a permanent post there, but that was not the case. I had to leave fora two year minimum period and, when I looked over the stern of the Oriana latethe next afternoon at the disappearing Florida coastline, this is what I vowed to do.31 -A New Life, a New Place, and anEmerging CareerVoyage to the AntipodesThe Oriana left port late on the afternoon of Sunday July 25, 1968 and, as I havesaid before, it took in the Bahamas, the Panama Canal, Acapulco, Los Angeles,San  Francisco,  Vancouver,  Honolulu  and  Suva  before  arriving  in Auckland  onSeptember 21st. Once again, my cabin on the liner was one of the least expensiveand on the lowest passenger deck. I had come to like this on the Queen Mary asthe night before arrival in New York there had been a storm and there was muchless roll than higher up. The berth was for four but I had the place to myself. Thevoyage  was  very  pleasant,  especially  for  the  first  two  weeks  as  these  involvedtraversing the Caribbean and then north up the Pacific Ocean taking in the NorthAmerican ports. Grand Bahama was pleasant enough with its markets, restaurantsand large sailing club, but I was in no mood for sightseeing so soon after leavingGainesville. From there, it was a three-day sail to Central America and the PanamaCanal and enough time to take stock and begin to enjoy what the next weeks couldoffer. Our evening arrival in Central America meant that we spent the night at Bal-boa (Panama City) before traversing the Panama Canal, a fascinating experience.The Oriana was one of the largest vessels to pass through the waterway with theclearance to the side of the locks frighteningly small in places. Progress was slowthough constant, but it increased once we were in the upper reaches and in GatunLake. After crossing it, the 26 metre descent through more locks to sea level atCristobal was easy and we moved into the Pacific Ocean.Our journey took us north as far as Vancouver before heading southwards. Thefirst Pacific port was Acapulco (Mexico), where we moored off-shore and wereferried to land by a series of small tenders. I mention this stopover for the notori-ety that I gained from it. After viewing the La Quebrada cliff divers and lookingaround the city I made my way back towards the harbour and, having time, entereda café and settled for a Mexican beer. One of the other customers was a crew mem-ber that I had interacted with a few times and so we got together, chatted and hadanother beer. All at once we realised the time – somewhat beyond that of the lastpassenger tender back to the Oriana. We raced the short distance to the quay and32 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careerwere lucky to find the shore crew still there but packing up. My new found friendwas in trouble because his shore leave had expired much earlier and he blamedhimself for my being late. The duty crew, far from impressed, made much messag-ing to the ship by walkie-talkie. By the time the shore gear was stowed, the Orianahad raised anchor and was underway. It proved to be a fascinating experience toride the small craft to the liner, come alongside the large moving vessel and then behoisted aboard. Once safely secured in the hellions, a ladder appeared at the side ofthe craft and I was asked to disembark first. What a sight! The available crew andmost of the passengers had been gathered on deck. I was given a formal ceremo-nial welcome aboard, being then passed down a line of officers who increased inrank until I met the Captain. He then introduced me to the Commodore of the P&OFleet who was on an inspection tour for our voyage. After him was a solitary morejunior  individual  who,  quite  drolly  and  almost  in  an  undertone,  said:  We  knowyou  will never  do  that  again.  How  right  he  was!  Of  course,  the  embarrassmentremained and gave me more than an element of notoriety.The voyage continued via the scheduled ports with San Francisco providingtwo  full  days  ashore  as  it  housed  the  main  US  P&O  Offices  and  allowed  timefor  the  liner  to  be  restocked  at  its  mid-point  on  the  Southampton–Sydney  run.The leg from Vancouver denoted a precise repeat of the on-board activities and,whilst the weather was great, the vistas of continuous ocean instilled a boredomthat only landfall would break. The Hawaiian Islands came up and everyone hadmade plans for their Honolulu stopover given the week in which to do it. Holdinga US driver’s licence made it simple to hire a car and a ‘round Oahu island’ tourwas made with the car full. In the evening we visited one of the beach bars com-mon before Waikiki gave way to the high rise developments, drank Piña Coladas,then returned to the ship for a midnight departure and days of sailing south to Fiji.There was a full day ashore there and then a comparatively short time to Aucklandand the start of a new life.The  Oriana  docked  in  Auckland  mid-morning  on  Saturday,  September  21,1968, and the business of clearing customs in one of the staterooms began. I leftthe collection of my research samples until that morning. On embarking in Florida,I had decided to have the chemicals put into safe storage to avoid possible lossand/or injury to a fellow passenger. No questions were asked when the box of syn-thesized compounds was deposited or retrieved and I can but wonder what wouldhappen if the same thing was tried in 2011, given all the regulations now in force. Iwas astonished that my entry to New Zealand was complete within seconds with asingle stamp affixed into my passport. Dockside, the trunk that had been on-loadedin Southampton was there as was a ‘not needed on the voyage’ suitcase, but therewas no sign of the large trunk that had disappeared into the hold of the Oriana inPort  Everglades.  It  had  been  incorrectly  stowed  and  it  took  almost  two  months33 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistbefore  it  appeared  in  Wellington  without  any  apology  or  compensation  for  theinconvenience P&O had caused. What I did have was forwarded to Wellington onthe overnight train that I took that evening.By then, it was afternoon and I took a taxi to the railway station to uplift mysleeper ticket for the Auckland-Wellington night express. Though short, the taxiride was odd; everything was from an era past – the cars, the streets and the dressof the people. Clearly, the US of A was well behind me and I had the impressionthat things were even years behind England. On paying the taxi fare, I tipped thedriver as one would in the US. This provided me with my first lesson in NZ eti-quette, for the driver took the time and trouble to point out that such things did nothappen in his country as everyone was paid a living wage. He recommended thatI didn’t try to do it again, and returned the additional money I had proffered. Afterdinner it was back to the station and on to the train. This was lesson two for life inNZ. The train was like something out of the ark and bore no resemblance to the onethat had whisked me from New York to Gainesville two years earlier, or even theBlackpool–London expresses that I had taken while at boarding school. The seatswere uncomfortable, there was no refreshment car, and the sleepers were what Ihad known as couchettes on the European expresses to and from Austria some tenyears earlier. There were a few stops and then one, at about 10.30 (my guess is thatit was Tauramanui), where everyone in the carriage rushed to the platform. I got a‘come on’ from my fellow passengers. This was the last stop where refreshmentscould be bought and it seemed that pies and tea were the order of the day. The piewas fine but the hot NZR tea, the first one non-iced in a couple of years, provedundrinkable. We reboarded, the train moved on and, after a fitful night, the ancienttrain pulled alongside Platform 9 at Wellington Railway station a little after 8.30am.Despite this being Sunday and early, Professor Stan Slater, the then Head ofChemistry was there to meet me. After the pleasantries, he took me to his car thathad to be at least 15 years old (I gathered subsequently that it was a 1952 model),put my cases in the boot and drove me to my hotel, the Columbia, in lower CubaSt., central Wellington. My room was reserved but not yet available as it was onlya little after 9 am. My enquiry about breakfast was met with a: But it’s after 9 andweekend service ends at 8.30. After much intercession by Slater, it was agreed thata pot of coffee and some buttered toast could be brought for me. At this Stan left, Iwaited for my breakfast, and really began to wonder where I was. By about 10.30 Iwas able to get to my room and clean up. After lunch at the hotel, Slater reappearedand showed me around the city. Although I do not remember where we went, theinitial view of Victoria University sitting on the ridge of a hill higher than anythingin Florida has remained with me. As we approached the steep street upwards I wasconvinced that the car would never make it, yet with much crunching of gears we34 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careeradvanced  slowly,  onwards  and  upwards,  to  the  Easterfield  Building  on  KelburnParade that housed Chemistry. I was given a tour of the Department, told that therewas no office available but that something would be worked out, and then depos-ited back at the hotel.The First MonthsOn my first day at Victoria University of Wellington (VUW), I was collected byProf. Slater and driven up the Dixon Street hill again, and it did not seem quite sobad the second time. I was taken to his office on the third floor of the Chemistry De-partment, and introduced to the then Secretary, Unity Jones. After the usual pleas-antries, we moved into the inner sanctum where we discussedwhat I was going to do. I was then taken to meet the staff. Thefirst was Dr. Ted Harvey (1925-2008), externally a quite loudand forceful individual who, I was told will look after you. Tedwas the senior organic chemist after Slater and he attended toall the chemical orders, supervised the stores, and scheduledtraining for the technical staff. He took me around the Depart-ment, introduced me to staff and arranged for completion ofthe necessary paperwork in the castle, the affectionate namethen given to the central administration on the assumption thatwhat went in rarely, if ever, came out! I do not recall all thathad to be done except that there was little by way of formality. The major concernwas over my lack of removal expenses and how it was that I could have arrivedwithout shipping household furniture and kitchenware separately. That I did nothave any of these things by virtue of my US furnished accommodations made littleimpression. I was told that I could stay at the Columbia for a maximum of threeweeks, but that most people were out of the place within one. I was given informa-tion on the various city suburbs and advised to consult the Evening Post ‘To Let’section for available flats (not the US apartment). When asked if there was a mapof the city that I could borrow, there was a sigh and a look of disbelief.W.E. (Ted) Harvey ca.1960Back up Kelburn Parade to Chemistry and Ted took me to lunch in the RankinBrown Staff Club, arranged for membership papers to be sent to me, and intro-duced  me  to  various  people.  Upon  return,  a  decision  was  reached  that  the  bestplace to put me was in Bob Hay’s office. Bob, another organic chemist, had left onsabbatical leave and was to be away until mid-1969. So I moved into his Level 1laboratory–cum-office with its window looking across to the Library in the RankinBrown  building  and  opposite  the  smaller  of  the  first-year  laboratories. The  firstdays were a struggle as I had little idea what was expected of me and I becamefully occupied doing things non-academic staff did in Florida. The Columbia Ho-35 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemisttel was not particularly comfortable and I needed to find a place of my own. Flathunters waited outside the Evening Post Building on Willis St for the first editionof the evening paper to appear at about 1 pm. My problems were in working outwhere the various suburbs were and, with no car, how to get to them. I saw numer-ous dark, dingy and damp places that convinced me that a car was essential; a newAustin Mini was chosen as my funds were in US currency that gave eligibility topurchase a new vehicle outright. The impact of this was that the car was worthmore when it came out of the British Motor Corporation showroom a week laterthan it was when it was inside. It also accounted for the aged (vintage!) vehiclefleet and the number of old bombs on the streets.On the Thursday of that first week I was summoned to appear at the monthlyScience Faculty Board meeting. Prof. Slater formally introduced me to the Augustgathering (as it was in those days) and espoused the great things that I was (ap-parently) going to do for VUW. In those days each Department had as Head, itsProfessor or, if there was more than one the longest serving of them. Chemistryhad three Chairs, Slater (Organic) as Professor of Chemistry, James Duncan (Inor-ganic and Theoretical Chemistry) and John Tomlinson (Physical Chemistry). TheFaculty Meeting lasted for a long time with much formality and a strict code ofpractice that I needed to become familiar with. Once complete, it was to lunch inthe staff club with new found colleagues. On the Friday I was told that there wouldbe little by way of ‘To Let’ in the paper that afternoon as Saturday was the big day,and that I should get that paper as soon as possible. Indeed, the Saturday eveningpaper did carry most advertisements for flats and I made appointments to view sev-eral. One of these was on Sefton Street in Wadestown for which, after interview,I was accepted by the elderly couple who lived in the upstairs home. In 1968, set-ting up electricity and telephone accounts was simple. The Municipal ElectricityDepartment had its showroom and office almost next door to the Columbia Hoteland the paperwork was straightforward with the power turned on later that day –no security deposit, merely a small connection fee. The telephone connection wasjust as easy and made the following day; the account was billed monthly withoutneed for a deposit.Because  I  had  arrived  in  September,  I  had  no  allocated  duties  in  Chemistryother than to start my research and prepare for the 1969 academic year. However,I  was  asked  to  mark  some  undergraduate  and  Honours  answers  to  examinationquestions set by Bob Hay. This I did, subsequently to discover that an additional5% was added to the Honours papers by the external examiners. Inevitably, hav-ing not taught the courses and with no model answers or guidelines to go by, thestandard was one that I devised and not that common to VUW at that time; to thepresent day I have never enjoyed marking what others have set. During those earlydays, I found that John Craig, another organic colleague and a Scotsman, had been36 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careerat VUW for some six years and researched aromatic systems. His work was nottoo far removed from my own interests in strained molecules and novel aromatics.He was a delightful individual and always helpful; I have fond memories of theyears we worked together and our lunch time sojourns to the Staff Club. Ted wasthe better bench chemist, but he had few students and only rarely published hisnatural products studies; his last paper appeared in 1979, the year that he movedto become VUW’s Registrar. He more than encouraged me to apply for a VUWresearch grant for a student assistant over the summer months. In those days, therewas no application form. Rather, one had to spell out what one wanted and why,and then wait for a call to interview; the panel consisted of the Geology Professor,Bob Clark, his Philosophy counterpart, George Hughes and (I believe) Prof. Gor-don of Botany. In due course, I was called for an interview with Clark. This wasthe first of its kind for me and I was far from comfortable attempting to tell thissenior non-chemist academic what I needed money for. Some years later I learnedthat Bob would give financial support to every new science staff member, but thatany  subsequent  monies  depended  upon  what  was  achieved.  I  got  the  grant  andemployed Rosemary Coveny, a married third year student, for the summer monthsas the funding then was sufficient for that. She made a range of starting materialsand I prepared several more-specialized small-ring compounds for subsequent use,including the notorious skin sensitizer, diphenylcyclopropenone. As Christmas ap-proached, Prof. Slater advised the Department that he had accepted the positionof Assistant Vice-Chancellor and would formally leave Chemistry on January 1,but retain his chair in the subject. What I had not understood prior to this was theneed for me as a 6th organic chemist. His move made sense of it all and he neverreturned to the Department.Ted Harvey obtained $NZ 550 for me to purchase equipment of my choice. Itwas the equivalent of a modern set-up grant and it was spent on the purchase of aphotochemical reactor as I hoped to pursue further research in that area. A Rayonetunit was ordered from the US, duly arrived six months later and was put to use. Itbecame the longest serving piece of equipment in the Department for it was stillemitting  radiation  in  2007;  it  blew  remarkably  few  of  its  four  horseshoe  inter-changeable light tubes during the many years of service. The month of Octoberalso saw the Department’s first nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometerarrive. It was a 60 MHz Japanese Hitachi state-of-the-art instrument that Ted tookcharge of. Once appropriately installed and commissioned, he invited me to be-come an operator with one of the Technical Staff, knowing that I had operated bothan NMR and mass spectrometer during my time in Florida.I began to get accustomed to VUW and it to me. I worked long hours at thedesk preparing course notes for the following year and I spent my other time at thebench to get my research underway. The pay was low by US standards but I was37 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistable  to  get  by.  I  assumed  that  asalary of $NZ 3400 was appropri-ate for a staff member with a yearof  teaching  experience,  but  sub-sequently found that it was onlyjust  sufficient,  largely  becausethere had been no adjustment toacademic salaries for some time;the next review was due only in1970. My salary increased on theanniversary  of  my  appointmentand  I  was  given  an  acceleratedincrement to $NZ 3900.I found living alone depress-ing and I felt isolated. As a staffmember, there was a limit to thesocializing  that  could  be  donewith students and I was the onlyone single. Unlike Florida, wherethere had been a lot of social in-teraction,  Wellington  providedalmost  none  with  Gary  Burnsbeing  the  only  colleague  to  in-vite  me  to  his  home  in  the  firstfew months. Christmas came andwent  and  I  was  back  in  the  labon Dec. 27 having not been toldof VUW’s two week close downperiod. I was discovered there byTed  Harvey  who  took  me  to  hishome  (where  his  widow,  Helen,  still  lives)  for  dinner.  During  the  course  of  theevening, he explained what Christmas and New Year meant in terms of NZ, theuniversity and academic staff holidays, and so I toured the South Island being backbefore my colleagues began to reappear. The travel gave me a good impression ofthe South Island with a return via Christchurch where I stayed with Jim and FayCoxon for the second time. I had first met Jim (and Fay) when he joined Cookson’sSouthampton  group  as  a  postdoctoral  for  the  1965-66  year  and  worked  on  thebench facing me. Although a year ahead, Jim and I are the same age and had main-tained contact while I was in the US. It is not surprising, then, that I accepted theirinvitation to visit for a weekend shortly after arriving in Wellington. This second38 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careervisit was more relaxed and I learned more about his work at Canterbury Universitywhere he held a lectureship. When I returned to the office it was as though I hadnever left – there was still no one about and few ever knew that I had had almostthree weeks in the South Island that summer.Time to Settle InAfter the holiday in the South, I found a flat in a large house on Pembroke Roadin the suburb of Northland that had a vacancy for a flatmate. I saw the place, metthe  two  men  already  there  (Warwick  Jenness,  a  salesman  in  boating  equipmentand Jon Blomfield, who worked for the telecommunications industry as a majorinstallation engineer) and, being accepted, moved into the shared environment aweek later. Warwick was a delightful flatmate but often out and Jon, though lessoutgoing, was very reliable. I got on with them both and enjoyed having peoplearound again.As the weeks and months passed, I began slowly to appreciate Wellington. Af-ter an initial impression that winds blew continuously, I became able to distinguishbetween a gentle Wellington breeze and a decent storm, and even walk up the hillfrom the city to Victoria. Teaching was going well (4th-year Honours courses onnon-benzenoid  aromatics  and  physical  organic  chemistry,  and  more  routine  3rd-year undergraduate work) and the research programme began to pick up pace. Theallocation of Honours students entering their 4th-year in 1969 was made at aboutthe same time as the arrival of the NMR instrument the previous spring, and I wasallocated Ang Weng Soon, a Chinese Malay. He was more than happy to be withthe new lecturer and settled on a project involving three-membered ring nitrogenchemistry; I gave him reading material for the summer months. Ang started labo-ratory work for his MSc (Hons.) degree, with its 12 month maximum completionperiod, before formal registration early in February, and by the end of that month Ihad written my first reference. He applied to the Singapore-based Lee Foundationand was one of few in NZ to have success in gaining a grant. Of course, as I hadno experience of the NZ science scene and the laboratory courses involved in theundergraduate programme, I did not know what I could (or should) expect of himand how much, if any, of the work I would need to do myself. As it happened, Angwas a keen learner and we got on well together. He made a foray into the hetero-cyclic chemistry associated with my own aziridine PhD studies. The intent was tosee if methylenepyrroles 24 would add dimethyl acetylenedicarboxylate (DMAD)and, if so, what products would ensue (Scheme 8). At that time, methylenepyrrolesof type 24 were unknown and so we set out to synthesize various N-phenylphthal-imidines  25  and  find  if  they  would  react  with  DMAD; Ang  got  no  further  thanto make a series of compounds and establish the stereochemistry about the exo-39 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistcyclic  double  bond  duringhis MSc degree, for whichhe  was  awarded  an  uppersecond class. The work waswritten up during 1970 andformed my first publicationfrom  NZ.23  Ang  returnedhome to Penang (Malaysia)where,  for  some  years,  hewas  employed  in  the  rub-ber  industry.  However,  hedecided to move to a business venture and set up his own firm in Singapore. Hemarried, has two children, and now works only for two hours each day – long be-fore me. Although he has remained in contact since those days, we have only oncemet, and that was on my first visit to Hong Kong in late 1988. Ang was there onbusiness but we had a delightful afternoon together and followed it with dinner atone of the Floating Restaurants in Aberdeen.Those early times in Wellington signified a further break from my origins asseveral of my relatives died. The first was my mother’s twin sister, Anne, who suf-fered a fatal heart attack in October 1968 aged only 56 years, and she was followedby John Parker, the husband of my cousin Julia, who died in a diving accident, andthen my maternal grandmother.My 1969 allocation of laboratory supervision included one afternoon session aweek with each of the second- and third-year students in the second floor organiclaboratory, and a first-year lab on Level 1. The academic in charge of the organiclaboratory was Ted Harvey and I can still picture him telling the students that Icould do everything they had to do in half the time using bench skills that wereon a par with his own; high praise indeed from one whose skills exceeded minequite considerably. The first year lab covered the General Chemistry programmeof  the  day,  which  at  that  time  took  the  full  teaching  year  with  the  lab  and  lec-ture programmes integrated. I think that there were about 350 candidates enrolled.Most of these were medical and engineering intermediate students who spent theirfirst year of tertiary education at the local university and then, if selected, movedto the specialist schools elsewhere in NZ. Many non-chemistry science studentswere required to have a chemistry input of first and (for some) second year study.Dr. Malcolm Carr was in charge of the 1st-year studies, a position designated as aSenior Lectureship, and his noon lecture was repeated at 4 pm. Malcolm was theremaining organic chemist, but did little by way of research, preferring instead toconcentrate his efforts in the teaching environment. He was a delightful individualand great to work with but he moved to the new Waikato University in late 1970.40 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging CareerThere he taught the first science courses in 1971, taking charge of the introductoryprogrammes and subsequently doing much for New Zealand science education.The introductory chemistry practical course involved analytical chemistry forthe first twelve weeks (the first-half year) and general and organic in the second pe-riod. My first half-year afternoon class comprised some 70 students and I was al-located demonstrators at the rate of one to twelve students (a ratio that has workedwell for more years that I care to remember), so there were five demonstrators withme. By the time the mid-year came, Bob Hay had returned and was none too happyto find his office-lab occupied. As a Senior Lecturer he got his office back and Imoved to the second floor and took over E208, Alan Freeman’s small office-labas he had, in turn, gone on leave. In reality, this office was the preparation roomfor the Easterfield 206 lecture room and located at the southern end of the East-erfield Building, behind the E206 lecture room. Entry to the office was by way ofthe E209 research laboratory. Other than that door, there was one that led into thelecture theatre but access was prevented by the desk; there was also a double-sidedfume cupboard that served both the prep room and the lecture theatre. Even now,after 40 years and major building renovations, the fume cupboard is still evident,though sealed up with some, now historic, molecular models remaining in it. Theoffice itself was completely hidden from those not in the know and meant few ex-traneous visitors. On moving in, I made the point that although I was the last oneto arrive, I did need a permanent home and, as this was on the organic chemistryfloor with my colleagues, I should be left there. I remained in that office until the1980s when I moved to Room 210 overlooking Kelburn Parade.The annual NZ Institute of Chemistry (NZIC) conference was always held inthe common university break during August and in 1969 the venue was Dunedin. Ineeded to attend and meet colleagues from the other universities as well as presentsome of the US-based research work to show the sort of chemistry I was involvedwith. Ted Harvey was the Hon. General Secretary of the NZIC, a role that he heldfor  some  20  years.  He  took  the  trouble  to  introduce  me  to  all  of  those  organicchemists I had not met and many of the industrialists as well. In fact, throughoutmy first years at VUW, Ted invited me to socialise with the NZIC Councillors af-ter their deliberations, which in those early days spanned a two-day meeting threetimes a year. Each of the annual conferences included a Student Papers Competi-tion with one entrant representing each university; it was taken seriously. MargaretLeach, a PhD student with James Duncan and a demonstrator in my first half-yearlaboratory, was selected as the VUW candidate.Jim  Coxon  had  come  down  from  Christchurch  by  car  with  a  couple  of  hisresearch students that included Dick Garland who subsequently joined NZ Phar-maceuticals  at  its  inception  and  rose  to  Managing  (now  Executive)  Director  ofthe company. That vehicle, decidedly old, became the mode of transport for es-41 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistcapes to the local hostelries and was always well loaded with a group of us thatincluded Margaret. After our return, we saw more of each other and on November4, we drove to Havelock North (where her parents lived in retirement) to seek theirapproval to marry; we became formally engaged on November 5th. By then, mymother had set her plans to spend some six weeks in NZ over the 1969/70 summer– as much time as her job would allow; she met her future daughter-in-law on arrival.By that time in November, the teaching year had ended and the formalities ofsettling final grades had passed. It provided me with an experience very differentfrom the US scene. At VUW, there was a much greater effort to ensure that candi-dates close to the borderlines were fairly assessed. Answers from those on the bor-derlines were revisited and marks adjusted if appropriate. With that done, meetingsto settle the 1970 teaching duties were held and I began to appreciate how easilythe long summer research period could vapourize, more so as Margaret and I start-ed to think about a future life together and where we could live after our May wed-ding. I had arrived in NZ with somesignificant  savings  and  there  wasenough left for us to make a depositon  a  house,  provided  we  could  geta  mortgage.  After  much  searching,we located a property at 52 CroydonStreet in the suburb of Karori, some4 km from the university, had our of-fer accepted and secured the neededtwo  mortgages.  Settlement  was  setfor late February 1970 and Margaret moved in while I remained in the Northlandflat until after our marriage. As Margaret’s parents lived in Hawkes Bay in retire-ment, our wedding was held in Wellington on May 9, 1970, at St. Teresa’s CatholicChurch in Karori with both Catholic and Anglican priests officiating.A Career DevelopsOnce  home  from  honeymoon,  Margaret  returned  to  her  PhD  research  and  Iwas back into teaching. Ang had completed his thesis, been examined, and left. Ihad gained no new researchers for 1970 and had no one active in the laboratory.However, I was fortunate in gaining a new grant from the Faculty Research GrantsCommittee and I employed Paul Milsom as my research assistant – but more ofthat later. I began to feel the need to make known my presence as an academic.After  some  deliberation,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  best  way  to  do  thiswould be by way of a textbook. The chosen topic was Organic Photochemistry asthere were few books on the subject suitable for senior undergraduates at that time,42 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careerand my interest had been kindled bythe  Florida  work;  it  also  gave  me  ajob that could be done privately at myown  convenience.  However,  as  thiswas  my  first  such  venture,  I  soughta  like-minded  co-author  and  a  con-tract  from  a  publishing  house.  JimCoxon  joined  me  as  co-author  andProf.  Michael  Grundon  in  NorthernIreland accepted our proposal for thebook  (subject  to  acceptability)  intothe  Oldbourne  Chemistry  Series  forwhich he was Editor. A contract wasexecuted at the end of May 1970 withdelivery of the text set for June 1971.Jim and I decided on content, dividedthe sections between us and scouredthe literature reports prior to writing.The  task  of  putting  words  on  paperdid not come easily but, eventually, I found that jotting down ideas in the eveningand then rising early the next morning to commit pen to paper before going to theoffice, worked best for me.By  autumn,  1971,  the  draft  text  was  written,  the  writing  checked  and  manyamendments made. Nevertheless, we needed to unify the style and settle remain-ing discrepancies. This was done over a long weekend at a beach house in Akaroa,near  Christchurch.  Thereafter,  the  final  manuscript  was  typed  in  Wellington  byformer chemistry secretary, Rhyl Singleton, who subsequently returned to the De-partment after her children attained school age; she remained with us until about2001, shortly after she was diagnosed with cancer. The completed manuscript wasdispatched by air to Grundon, who liked what he saw, edited lightly and acceptedthe tome into his series. The manuscript was passed to Oldbourne Press where itsat for almost two years with no progress to print despite efforts to elicit explana-tions and a publication date. Excuses were plentiful and apologies prolific until,finally,  we  were  told  that  the  series  was  to  be  terminated. A  breach  of  contractpayment had to be made by Oldbourne and they were generous enough to pass ourmanuscript to the same Ken Schofield at Exeter who had been my external PhDexaminer; by then he was the Organic Chemistry Editor for the newer CambridgeUniversity Press series, Cambridge Chemistry Texts. In short order, Ken acceptedthe book into the series, allowed us to update the material, made a few amend-ments himself and the book appeared16 in both paper- and hard back versions in43 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistmid-1974, and as a second edition in 1986. Surprisingly, as this is being written,CUP has advised it is interested in releasing the same 2nd edition as an ‘e-book’although it would be hopelessly out-of-date.The most notable event in Chemistry at VUW during 1970 was the creationof the first (and only) Chair in Organic Chemistry. The position was advertisedin  March  and  two  candidates  were  short-listed,  with  interviews  taking  place  inJune. The first, Bill Crow from the Australian National University, was congen-ial but did not impress the selection committee (whose composition excluded theorganic chemists) as much as the more  austere Robin Ferrier, a Scotsman  fromLondon’s Birkbeck College, who was appointed. He arrived some months later, inmid-spring, and ahead of his family, intent on settling into the university and find-ing a home. Margaret and I decided that he should not be left alone as I had and weentertained and assisted in whatever way we could. In fact, the day his wife, Caro-lyn and the two children arrived in December, we were taken to their temporaryaccommodation in Kelburn to meet them and have a meal. During the followingtwelve months we saw Robin and Carolyn socially at both their home and ours.However, a year after arriving, at an end-of-year post-Christmas barbeque at hishome, Robin told me that he thought it no longer appropriate for a Professor tosocialise with junior staff – and that was the last time that Margaret was invited tohis home. He became a difficult colleague to work with, probably because he feltthat NZ should treat professors as in the UK, and it led to several strained relation-ships. For my part, I got along well enough, even to the extent of agreeing to col-laborate in some of Robin’s work with unsaturated carbohydrates. I say agreeingas it never actually eventuated. As best I recall, Robin had a sabbatical visitor whowas to provide some unsaturated compounds that were to be cyclopropanated. Myinvolvement ended when I was asked not to waste the visitor’s time and only enterdiscussion when he got to the cyclopropanation part I was to be involved in.Paul Milsom had been in the laboratory sinceMarch 1970 as my second research assistant. Hemade excellent progress in the benzocyclopropenefield  by  starting  what  was  to  become  my  life’swork. The now used ‘cyclopropabenzene’ was un-defined in 1970 and both terms appear in what fol-lows. My interest with such molecules came frommy Florida studies that had required the cyclopro-panated  phenanthrenyl  cation  19  (Scheme  6)  asa fragmentation product in the mass spectrum oftriphenylcyclopropenyl halides. Little was knownabout  the  series  of  compounds  from  which  suchions could be derived. By 1964, Anet and Anet2444 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careerhad synthesised the first benzocyclopropene 26, and Vo-gel and his group reported parent 27 a year later in 1965(Scheme  9).25 As  our  1968  US  study  was  concluding,the Vogel group reported a simple synthesis of the gem-difluoro derivative 28 by way of a double dehydrohalogenation.26When Paul started his study, evidence had been gleaned to suggest the interme-diacy of benzocyclopropenones,27 and Dürr’s group in Saarbrucken had reported28a new photochemical synthesis of the ring system. Yet, despite these reports, lit-tle had been done to study the ring system systematically, explore the family ofderived compounds, or seek evidence for the derived cations, anions or radicals.This we hoped to rectify.Paul’s task was simple: to provide a straightforward, high yielding synthesisof an ionizable cyclopropabenzene in an amount that would allow for systematicchemical and spectroscopic study. By the NZ spring of 1970, Paul had evidencefor the first of the Wellington cyclo-proparenes, 29. He was competentat  the  bench,  got  results  quicklyand  returned  for  an  MSc  Honoursdegree in February 1971, by whichtime he had learnt how to obtain thedichloro  derivative  29  pure  and  inhigh (93%) yield (Scheme 10). Hisresults were published in communi-cation form that year.29 Paul was as enthusiastic a tramper as he was a chemist and,even with the stimulation of his publication, he did not get his thesis submitteduntil 1975. His preference had been to explore the mountains of South Americaand parts of the USA, but subsequently, he rued not returning for PhD training;the idea of a return to academic research stayed with him for more than 30 years.In February 1971 I started my first PhD student, Tony Woolhouse, with whomI  have  a  continuing  friendship. Tony  had  completed  his  MSc  degree  with  JohnCraig, gained 1st Class Honours in late 1969 and worked for the Wellington Hospi-tal Board in the metabolic unit laboratory for a year. However, he decided that re-search work was more what he wanted and returned to VUW for PhD study undermy direction; he made the lab buzz. He was, and still is, a remarkable enthusiast,thoroughly  enjoying  the  challenge  of  bench  chemistry.  Even  today  at  IndustrialResearch Limited (formerly the DSIR that he joined in early 1976) he continuesas a model bench chemist. Although he had a wife and two small daughters, heworked long hours in the lab, ran marathons at the weekend for relaxation, and hadgained more than enough results for a PhD thesis by mid-1973; he left for postdoc-toral work in Liverpool with Prof. Charles Rees in October of that year. The eight45 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistpapers  that  came  from  his  thirty  monthslaboratory  work  cemented  my  position  atVUW  and  internationally,  and  his  comple-tion time, within the three year norm, was arecord in the Department.Tony started working on the synthesis ofaziridines, with a view to preparing tricyclicderivatives  from  bicyclo[2.2.1]octanes  andoctadienes  (Scheme  11)  for  thermal  andphotochemical  ring-opening  of  the  three-membered aziridine ring. In essence, azideaddition to a bicycloheptene or -heptadieneled  either  to  a  single  isomer  or  a  mixtureof  endo/exo  stereoisomeric  tricycles  30,with  the  orientation  a  function  of  the  C10and the C8/C9 substituents. Products in thediene  series  were  sequentially  transformedinto bisaziridines. Photochemically inducedloss of dinitrogen was found best and a se-ries  of  all  the  possible  aziridine  isomers,e.g.  31,  was  characterized  and  subsequentring  opening  followed.  The  ultimate  ringopening reactions were soon settled and thestudy  was  completed,  but  with  insufficientdata  and  scope  to  lead  to  a  thesis.30  Tonythen moved into the more profitable cyclo-proparene area.Tony Woolhouse at DSIR ca. 1980By this time, it had become apparent thatthe  early  historical  studies  laying  claim  tocycloproparene synthesis were most likely incorrect and needed to be repeated.Tony’s initial foray was a repeat of a 1953 study reported by the Egyptian workersMustafa and Kamel,31 which we gathered had been done by Harold Shechter and hisgroup earlier, but not published. After writing and gaining no reply, we proceededto the laboratory and showed that the claim to gem-diphenylcycloproparenes fromdiphenyldiazomethane addition to, and dinitrogen loss from, N,N-dibenzoylimineswas  incorrect.  While  the  additions  and  losses  of  molecular  nitrogen  did  occur,the products were simple cyclopropanes and not their aromatized analogues. Veryshortly  after  this  work  was  completed,  a  delightful  letter  from  Shechter  arrivedtelling us that my enquiry had fallen behind a filing cabinet and that should wehave repeated the work then we should publish jointly, which we did.3246 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging CareerDuring  that  year  of  1971,  it  became  necessary  to  make  some  serious  deci-sions regarding research in New Zealand, and specifically at Victoria University.Research  groups  were  small  by  international  standards,  frequently  comprisingonly one or two 4th-year (Honours) students. Instrumentation was barely adequatedespite laboratories that were more than appropriate. Monies, which were nevergreat, were made available to each university by the (national) Universities GrantsCommittee, with funding agencies evolving only in the late 1980s. Each institu-tion allocated its monies, not to individuals but to Departments, based, to a point,on  budgets  submitted.  In  chemistry  this  led  to  separate  allocations  for  organic,inorganic and physical, from which the duly appointed professor allocated teach-ing monies, but no individual amounts; each of us in organic chemistry had theability to draw on the whole for our area on the assumption that if one individualhad an expensive year it would not be repeated in the following one. Bob Hay,who returned to Scotland (Stirling University) that year, had wanted this split intoindividual accounts but it never happened. Chemicals were not easy to obtain andimpossible to get if needed in a hurry – unless one of the researchers elsewhere hadthe compound and was willing to lend some, a regular occurrence. Despite this,Ted Harvey had maintained a tradition of annually adding to the range of chemi-cals held in the store and the list of compounds was extensive.But this was neither the US nor the UK. A decision had to be made whetherto follow modern international research trends and try to keep up without beingscooped by others overseas, or to select an area of work that one could researchand become recognised for. The last appealed as benzocyclopropene chemistry fit-ted well to the philosophy. Thus, 1971 saw my work move almost exclusively tothe cycloproparenes, a field that I had never anticipated staying with for the rest ofmy career. The year was notable because Margaret completed her PhD in May andthen, later, I was elevated from Lecturer to Senior Lecturer. I had let a select fewknow of the textbook and its acceptance into a known chemistry series, and thismust have helped. In those days, and until the late 1980s, promotions could not beapplied for rather than one’s nomination being made by the Head (subsequentlyChairperson) of the Department. I saw James Duncan and Robin Ferrier to offermy thanks for their efforts on my behalf. James was as gracious as he always was.However, Robin was  surprised and said that he  had had nothing to do with thepromotion. A few days after the formal announcement, Stan Slater expressed hisdelight and invited Margaret and me to a musical evening at his home, his way ofoffering congratulations. We arrived to find that Alan Clark, a PhD chemist butlecturer in biochemistry, had also been promoted and he too had been invited. Stanwas a classical music buff and had a room specially set up for listening with 1970sstate-of-the-art reproduction equipment. After being asked what we would like todrink, Alan and I were given bottles of spirits, mine a scotch and Alan’s a brandy,47 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistboth with a jug of water. To this day I have never been able to decide if this wasout and out generosity or a method of measuring intake, but I err on the side ofgenerosity.The same year saw me invited to spend six months at the University of NewSouth Wales in Sydney as a UNESCO lecturer, a title more grandiose than the jobitself.  In  essence,  UNESCO  provided  funding  for  a  lecturer  for Asian  studentsenrolled at NSW, but the School of Chemistry used the money to solicit visitingteaching  staff  for  six  month  periods.  Gary  Burns,  my  inorganic  chemistry  col-league, held the post for the second half of 1971 and VUW gave me unpaid leaveso that I was able to take over for the Jan-Jun period in 1972. This provided Mar-garet with postdoctoral work with the late Ray Golding (1935-2009), a New Zea-lander who had worked in DSIR at Petone prior to moving to Sydney.33 I left Tonyand my second PhD student Alan Browne, who started up after we left, to fendfor themselves – but with detailed reports air-mailed to Sydney every two weeks.The Australian ExperienceThe move to Sydney for six months meant that our car had to be sold and thehouse rented to pay the mortgage. The latter took more time (and trouble) than wehad imagined, but both were achieved before our Christmas at home with Marga-ret’s parents and a December 28 evening flight to Sydney. We had accommoda-tion in a Randwick Motel for a few nights, with our initiation and settling to thecity eased by the presence of my cousin Bob Robinson (the son of my mother’sbrother) and his wife. They had emigrated from the UK a year or so earlier, likedthe Sydney lifestyle and were generous with their time to us. After viewing severalapartments, we found a fully furnished, one bedroom place in a high rise block at56 Anzac Parade in Randwick. It was a fifteen minute walk to the university, justdown the road from the Sydney Cricket Ground and various parks, and but a shortbus ride into the city. The block of flats is still there as is the small garage opposite,though it is no longer the VW specialist repair place that it was.Monday January 3 signified sign-on day at UNSW. I was assigned an officewithin the 1st-Year Teaching Unit where I was to be based and met its Director,June Griffith (1925-1978), a delightful outgoing lady who made our stay in Syd-ney so enjoyable. Margaret linked up with Ray Golding and we were quickly intowork. For my part, I had lectures in General and Organic Chemistry to prepare butthere was nothing dramatically different from my U of F and VUW work (I hadtaken over the 1st-year organic course in 1971 as Malcolm Carr had moved to thethen new science faculty at Waikato University).We bought a VW Beetle, older than the one I had had in Florida, but it let us seesomething of the Australian countryside and its wildlife at the weekends, as I had48 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careerseen nothing and Margaret little of Australia’s indigenous species. We began toexplore further afield, quickly adapting to the Australian traveller’s Sunday ‘sign-in’. This was when a bona fide traveller, who had journeyed a minimum distancewas required to register upon entering any hotel or pub before gaining service; italways proved interesting to see just where those locals thought they had comefrom! We spent a weekend in the Blue Mountains at Katoomba that included theScenic Railway with its steep descent into the valley near the Three Sisters Peaks,and we spent Easter in Canberra. Our time in the Randwick flat saw us visit theexcellent Elizabethan Theatre, seeing Leo McKern in Mutiny on the Bounty. Theshopping area nearest to us had a range of food establishments of which Tiffany’swas big in precooked foods and specialized in main meals. That and Mr. Chips, afish and chip place closer to the campus that sold boxed meals more akin to the fil-let dinners now common, provided us with numerous evening meals at little cost.We absorbed our temporary environment to the full.My work at UNSW went well but I caused a few rumblings when I let it beknown that I intended using my research time to write a review on the cyclopro-parenes, as research was not common among the 1st-year unit staff. I had provideda proposal to Harold Hart, then editor of Chemical Reviews, seeking his approvalfor the first on this topic. It came in mid-January. Subsequently, I set to work, witha schedule for completion by the end of May, and the manuscript was submittedbefore we left. It appeared in the April 1973 issue of the journal.34 I also expectedto use some of my time to meet with colleagues in other Chemistry Departments.Setting up visits to the Sydney universities was simple enough and I enjoyed those.An overnight visit to ANU in Canberra, with Ron Warrener as host was also a partof the schedule. It proved to be an enjoyable and memorable visit as Ron had donea lot of photochemical work in an area that had much appeal, and I got along wellwith him and his then postdoctoral, Michael Paddon-Row; contact with both wasmaintained for many years and I spent two months in Ron’s laboratory in CentralQueensland in 1999.During the period after Easter, Margaret found that she was pregnant and theemergence of a soup craving came on our journey to Melbourne. I had convincedmy colleagues that I would be able to fit the time needed into the main teachingbreak  and  arranged  to  lecture  at  Melbourne  and  Monash  universities,  the  latterhousing Roger Brown as a Reader. We drove down to Melbourne on the inlandHume Highway (a two-way road for much of its length then) and spent the rest ofthe weekend exploring the city and its environs. Monday was my day at MelbourneUniversity. I was made very welcome by Prof. Don Cameron who, for whateverreason, became very supportive of me and my subsequent collaboration with Dr.David Kelly, an organic chemist who ran the NMR facilities. The instrumentationthere far exceeded that at VUW and we soon agreed upon a collaboration that gave49 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistmy small group in Wellington access to facilities unavailable in NZ. Although Imet Don on a number of occasions, it was during the period when he was Chair-man of the Editorial Board of The Australian Journal of Chemistry and I was amember (1994-99) that I really got to know and respect him and the then Editor,Dr. John Zdysiewicz (1943-2010), who became a true friend. Tuesday was spentat Monash University in Clayton but, sadly, Roger Brown was away and DavidBlack (whose successes since have been especially notable) hosted me. The day ofmeetings was good and I have retained contact with many of the people althoughno collaborations followed; we hold fond memories of a very pleasant dinner withDavid and some of his colleagues with his wife in their home. Wednesday morn-ing saw us heading back towards Sydney but via the coastal route. The remainingtime in Sydney went well with June Griffith great to work with; sadly she died anuntimely death from cancer in 1978.Our morning Sydney-Wellington flight was diverted to Auckland due to highwinds. However, whilst still at cruising altitude, we flew over Wellington from thesouth in clear skies and with a view of the north island from its southern tip beyondthe Wairarapa to the right and Mt. Egmont (as it then was) and New Plymouth tothe left. It was a sight that I have never forgotten. By the time we had landed inAuckland, Margaret was feeling none the better for the flight and I remember get-ting her into a sick room as a pregnant lady. Whether this impacted or not, I do notknow, but we got back to our Croydon Street home late in the afternoon, with mini-mal delay. The second half of 1972 saw Margaret continue her research at VUW,with her pregnancy becoming ever more obvious, while I had to contend with afull year’s teaching; we were both busy. Our first son, Mark was born on Dec 22.My new PhD man, Alan Browne (1948-2001), had settled in as Assistant Ra-diation Safety Officer as he had no scholarship. The minimum time for a part-timePhD submission was three years, but in reality it was always closer to a four-yearyear period. Both he and Tony Woolhouse coped well during my absence and withthe little time I was in the office because of the heavy teaching load after returning.I had a dozen lectures each week, tutorials, labs, and meetings of the committees towhich I had been appointed during my absence. I vowed never to get into the sameposition  again.  During  that  period,  Tonyhad covered the formation of dimers fromcycloproparene  29.  These  were  not  thesimple  ring-opened  head-to-tail  or  head-to-head  dimers  30  and  31  that  intuitivelyone  might  expect  but  the  more  complexisomeric E/Z bicycloheptatrienylidenes 32and  33.  The  structures  of  these  productswere  unable  to  be  settled  by  simple  mass50 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careerspectrometry and 1H NMR spectroscopy, andso  the  offer  of  assistance  from  David  Kellywas taken up. Despite the 13C spectra,35 it wassome  eight  years  before  the  structures  werefinally established by X-ray crystallographicanalyses,  with  the  mode  of  formation  likelyinvolving  ionization  and  recombination  to  abicyclo[4.1.0]hepta-1(7),2,4-triene  (Scheme12).36  Tony  also  settled  issues  regarding  thegenerality of the double dehydrochlorinationroute  of  Scheme  10,  the  replacement  of  thegem-dihalo substituents of the cycloproparene, and the stability of the various de-rivatives.Subsequently, Tony showed that the instability of gem-dichlorocycloproparene29 to protic media was due to ionization to cation 34 and he devised an appropri-ate procedure that allowed for its isolation as a highly moisture-sensitive antimonysalt (Scheme 12). As there was no facility to carry out low temperature NMR stud-ies in Wellington, the procedure was forwarded to David Kelly after Tony had left,and the work was repeated in Melbourne by Helmut Hügel; the vital spectroscopicdata that characterized the first cation in the cycloproparene series was gained.37In fact, David collaborated with me for many years before becoming Dean of Sci-ence at La Trobe University, while Helmut is at the Royal Melbourne Institute ofTechnology and was my equivalent as editor for Chemistry in Australia until 2008.In comparison with Tony, the 1972 new man, Alan Browne, began our forayinto cyclopropenes fused to other simple aromatics. During his first year, he syn-thesized  the  first  cyclopropa[b]naphthalene35a  (86%)  (the  benzo  analogue  of  29)  usingprecisely the same chemistry38 and showed thatits properties were analogous but with a some-what more stable ring system. He also obtaineddibromo 35b unexpectedly from a halogen ex-change. Subsequent work led to our only caseof being scooped to publication. Ed Billups atRice University in Houston had published39 astraight-forward synthesis of parent cyclopropabenzene (36) in 1971 and an exten-sion of this to the naphthalene analogue 36 (benzo fusion) seemed simple. Alanhad this done with the compound fully characterized, but he isolated a series ofside products whose proportions were dependent on his reaction conditions. Whilethis was being sorted out, the Billups paper appeared and Alan continued on, pro-viding a simple semi-kinetic analysis of the reactions that led to the benzene and51 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistnaphthalene  derivatives  before  beginning  our  attempts  to  generate  an  angularnaphthalene analogue, the cyclopropa[a] derivative.Sabbatical Leave and New ColleaguesThe year of 1973 saw me hosting a sabbatical visitor, Charles Spangler with hiswife Brenda and their children. They came from De Kalb, Illinois (Northern IllinoisUniversity), for some six months and we had accommodation arranged for their ar-rival; we entertained them and they us during a happy time. Charlie was keen to dobench work and he started to re-examine one of the earliest recorded syntheses ofcycloproparenes,  namely  the  formation  of  iminocyclopropa[l]phenanthrenes  37,as reported in 1930 by the Indian workers De and Dutt.40 The studywas completed by Honours student, Silvana Harrison the followingyear  by  showing  that  the  original  study  could  not  be  replicated  be-cause entirely different products were obtained.41 During Spangler’sstay I began to think of my own sabbatical leave, which accumulatedto a maximum eligibility of 270 days in August 1974. With a widowed mother inEngland, leave had to be in the UK and that would also give Margaret the chanceto see my homeland for the first time. In order to avoid three generations livingin the same house, and to fit with my chemical interests in photochemistry, leaveat  Reading  University  with  Derek  Bryce-Smith  and Andrew  Gilbert  fitted  best.Arrangements were made easily and VUW approved the leave in August 1973 forthe following year.Despite Margaret being hospitalized in December 1973, I was able to attend myfirst international conference outside NZ, namely the Royal Australian ChemicalInstitute meeting on Philip Island, near Melbourne, late in February. It provided anopportunity to revisit David Kelly and settle more work and, more importantly, topresent some of our research under the heading: Developments in the Chemistry ofArocyclopropenes. More notable was the presence of J. E. (Jack) Baldwin, then atMIT, who spoke on 2,3-Sigmatropic Reactions and subsequently almost drownedwhile  swimming.  During  the  year, Alan  continued  as  my  sole  PhD  student  andSilvana Harrison was joined by Teng See (later Christine) Chuah in what was to bethe final year of Victoria offering an MSc (Hons) degree over a 12 month period.The move to a BSc (Hons) structure saw a gradual and continuous reduction ofthe research component, to the extent that publications from the honours projectsdiminished. In that final 12-month MSc year, both of my students were involvedwith our early approaches to the cyclopropa[l]phenanthrene ring system that werepublished.The British Council offered Fellowships to a limited number of NZ residentacademics and I sought funding for the sabbatical travel scheduled for late No-52 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careervember. The outcome was not to be decided before we left NZ and I was advisedthat there were many applicants. It was in my second week in Reading that I wastold I was to receive the grant. Our initial accommodation was with my mother inthe same Lee SE 12 home I had lived in and we had a week there before I movedto Reading. Margaret rapidly warmed to nearby friends Sally and Peter Civil, whohad been looking after my mother more and more since she was on her own.My time in Bryce-Smith’s Reading laboratory began at the beginning of oursecond week in the UK and I stayed in Whiteknights Hall, one of the student/staffresidences, for the weekdays. I was made very welcome there and in Chemistry,especially by the former Southamptoners Gerry Fowles and Monty Frey, who werestill active. By 1974, Derek Bryce-Smith had become renowned for his environ-mental work on roadside lead pollution from exhaust emissions and he spent mostof his time on that, leaving Andrew Gilbert to run the photochemical programme.Andrew was a delightful colleague who, in my view, never gained the recognitionthat he truly deserved, as it was he who drove the photochemical studies. I set-tled to photoaddition reactions of aromatic ethers, specifically the photoadditionof maleimide to anisole, gained much valuable experience and a publication thatappeared in 1977 describing the isolation and characterization of 38-40 (Scheme13).42  The  Chemistry  building  was  relativelynew, stood alone, and had the distinction of re-search  laboratories  with  windows  above  headheight. While this provided more wall space forcupboards and shelving, the reason given to mewas that earlier, the somewhat notorious Profes-sor  Guggenheim  had  not  wanted  students  dis-tracted by pleasant views. Daylight was there though, thus making it very differentfrom  the  central,  totally  enclosed  laboratories  of  Utah  that  I  experienced  later.The first few days provided an opportunity to visit The Old Crown in GallowstreeCommon that we had agreed to rent from Dr. Neil Isaacs after Christmas. Neil, aphysical organic chemist, was to spend a leave in Auckland with Prof. Peter de laMare and  depart for NZ close to Christmas, returning shortly after our  planneddeparture at the end of July 1975. The property and the rental were too good toturn down. The converted old pub in the small village was more than suitable as ithad four bedrooms, three for our use, and all the modern conveniences of the day.In our time there, we experienced only one problem and that was with the heatingsystem, and not the resident ghost who we never met. I returned to Lee on Fridayevenings and so began some weeks of commuting until after Christmas.Whiteknights Hall was some 15 minutes walk from Chemistry and I recall feel-ing that the air in Reading never seemed to move. On one particular morning, thestroll across campus was much more enjoyable as there was a gentle breeze. When53 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistI got to the office, I was greeted by complaints about the wind and asked what itwas like in Wellington! My time in the Hall covered the pre-Christmas festivitiesof which there were several. I was invited to the formal Christmas Dinner, a quitegrand  event,  and  then,  afterwards,  to  the Warden’s  residence  for  port. The  portwas excellent and it was only the next day when I learned that, traditionally, eachwarden laid down port for a Christmas function many years in the future. Christ-mas was spent at 31 Heather Road and provided a further opportunity to visit rela-tives  and  friends  from  the  past,  no-tably Chris Watts, who by then wasworking  for  Plessey  Company  andnot  using  his  chemical  backgroundany longer. Margaret met several ofmy relatives and, as fate would haveit, a cousin and her husband lived inReading, he the grounds-man of theGallowstree Common playing fieldsjust  down  the  road  from  The  OldCrown.The Old Crown, Gallowstree Common, 1975After New Year, we moved to Gallowstree Common to find that the Isaacs hadleft their home in excellent order; all that we needed do was to turn on the heatingand get the place warm. The ensuing months there were happy. The university waseasily accessible by car but not by bus. There was a service but it took over anhour, needing a change at Reading Station. We met the neighbours, including onesthat the Isaacs had advised of our arrival and who had small children, and Margaretgot to know some of them well. She took Mark for walks through the neighbour-ing woods, enjoying the openness of the English countryside in comparison to thebush of NZ. Our nearest neighbours were a delightful older couple (George andMary Holmes) who offered to look after Mark should we wish to have an eveningout. Mary, especially, was very friendly and we remained in contact with her until2008 when she died. Our weekly shopping was done in Henley-on-Thames as itwas no further than central Reading, yet easier to access by car and park.In late January, I left for a week in Switzerland and Germany. I had visited acouple of the London Colleges to give seminars and meet staff before Christmas.But a visit to continental Europe was vital because of the small-ring chemistry be-ing studied there. Paul Müller at the University of Geneva had collaborated withus  on  cycloproparenyl  cation  issues  after  the  publication  of  our  landmark  com-munication and I wanted to meet with him. In fact, he was responsible for Bryce-Smith offering me more respect than to many of his staff. In late 1974, the Eng-lish universities were in financial difficulty, manifest in Reading by only SeniorLecturers (or above) having direct dial for local telephone calls while Professors54 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careerwere allowed long distance access. That I received calls from a Swiss Professorcaused confusion as no one knew where I should speak to him except by using theProfessor’s office, which I had to do. My visit to Geneva (and other places) wasarranged by Heinz Dürr of the University des Saarlandes and not Paul, as we hadcorresponded first on our mutual interest in the cycloproparenes. So it was that Iflew to Geneva where I met and began a twenty year friendship with Paul Müller.My  lecture  was  well  received.  I  also  reaffirmed  that  souvenir  collecting  shouldnever cause packing problems and settled on a pair of cufflinks from each overseaslecture tour. A set from Geneva was added to the pair from Sydney.From Geneva, I went by train to Freiburg in Germany to meet Horst Prinzbach,then a major force in small ring chemistry and photochemistry. My first eveningwas hosted by one of his junior colleagues, Dr. Gerd Kaup, who took to task thelevel  of  a  new  textbook  on  Organic  Photochemistry  that  had  quite  recently  ap-peared.16 After some discussion, he looked at me then said: ‘Ah, I think it was bysomeone from your country. Do you know him?’ I responded that I did since I wasone of the authors – and we got on well from that day. Prinzbach was a great hostand the next evening, after my seminar, we went to his favourite restaurant in asmall village on the outskirts of the Black Forest. It was there that the wine wasserved in Prinzbachian chalices – the pentagonal cup joined to a triangu-lar stand depicting the molecule named by him as calicene. That visit sawthe beginning of a long friendship that continues even today, cementedwhen he visited NZ just a few years later. Saturday saw me travel to Saar-brücken to be collected from the railway station by Heinz Dürr. He was,and is, a striking individual, tall with small beard, yet he remained silent until wewere sat in his car. He then turned and said: It is now Saturday afternoon and it ismy custom not to talk chemistry until Monday morning. Will this be alright? It was,and I had a marvellous weekend with him and his wife Helga when, amongst otherthings, I was taken to the Roman Ruins at Trier. Monday saw my university visit, alecture on the small-ring chemistry and much discussion. It was then a race to thestation to get the evening train to Cologne. The train had no restaurant car and, as itbegan to pull out of the station, Heinz and his student waved to lower the windowwhereupon savouries, sandwiches and cakes were passed in.In Cologne, I saw Emanuel Vogel who, with Prinzbach, Hafner and Huisgenwas among the most noted of the mainstream chemists in Europe. I had met himin Florida during his visiting professorship and he had corresponded since thenon cycloproparene chemistry. As in Freiburg, it was a great visit and we remainedfriends for close on 40 years until his death on 31 March 2011. I was fortunate as,unlike his junior German colleagues, I was an international collaborator and ben-efitted from gifts of chemicals from his on-campus pilot plant, mailed at no cost toNZ. I purchased another pair of cuff links to mark the end of a very successful tour.55 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistMy return to Reading was uneventful and we settled to the cold of winter withdelightful  weekend  outings  to  the  local  sights  and  periodic  visits  to  Lee.  Oncespring arrived, my mother and friends came more often for weekend visits. ForEaster, we headed northwest to my relatives in Lancashire. The first stop was inLytham–St. Annes where my oldest cousin, Margaret, lived; my father had stayedwith her and husband Bernard Lancaster prior to his surgery. We were made mostwelcome  but,  in  the  short  time  available,  we  had  to  move  on  to  Gt.  Harwood,where we stayed with Cousin Julia and her two children in their home at 6 Coro-nation Street, across the street frommy first home. To fit the accommo-dation,  a  typical  terraced  property,modernized,  but  with  only  threebedrooms  the  smallest  of  whichwas very small, her children stayedwith  their  maternal  grandparents  atNo. 17. Margaret was then exposedto  the  gaggle  of  northern  relativesthrough  a  gathering  that  Julia  or-ganized  on  Easter  Sunday.  We  sawsomething  of  the  local  countrysideincluding the Woodfields Village and Stonyhurst, Chatburn where Margaret Lan-caster’s sister Teresa and her family lived, and Sabden, the small mill village at thefoot of Pendle Hill where my Uncle Ted had been Mill Manager. We returned theretogether only in September 2009.My mother, Mark and friend, Reading, 1975Back in Reading, I continued to work and give university lectures. Robin Fer-rier had been more than keen for me to gain exposure in the UK and set up severaldesirable  visits.  In  total,  I  must  have  given  a  dozen  or  more  lectures  and  madesome very valuable contacts, but not all were simply professional. I arranged tovisit my Southampton friends, Brian and Cathy Odell, who by this time were inLeeds with Brian at the University. This was followed by Stirling University withBob Hay (d. 1999) who had returned there from VUW in 1971. We thoroughlyenjoyed our time and driving over Ilkley Moor (Bar T’at), and visiting York andits Minster. In Scotland, we saw Edinburgh and the Highlands near Stirling, but notLoch Lomond. The return journey took us through Cumbria and the Lake District,passing through Ambleside, where Margaret and Bernard Lancaster had run theBoots Chemists for many years before settling in Lytham.The visit to Stirling University provided the best outcome for me, in that Prof.Willie Parker asked if I would like to contribute to the Royal Society of Chem-istry  (RSC)  annual  publication,  Alicyclic  Chemistry,  which  provided  an  annualsummary of the literature published in the field. I accepted and it proved to be an56 -A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Careerinteresting time. The retrieval of scientific material was on the brink of electronicsearching and, thanks to Willie Parker, the RSC provided me with the latest list-ings of article abstracts retrieved under a trial process; they gave a huge time ad-vantage over the hard copy that came to Wellington dominantly by surface mail.Air-mail print-outs began to appear in December when I was home and they camewith remarkable regularity. The collection of the ca. 1000 citations and requisitedata over the 1976 and 1977 years was manageable. Writing was done over a shortperiod around Easter and the book appeared some four months or so later, with the1976 literature survey published in the northern autumn of 1977. It was an excel-lent experience and one that set me up for assessing and abstracting papers for therest of my career. I had articles published in Volumes 5 and 6 of the series, the lastafter Parker’s most untimely death.Our final months in Reading saw us enjoying the late spring and early sum-mertime before we dispatched surface-mail parcels home to keep our air luggagewithin the allowance. Our car was easily sold and we left Reading for a few days inLondon before our departure from Heathrow. We did not expect the welcome thatwe received in Los Angeles. Air New Zealand had begun flying from Auckland toLondon via LAX, but it was only the aircraft that made the full journey. Air NZhandled the Pacific sector and a British Airways crew flew the polar route to andfrom LA. We were appropriately ticketed for the single flight from LHR to AKL.On arrival at LAX, all passengers were required to pass through immigration andcustoms, much like the situation in the recent past. However, US officialdom des-ignated the flight from LHR as British Airways and that from LAX as Air NZ. Wehad no US visas and were not to be granted entry to the US, despite the tickets anditinerary being clear; we were barred from entry and from any transit facility. Ourenquiries of how we could re-board our aircraft met deaf ears until two-year oldMark decided that he had had enough and began to cry. The solution was simple:we were to be placed under armed guard and taken from arrivals to departures andheld in custody until we re-embarked. The guards, however, were more humaneand, once out of eyesight of the immigration officials, they carried our luggage,smoothed our way and, once at the boarding gate, simply left us to our own devic-es. The Pacific leg remains a blur, but we arrived home tired, yet happy to be back.My return to VUW was greeted with enthusiasm and I began to prepare themandatory Leave Report for the research and refresher leave committee, as it hadbecome called. I was quickly into teaching and the routine cycle of research, teach-ing and administering began again. In September, I attended the annual meeting ofthe New Zealand Association of Scientists to receive the 1974 Research Medal. Ihad been advised of this before we left for England and its receipt, my first award,came from nomination by James Duncan, then Head of Chemistry. Naturally I wasdelighted,  as  recognition  within  one’s  own  country  is  usually  not  easy  to  come57 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistby and it was a significant addition to my CV. The surprise of the spring was mypromotion into the Extended Range of the Senior Lectureship. At that time, the sal-ary ranges for Senior Lecturers overlapped that of Readers through the extendedsection. While this was a much appreciated event, it was also a cause for concernfor two reasons: it was unusual for a staff member to be promoted so soon aftersabbatical and the SL Extended Range generally was regarded as difficult to moveout from.When  we  got  back  from  England  my  research  students  were Alan  Browne,who was approaching the end of his four-year period, Teng See Chuah, my 1974Honours student who had returned for PhD, and a BSc Honours student, GarryMitchell, who had had a difficult time with me absent for the bulk of the period thathe was carrying out laboratory work. All three had maintained an excellent routineof reporting by air-mail and I wonder how the student body of today, with all hismodern  facilities,  would  cope  if  transported  back  to  that  era  of  pen  and  paper.Teng See found advanced study too demanding and she moved away, subsequentlyto marry our Store Manager, Peter Leighs, and to a successful career initially inbusiness and then in law. As the end of the teaching year approached, I obtaineda grant and took on a new research assistant, David Officer, who stayed with meuntil 1981, firstly as a paid employee and then, from 1976, for his Honours andPhD degrees.58 -A Young Family, a Career, andMomentumThe 1975-76 summer vacation saw David Officer as my research assistant and theonly laboratory worker I had. However, he and Martin Banwell, a more than com-petent undergraduate, had signed up for the new 1976 BSc (Hons.) degree, withresearch  under  my  direction. The  reduced  activity  gave  time  to  complete  someprojects on our Croydon Street home, especially as we were expecting our secondchild  the  following  spring.  Paul  Derek  was  born  on  September  3  and  Margaretstayed in the maternity hospital for about a week, in line with the policy of the day.Both Officer and Banwell proved to be very competent individuals, as differentas chalk and cheese, but they made the research lab hum. The pair outdid my for-mer students as both graduated with first class honours.Alan Browne submitted his thesis on cyclopropanaph-thalenes mid-year, in a time just a little longer than thefour-years  expected,  and  ended  up  with  a  tally  of  sixpublications.  He  went  to  join  Leo  Paquette  at  OhioState for his postdoctoral period. David was attemptingto  extend  the  cycloproparene  family  by  synthesizingcyclopropa[l]phenanthrene (41) by use of ring contraction processes. He carriedout  some  of  the  critical  work  that  showed  that  the  1974  report  by  Radlick  andCrawford43 (Scheme 14) was impossible to reproduce; the dreadful odour of 27was the only evidence for its presence. Martin also took on aspects of mono- anddicyclopropabenzene synthesis and they both shared (with others) their first paper.In  January  1977  I  formally  moved  into  the  Readership,  having  been  told  ofthis just ahead of Paul’s birth. A little later, the Higher Salaries Commission com-pressed the Reader’s salary scale from four levels to a single rate. With a secondchild, everything helped and this proved a major boost to our income. Both MartinBanwell and David Officer returned for PhD study, Martin, like Tony Woolhouse,with a University Grants Committee Scholarship (of which NZ had ~100 for alldisciplines)  and  David  as  a  Junior  Lecturer  akin  to Alan  Browne.  I  also  startedNeil Galloway as an Honours student and was very busy again. Martin and Davidhave  been  the  two  students  whose  careers  have  been  especially  pleasing  to  see59 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistdevelop as both moved into academia, Martin ascendingto the senior Organic Chemistry Chair in the SouthernHemisphere, that at the Australian National Universityin Canberra. This followed postdoctoral study with hischoosing Leo Paquette at Ohio State, a research fellow-ship in Adelaide (Australia), and then tenured positionsin Auckland and Melbourne before moving to ANU in1995. He was awarded an honorary Doctor of Sciencedegree by Victoria University in May 2010. For sometime I had assumed such honours would go to him, butI  had  neither  expected VUW  to  be  the  first  institutionto make such an award nor to see it from the same sideof the grass as Martin. By way of contrast, David hadpostdoctorals with Ron Warrener (at ANU) and then Emanuel Vogel (in Cologne)as a Humboldt Fellow, before accepting a lectureship in NZ at Massey University,Palmerston North, with promotions, ultimately to Professor. He accepted a Chairat the University of Wollongong in 2007, where his research is in the recently cre-ated ‘Intelligent Polymer Research Institute’ developing functional nanomaterialssystems. Their time at VUW gave them seven and six publications each, Martincompleting after a mere 30 months (like Tony Woolhouse) and David after 4 yearsas a Junior Lecturer, in 1981.Martin Banwell 2010Martin began what turned out to be a failed project – the attempted synthesis ofthe linear and angular dicyclopropabenzenes 42 and 43, which also was unsuccess-ful for Udo Brinker and his group in the 1980swhen  they  tried  to  generate  the  naphthaleneequivalent 44. What Martin’s work did was toshow  the  ease  by  which  halotricyclooctanescould  be  transformed  into  homotropylidenes,as  depicted  in  Scheme  15.  The  reaction  re-quired addition of the substrate to the base, thereverse of what had been our normal procedureuntil  then.  The  so  called  normal  addition  ledto  a  series  of  styrenes  and  much  of  the  workconcerned the precise way in which these wereformed. A series of papers entitled Studies in the Tricyclooctane Series appearedin the Australian Journal of Chemistry.Understandably, David’s work was slower as he had to contend with the dutiesof a junior lecturer. He elected to continue attempting to extend the cycloproparenering systems to the cyclopropa[l]phenanthrenes. By this time, cyclopropabenzene(27) and -[b]naphthalene (36) had been characterized and studied in some detail.60 -A Young Family, a Career, and MomentumVogel and his students had prepared the angular -[a]naphthalene (45) from flashvacuum pyrolysis during 1976, a result that was taken much further by Paul Mül-ler  and  his  group  using  more  conventional  chemistry  overthe  ensuing  years.  Our  interest  came  from  the  strain  in  themolecules and its impact upon stability. Thus, while 27 and36 were stable compounds, 45 was not. This fitted with theexpected increase in π character of the bridge bond on mov-ing from 27 to 41. Although our efforts to obtain 45 (or a de-rivative) failed, we were convinced that phenanthrene 41 hadto have a more double bond-like bridge and would show even less stability. Thus,David’s studies laid the foundations for the ultimate synthesis of 41, with which hewas intimately involved in 1984 whilst in Vogel’s Cologne laboratory.The year 1977 also was significant for me in a different direction. I noted ear-lier just how much Horst Prinzbach had impressed me when I visited Freiburg in1975. A year after returning from England in the spring of 1976, I found that theNZ Vice-Chancellors Committee had an established fund for a visiting GermanNational Fellow. The monies available provided for travel to and from NZ, withone week to be spent at each of the four major, and half a week at the minor (Wai-kato and Massey) universities. Half a week at each of Rotorua and Queenstownwas also included for rest and recuperation. On carefully reading the conditionsand criteria, I could find nothing to limit the individual to being a German Lan-guage or Literature scholar, and so I wrote to Prinzbach seeking his permission tonominate him, got it, and then submitted the paperwork. He was selected and camein the winter of 1977 travelling via Easter Island. He gave a lecture course in eachuniversity, with that at VUW stunning in its clarity, vision and scope, and encom-passing his fulvene, fulvalene and bishomobenzene chemistry. Only Roger Brownhad  visited  me  previously  (1974)  while  on  sabbatical  at  Canterbury  University,and Horst’s time in NZ did much to enhance my reputation. Margaret and I enter-tained him at home, showed him the Wellington area and, on his last night, tookhim to a progressive dinner. The concept of hosting an evening meal with the threecourses eaten at different venues had become popular. It meant that one had eachcourse with a different group of people in a different home. Horst was allowed tojoin this Young Wives event and it took him into different NZ homes. In the follow-ing year he was, I believe, named German of the Year, became a firm friend and,on every visit to Freiburg since (the last being in 2009), that progressive dinner hasbeen raised by him. Subsequently, I hosted some two dozen eminent chemists wholectured in the various NZ universities. Robin Ferrier nominated Hans Paulsen, acarbohydrate  chemist  from  Hamburg,  also  for  the  German  National  Fellowshipand he came in 1978, the only other before the rules were changed so that they ap-plied to language and literature experts only.61 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistTime passed quickly as I became more involved in committee work, not leastthat of the University Safety and Civil Defence. I had taken on the duties of De-partmental Safety Officer shortly after we returned from Reading. In itself, thiswas straightforward enough. However, the various science departments had quitedifferent  expectations  of  their  staff  and  students  when  it  came  to  safety  issuesand directives were frequently at odds. The effect of this was that a Science Fac-ulty safety advisory committee was established under my chairmanship to put thehouse in order as it were. It succeeded in bringing about a much more logical ap-proach to safety issues and an approach was made to the then Vice-Chancellor, Dr.Danny Taylor, for funds to produce a Laboratory Safety Handbook. Unlike mod-ern  management  practices  that  require  everything  justified  in  triplicate,  my  onemeeting with him was short and simple, and I emerged charged with the task ofproducing a manual for use in all laboratory areas. A group from the faculty com-mittee rose to the occasion and Victoria’s first Laboratory Safety Handbook ap-peared in 1977, by which time a University Safety and Civil Defence Committeehad been established. In the years that followed I was involved with safety coursesfor secondary school teachers, advising the Wellington Medical School how betterto address its issues and a range of other matters that provided a distraction fromwhat I really wanted to do.The summer of 1977 saw Mark’s 5th birthday ahead of Christmas, and our firstsummer house sitting for Margaret’s brother Ron, in Hamilton. I do not recall whoinitiated  things  but  Ron  preferred  to  have  the  house  occupied  when  they  wereaway. The idea of a quiet time relaxing in the NZ sun with a large pool and a ten-nis court was seriously attractive. It was the start of regular summer visits to 58Herbert Road that provided the essential R&R after a busy year. My mother, nowretired, visited us for the third time over the following summer (1978) but she wasdistracted by a new suitor, Victor Spencer, whom she married in March 1980. Theyvisited us in 1984, and then again in 1987, the last time my mother was with us asshe was beginning to display early signs of the dementia that took hold and forcedher into permanent care for the last five years of her life. She died on February28, 1996, ten days after a serious stroke. My flight to London for the funeral hadme in a seat adjacent to John Spencer and his wife on the Auckland-Los Angelesleg; John had been out to interview for the inorganic chair vacated by Neil Curtison retirement, was offered the position, and subsequently joined as a Professor ofChemistry with responsibilities in the inorganic area – labelled chairs were out!For the new 1978 academic year my 1977 Honours man, Neil Galloway, re-turned for PhD. Neil had gained a 1st Class Honours degree and a UGC scholar-ship, but with added allowances for his wife and young child. He began workingon  the  oxidative  decarboxylation  of  bicyclo[4.1.0]heptene  dicarboxylates  in  thesearch for a new and viable synthesis of the cycloproparenes. During the course of62 -A Young Family, a Career, and Momentumhis work he moved from Wellington city to the coastal suburban settlement of Rau-mati where his wife was closer to family. The subsequent daily commute did not fitto his responsibilities or the demands of the research laboratory and he transferredto an MSc degree, which he gained in early 1980. We never found a new pathwayto the cycloproparenes but did synthesize the requisite bicycloheptene 1,6-diac-ids and follow their decarboxylations.44 Neil subsequently joined Taubman’s PaintCompany (now the Peter Jackson film studios) in Wellington and had a successfulcareer there until its closure.I had had spells serving on the Wellington Branch Committee of the New Zea-land  Institute  of  Chemistry  (NZIC),  was  elected  to  its  Fellowship  in  1977,  andbecame  the  Branch  Chairman  in  1980.  One  David  Bibby  was  the  very  compe-tent Branch Secretary – he is now VUW’s first-rate Dean of Science – and still acompetent secretary. During this time, I was awarded the Institute’s ICI Prize forExcellence in Chemical Research, while also serving what transpired to be the firstof four lengthy terms on the National Council. The last two of these buttressed a27 year involvement with the organization and running of the Chemical Congressof Pacific Basin Societies (Pacifichem). Following from the success of bringingPrinzbach to NZ, I nominated Derek Bryce-Smith for an NZIC sponsored lecture-ship of the country. He visited in 1979 and attracted significant media attentionfrom his environmental stance on lead pollution. He was followed a year later byEmanuel Vogel, then Peter Sykes (Cambridge), and almost annually thereafter adistinguished chemist from the northern hemisphere.My third international conference (I attended an RSC meeting in York whileat  Reading)  was  another  RACI  Organic  meeting  in  January  1979,  this  time  the5th National in Hobart, Tasmania. David Officer and I both attended, and Davidpresented our approaches to cyclopropa[l]phenanthrene at the subsequent meetingin Melbourne in August 1980. I was fortunate to meet and interact with Prof. KojiNakanishi of Columbia University, fortunate not so much for his elegant chemis-try or his magic (we were almost ejected from the Wrest Point Casino) as for thehelp he offered when VUW’s 11 year old 60 MHz Hitachi NMR instrument hadproblems. We were unable to get any satisfaction from the manufacturers until heintervened on our behalf. Even more coincidental is that I had an excellent work-ing relationship with Koji’s brother, Atsuo, during our mutual times working onthe Pacifichem meetings; he was the Executive Director of the Chemical Societyof Japan during 1989-1998. The problems with the Hitachi NMR instrument signi-fied its age and the need for a second generation machine. The organic chemistswere, by far, the largest users of the facility and it fell to us to provide an appro-priate case for a new instrument that could provide carbon-13 as well as protonspectra. The task was up to Ted Harvey as he was the one most familiar with theHitachi and he did the job with aplomb. After considerable searching, a decision63 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistwas made to match Otago and Canterbury universities and acquire a Varian Instru-ments 80 MHz electromagnet instrument when funding became available. In thosedays, grants for major equipment were made by the University Grants Committeeand our case was so well handled by Ted that we were given the grant at the timewe needed it. The instrument was ordered, but only after some significant negotia-tion that had the installation done by the Varian Palo Alto expert technician andnot an Australian counterpart who had quite limited experience. The order itselfwas placed in 1979, not by us but by the Government’s Education Department.They provided their own (internal) insurance and refused to transfer monies to theUS despite the almost certain probabilitythat  the  NZ  dollar  would  devalue  beforeany  account  was  paid.  In  any  event,  theinstrument duly arrived and was installedby  the  Varian  man  in  the  early  part  of1980. He was superb in getting the elec-tromagnet  up  and  running,  and  in  train-ing  our  NMR  technician,  the  NZ  Varianman (Alan Ross) and me. Ted had alreadymoved away from the Department to theRegistry, the NMR acquisition his final and lasting contribution before departure.I well recall receiving a letter from the Education Department some months afterinstallation and payment of the account seeking something approaching $NZ 1000from me to meet the difference between the grant and the final payment. I thinkit unnecessary to explain my subsequent actions, save but to say that neither I norVUW made any additional contribution!Brian Halton and Alan Ross – NMR 1980All of these things seem to have happened in a flash of time, for the next focuswas the second sabbatical due in late 1981 after David’s departure. A decision as towhere best to spend the time was coloured by thoughts of the US and Peter Stang’snovel carbene chemistry, which was expected to fit nicely with new ideas for ourcycloproparene work. Even in those days, Peter, who is my own age, was locatedin Salt Lake City and his area of expertise was simply too good to miss. We ar-ranged for a nine month spell at the University of Utah from late September 1981and VUW approved the programme, although I was encouraged to seek additionalfinancial support as my VUW salary was likely to be inadequate. And so it wasthat I applied for a Fulbright Fellowship from the 1980-81 allocation. Shortly afterthe application had been lodged, I was informed that the NZ programme appliedonly to NZ citizens and I was asked if I had an application under consideration.I did not, but application papers were completed in short order and delivered tothe NZ immigration office. There were two difficulties, the first being proof of my1968 entry to NZ. As I commented earlier, there were no formal requirements and64 -A Young Family, a Career, and Momentumthe stamp in my obsolete passport was my sole record unless a letter from VUWcould be provided. The major problem, however, was in having my applicationconsidered in time for the deliberations of the Fulbright Selection Panel. Yet again,fate was on my side. When I entered the Department of Labour and spoke with theofficer handling applications, I detected a clear and definite Lancastrian accent;he came from a village close to Gt. Harwood. Naturally, favouritism can never beshown by any NZ Government officials as applications are dealt with strictly in or-der of receipt; I was shown a large pile awaiting investigation. My NZ citizenshipwas granted shortly afterwards and it was followed by the award of a FulbrightFellowship .....  and I am now a member of the NZ selection committee.Sabbatical in Salt Lake CitySo it was that, in 1981, we planned the stay in Utah. Peter was generous to theextreme  with  his  time  and  help.  Not  only  did  we  setup  a  research  plan,  but  also  he  provided  informationon apartments, cars, schools and the ways in which wecould get both boys into the Utah State education sys-tem. He had me appointed as Visiting Professor, pro-vided medical cover and assisted in many other ways.Our third foray into house renting, car sale and travelarrangements  went  smoothly,  culminating  in  our  Oc-tober  1  departure  for  Los Angeles,  where  we  spent  afew days taking in all of those things that the city andits environs are famous for. By then, Peter had rentedan apartment for us on the Salt Lake valley floor, a twobedroom,  semi-basement,  unfurnished  place  at  1224SE  9th  St.,  comparatively  close  to  campus.  It  provedideal.Our arrival into Salt Lake City involved a flight path up the valley before a turnto the east and touchdown towards the south. The Mormon Temple and Moroni,the angel, glistened in the afternoon sun and the University stood out from its siteon the foothills to the Rockies. Peter met us and whisked us to the apartment inshort order. Much to our surprise the place was almost completely furnished fromthe University of Utah loan closet, set up some years earlier by University staffmembers’  wives;  all  we  needed  do  was  to  donate  any  household  items  we  pur-chased or replaced. Dinner that night was with Peter, his wife Christine and theirtwo daughters, similar in age to Mark and Paul. Although Christine had providedus with essentials (even made the beds ready for us), Margaret and the boys ven-tured to the grocery store next day for a few more things while I was at the univer-65 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistsity. A day later Christine took Margaret to Smiths, a vast grocery store and a mindblowing experience for someone who had never been in the US before. Both Peterand Christine have remained close friends since that first encounter.At the U of U, I completed various forms, collected my campus ID and arrangedfor issue of the Exchange Visitor Visa needed as a Fulbright Scholar. I met mem-bers of the research group and academic colleagues, most notably Cheves Walling(1916-2007), then editor of JACS. I was given an office desk and lab bench, andsettled to the work that I would do. The boys attended Emerson Elementary, a Stateschool just around the corner a couple of blocks away from our apartment and onE 13th S. One of Peter’s neighbours ran a car dealership and he let us have a latermodel Mazda GLX hatchback at cost and agreed to take it back for a fair pricewhen we left. Christine arranged for Margaret to attend the Utah Women’s FacultyClub New Comers afternoon just a few days after our arrival and she won ticketsto the university Pioneer Theatre for Stubby Kaye in Guys and Dolls.Very soon after my arrival in the Chemistry Department, Prof. Manfred Regitzvisited from Kaiserslautern in Germany, and I began to get more international con-tact and hear many excellent lectures. We joined theRegitz and Stangs for dinner and I was invited to visitKaiserslautern when in Germany the following Euro-pean spring. We settled to a happy life and Margaretbegan  to  explore  and  enjoy  her  new  found  freedomwith  both  boys  in  school.  The  weekends  were  spentdoing all those things that the US had and NZ did not.One of the exercises during the winter months was tak-ing the car out of the carport safely. The apartment hadno garage but a covered concrete pad. With the levelof  snow  and  ice,  salting  the  roads  was  common  andwhenever one got home the car would be wet. Over-night,  the  temperature  drop  was  such  that  the  waterfroze the tyres to the car pad and so a revved up enginewas needed to free the wheels and get moving. All well and good, except that thecarport  was  orthogonal  to  the  driveway,  and  as  soon  as  the  car  started  movingbackwards, a 90º turn was vital, yet we always managed to miss the neighbour’sfence directly behind.We spent time ice skating on one of the local open air swimming pools that wasset to freeze for the winter season. Skates were provided at a small cost and theboys and I enjoyed making the circuits. They became more proficient as the ses-sions passed and, as I had always enjoyed roller skating at St. Joseph’s College, Ifound this experience exhilarating, despite the bumps and falls. Margaret was lessof an enthusiast and, sadly, had a fall that hurt. It happened shortly after New Year66 -A Young Family, a Career, and Momentumand two weeks later, on a Sunday morning, her hip began to ache. She degeneratedrapidly from having some minor discomfort to total immobility and was admittedto Holy Cross Hospital (now the Salt Lake Regional Medical Center) as advisedby Peter, underwent surgery for a recurrence of her childhood osteomyelitis, andremained there for almost two weeks. I contended with the boys, but as soon asour predicament became known, colleagues arrived with prepared meals and thefridge was filled, most notably with lasagne (and now I can no longer face it). Thetiming was far from the best as I had planned on visiting several universities to theeast and, not knowing how long the recovery would take, all had to be cancelledsave for visits to Texas and Florida in March.I spent three days in Houston lecturing at both Rice University, with Ed Bil-lups as my host, and at the University of Houston. Ed was the other chemist mostactive and successful in the cycloproparenearea and the visit was good for both of us. AtHouston I met Randy Thummel and gainedmuch  useful  insight  to  his  four-memberedring chemistry. Arrival in to Florida was toGainesville airport on a Friday evening fora  weekend  with  my  former  flatmate,  BillEaton and his wife Cindy, before venturingback to the U of F. I spent from midday onMonday until the following Friday at the University. My visit coincided with oneof the early Katritsky Florida Heterocyclic and Synthetic Symposia (now Flohet).He was most gracious, and involved me in as much of the programme as was fea-sible but I was there dominantly to see the developments in Merle Battiste’s chem-istry as well as catch up with former teaching colleagues. It was time well spent.There were but a few days after returning to Utah before the 183rd ACS NationalMeeting took place in Las Vegas. Peter had encouraged me to attend and presentsome VUW work. This I did, with the research going under the title AromatizationRoutes to Cycloproparenes. The meeting was exhilarating and new contacts andfriendships  ensued,  most  notably  with  Larry  Scott,  then  at  Reno  (University  ofNevada), who I subsequently visited and with whom I have had much interactioninvolving the International Symposia on Nonbenzenoid Aromatics as it used to becalled. The meeting was followed by a few days back in Utah and then a lecturetour in Germany that was generously hosted by Emanuel Vogel.I flew to London, gave a lecture at University College and met Peter Garratt,and  then  attended  to  a  few  family  matters  before  moving  on  to  Cologne.  Ema-nuel had set up an excellent speaking tour encompassing some eight universitiesover two weeks that began in Cologne. The tour gave me better recognition in thecountry, and  led to many return visits.  Of course,  there were returns to Geneva67 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistand Saarbrücken as well as time in Freiburg with Prinzbach. I made many newcontacts, not least Klaus Müllen (now Director of The Max Planck Institute forPolymer  Research  in  Mainz),  and  Curt  Wentrup  and  his  wife  Edeline  who  hadworked with Müller in Geneva some years earlier. I got to know Manfred Regitzbetter than simply over dinner in SLC and saw him a on a number of subsequentvisits. Sadly, he suffered a serious stroke in Paris in the late 1990s that essentiallyterminated his career in chemistry and forced him into early retirement. The laststop on the tour was at Heidelberg where my host was Richard Neidlein of thePharmacy School. We got along well and have interacted both in Germany and inNZ many times. In fact, Richard subsequently embarked on aspects of cyclopro-parene chemistry and, being of the sort of individual who would never do things byhalves, made significant quantities of the highly odoriferous cyclopropabenzene(27). However, there were difficulties at the University as the odour of the com-pound, when coupled with concerns that it advanced alopecia (baldness), led to aban on its preparation and use there. After this, I became aware that molecule 27can be detected nasally at the level of 1 ppb, but I am unsure just where that figurecame from – perhaps the Heidelberg University health professionals who had con-tacted me. It is important to note here that there have been no adverse health effectsin Wellington, save for the occasional headache, and this from a 35 year period ofworking with the compound(s).The Utah project that I had been working on had developed but, in itself, neverappeared in print save for review documents. What had been decided was to cou-ple Stang’s expertise with unsaturated carbenes to our own in the cycloproparenearea,  with  a  view  ultimately  to  deliver  the  first  methylenecycloproparene.  Ourapproach  involved  the  addition  of  unsaturatedcarbene,  generated  from  2-methylpropenyl  tri-flate,  to  1,4-dihydronaphthalene.  This  gave  theexocyclic alkene 46 that was expected to doublydehydrogenate to the sought after arene 47. Thisdid not happen as opening of the three-memberedring  was  the  preferred  path,  giving  alkene  48(Scheme  16).  From  these  studies  it  became  ap-parent that 47 and analogues 49 would need a synthetic procedure that carried thearomatic ring while the exocyclic alkene was located in place. Thus, a retrosyn-thetic analysis (the term was beginning to be used) led us to propose deprotonationof the arene, capture of the anion with trimethylsilyl chloride and deprotonation ofthe monosilylated cycloproparene so formed, so that the anion could be capturedby a carbonyl-containing compound in a silyl-Wittig sequence. This was expectedto deliver the alkene 49 directly as shown in Scheme 17. There was insufficienttime in SLC to initiate this work except for the synthesis of 27, which was then68 -A Young Family, a Career, and Momentumreturned to NZ in a sealed thick-walled glass ampouleby conventional air mail delivery. It was my studentsin Wellington who brought things to fruition. The col-laboration  with  Peter  that  my  sabbatical  began  wasongoing  and  lasted  some  twenty-one  years  givingtwenty communications, papers and reviews.Our final morning in the US started as it had be-gun  nine  months  earlier  –  in  Los Angeles  and  withbreakfast at Denny’s. Unlike our arrival, we were intopancakes  and  all  things American  and  we  made  themost of it for the last time. Our Air New Zealand flight home provided time forreflection on what had been highly successful professionally and a truly wonderfultime in our family life. Unlike my departure in 1968, this was to a homeland thatI was not going to leave.Advances in Chemistry – At What Cost?With David Officer having left the lab in 1981 without being replaced, the hopefor future research assistance had rested on the two honours students that joinedme  before  I  left  for  Utah.  Both  Barry  Dent  and  Cliff  Randall  got  on  well  withtheir honours research and elected to return for PhD study despite my being out ofthe country. Barry had gained a 1st class honours degree along with several otherprestigious awards, and returned with a UGC postgraduate scholarship to take onthe challenges left by David to synthesize a cyclopropa[l]phenanthrene. By com-parison, Cliff had not achieved as highly in his honours year, but his upper secondqualification was enough for him to be awarded a teaching assistantship, which hetook up in late February, 1982. The provision of junior lectureships in chemistrywas  terminated  by  VUW  through  its  Dean  of  Science,  but  the  Department  hadretained a few assistantships to continue at least some PhD sponsorship.Cliff had used his honours year to delineate the route to halocyclopropaben-zenes from tetrahalobicyclo[4.1.0]heptanes and found that the presence of a labilebromo or chloro substituent in the six-membered ring indeed led to triple dehydro-genation. Such elimination sequences had been studied earlier but the precise routeby which the product(s) were formed remained in doubt. Our studies, initiated forus by Martin Banwell, showed that, by using a mixed halide, the halogen retainedin the product arene 50 or 51 was that from the six-membered ring of the trans-2,3-or 3,4-dihalo starting material (Scheme 18). Moreover, the 2,3-dihalo compoundshad  the  2-halogen  on  the  opposite  face  to  the  three-membered  as  shown  fromX-ray crystal structure. As will be obvious from Scheme 18, the major thrust ofthis  work  was  to  generate  the  two  possible  didehydrobenzenes,  52  and  53,  by69 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistsubsequent dehydrohalogenation. This Cliff did using the complex base system ofsodium amide/sodium t-butoxide in tetrahydrofuran and, in the presence of furan,the two benzynes were trapped as the angular and linear Diels-Alder adducts 54and 55, respectively. The structures were confirmed from Ag(I)/MeOH openingof the three-membered rings to the same naphthalenyl methyl ether 56 that wasindependently synthesized. The results were published in 1983.45During  my  time  with  Peter  Stang,  the  competence  of Yitzhak Apeloig,  bothas an experimentalist and a theoretician had come to impress me. Having neithercomputer nor software, let alone the needed expertise to carry out a computationalstudy of the didehydrobenzenes 52 and 53, I approached him to see if he wouldbe interested in assessing the compounds for us; this led to another on-going col-laboration  of  almost  20  years.  Of  course,  in  the  early–mid  1980s  the  personalcomputer had not arrived and computation, as it was, was far from easy to per-form. Worse still, the basis sets then available did not replicate the cycloproparenegeometry well. Yitzhak and his students persevered with parent hydrocarbon 27,subsequently to publish in 1986 a paper in the Journal of the American Chemi-cal  Society  entitled  Cyclopropabenzene.  Geometry,  Electronic  Structure,  Strain,Reactivity, and the Question of Bond Fixation. A Theoretical Study.46 This was fol-lowed by another on 52 and 53 that showed the pair to be the most highly strainedbenzyne derivatives yet prepared, having strain energies in excess of 700 kJ/mol.The angular isomer 52 is the more strained (by some 10 kJ/mol) as the distortionsimposed by benzyne itself sit more comfortably upon 27 in a linear rather thanangular manner.47 What is interesting here is that in the mid-1980s the time neededto complete each computation was long, and the only computer that Yitzhak hadaccess  to  capable  of  handling  the  job  was  that  in Technion’s  (Israel  Institute  ofTechnology’s) administration. This was taken over for small ring calculations dur-ing the summer months when staff were absent. This cannot have been all bad asYitzhak rose to become President of the Technion from 2001 to 2009. In 1999, abook World Records in Chemistry was published by Wiley that includes benzynes52 and 53 as then, and even now, they remain the most highly strained benzynesrecorded.70 -A Young Family, a Career, and MomentumHaving completed this work, Cliff moved on to the synthesis of our desiredplanarized cycloproparenes, namely those carrying an alkene at the C1 position,the alkylidenecycloproparenes exemplified by 49 of Scheme 17. Cliff was able toshow that in the naphthalene series, methylene derivatives could easily be synthe-sized, not by following the path of Scheme 17, but by modifying it because mono-silylation of the naphthalene could not be controlled easily. However, disilylationwas readily brought about in good yield to give 57 which, in turn, underwent desi-lylation with t-BuOK to the ensuing a-silyl anion that readily coupled with aryl-containing carbonyls. This gave the much sought after olefins as highly colouredcrystalline compounds in good yields, as demonstrated by the yellow-orange 58of Scheme 19; this was obtained, ultimately, inalmost quantitative yield. In this way, a rangeof naphthalene derivatives was soon preparedand the work extended to the benzene series.This  was  more  problematic  as  the  benzenoida-silyl  anion  has  less  stability  and  the  entiresequence,  although  successful,  gave  rise  toproducts  in  yields  of  little  more  than  50%.48Not surprisingly, Cliff successfully completedhis doctoral study. The work he did was demanding and its execution was due tohis excellent ‘pair of hands’ that seem to have been the trademark of his career inmass spectrometry in the NZ Crown Research Institute environment. The gambitof properties of these new compounds took us in a new direction and involved usin many years of fascinating study.While Cliff was underway with benzynes and alkenes, Barry Dent was pursu-ing cyclopropa[l]phenanthrenes. His initial studies followed from those of DavidOfficer, and honed to the delivery of the gem-dichloro derivative employing a routethat  uses  a  9-  or  9,10-disubstituted  phenanthrenecarrying  an  electron-donating  substituent.  With  anucleofugic  substituent,  subsequent  elimination  isfacilitated, with the first successes coming from theaddition of dichlorocarbene to 9-phenylselenophen-anthrene, oxidation of the product to selenoxide andthen  ejection  of  PhSeOH. Although  not  as  simpleas implied, methyl 9-phenanthrenecarboxylate wasobtained  via  intermediate  59  (Scheme  20)  by  aroute that mirrored the behaviour of 27.49 In orderto complete the study, Barry skilfully pursued the parent molecule 41 by employ-ing the C1 unsubstituted methylselenide 60 successfully, as shown in Scheme 21.The  route  to  60  involved  monodechlorination  of  the  dichlorocarbene  adduct  of71 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist9-trimethylsilylphenanthrene,  t-butoxide  desilylation  and  capture  of  the  ensuingcyclopropene by the anion of methylselenide as 60. Methylation of this then gavethe dimethylselenonium tetrafluoroborate that lost dimethylselenide when treatedwith t-BuOK at ambient temperature. In the presence of furan, a mixture of thethree Diels-Alder adducts 62-64 was isolated and then separated into the indepen-dent components in yields of 13, 20 and 7%, respectively. The formation of 62 and63 represents 83% of the isolated adducts and shows that not only is 41 formed inthis reaction but that it is a kinetically more stable product than the angular (C1-C9b) alkene 61. Work in Cologne by Vogel’s group (that included David Officer)also led to 41 by their traditional flash vacuum pyrolytic retrodiene process, andthis allowed for its isolation free from side products. It is a moderately stable solidat –78 oC but decomposes over several days. The results were published jointly in1985.50I regard the results of Barry and Cliff as probably the most significant frommy career. These two doctoral students made the advances recorded above fromresearch that started while I was on sabbatical leave in Utah and then saw my pres-ence in the university dwindle from March 1983 for close to a year. I had not feltwell for some time and my GP had been unable to offer any solution. During thestay of Prof. Mord Rubin (Israel Institute of Technology) I was referred to the localhospital for a coronary check but discharged. That was until March 25, 1983, when72 -A Young Family, a Career, and MomentumI suffered a significant heart attack – though the night duty doctor did not pick itand gave me a significant dose of morphine that kept me more than happy for theday. After diagnosis, and the mandatory stay in the coronary care unit of Welling-ton Hospital, my cardiologist came to the conclusion that I could be well servedby arterial grafting and approached the surgical team. At that time, coronary arterybypass surgery had only been introduced recently to Wellington but I was regardedas  a  suitable  candidate  and  underwent  the  operation  some  four  months  later,  inJuly. Anaesthesia in 1983 was markedly more invasive than in the 21st century (asI know from experience) and it took six months before its effects finally dissipated.Although I was back to the office some six weeks after surgery, even doing somelecturing, I doubt if my presence was especially effective. During my recuperationBarry and Cliff visited, brought their results and provided much needed stimula-tion. That they achieved what they did, essentially unsupervised, says much abouttheir own perseverance. Cliff married and left to take up a position with the thenDSIR, while Barry spent a postdoctoral period in Alberta with Prof. Derek Clivebefore also joining the govern-ment  laboratories.  Both  stayedin  the  service  through  its  tran-sition into the Crown ResearchInstitutes.  Barry  developed  aspeciality in the synthesis of la-belled  reference  compounds  in1987  that  extended  to  customorganic  synthesis.  He  boughta  business  unit  from  his  thenemployer  in  1996  and  beganhis own company BDG Synthe-sis  that  now  employs  six  PhDchemists providing custom organic synthesis; it is a well recognised organization.At the time that the pair left my group, I had made several significant decisionsand refocused my life.Things  at Victoria University  were  undergoing  change  when  I  took  my  sab-batical at Utah. My second US sojourn and European visit had brought me to theconclusion that the time was right to seek a more senior appointment elsewhere,and  this  I  had  begun  to  do.  VUW  elected  to  place  a  freeze  on  personal  chairs,announced  it  in  1982  and,  effective  from  the  following  year,  it  stayed  in  placeuntil 1991, and so any advance could only come with a move. The impact of myinfarct and heart surgery put an end to any thought of move, as I was no longereligible for the essential insurance covers that would be associated with reloca-tion  within  or  beyond  NZ;  I  settled  to  the  knowledge  that  my  career  was  to  be73 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistintimately linked with VUW for the remainder of my working life. 1981 had seenmajor restructuring of Departments with the autocratic Head being replaced by anelected Chairperson (limited term appointment) with an Executive that comprisedthe Professors and one representative of the sub-professorial staff. In Chemistry,the Chairperson (masculine and feminine were displaced and now the title ‘Chair’is deemed sufficient!) was Dr. Stuart Smedley, a physical chemist. This significantchange marked the beginning of a reorganization of the NZ universities during theensuing decade, as illustrated by, e.g. each offering its own postdoctoral fellow-ships. As my medical advisors had given a prognosis of five years survival post-surgery were I lucky, I was faced with a rapid change in lifestyle that needed to beeffective. I simply had to become more efficient and more selective in what I didso as to gain more quality time with the family, and this I did.In the summer of 1984 I was approached by two of my compatriots from DSIR,Neil Milestone and Graeme Gainsford, to see if I would be willing to accept nomi-nation to the NZIC 2nd Vice-Presidential role. That year, the Wellington Branchhad  the  customary  right  to  make  such  a  nomination,  which  meant  a  three-yearcommitment  to  the  Institute  if  I  was  elected.  Having  been  merely  a  year  post-coronary and with serious concerns about the work level, I was not easy to per-suade. However, my former roles with NZIC had been more than worthwhile and,after some serious discussions and considerable thought, I acceded to the requestand was elected unopposed (the tradition). I have never regretted the decision, asit marked the beginnings of what has now been 27 years of continuous service tothe profession of chemistry by way of the national New Zealand organization inone guise or another; it has also provided much personal satisfaction. The rolestook me through the Vice-Presidencies to President for the 1986-1987 year with aworkload that was shared by one of the Chemistry secretaries, who attended to theentire (and significant) correspondence that was needed, much done on Saturdays.The presidential year took me to Japan for the first time. I was the NZIC observerat the 1987 planning meeting for the 1989 Honolulu pan-Pacific Chemical SocietyCongress that was named Pacifichem at that Tokyo meeting. It kept me involved asthe convener of the Young Scholars Selection Panel. NZ and Australia were admit-ted as full partners in 1990 but more of that later.During 1984, Victoria advised staff that it would fund a strictly limited num-ber  of  three-year  postdoctoral  positions  –  no  more  than  two  or  three  across  alldisciplines. The  selection  of  the  projects  for  funding  was  to  be  made  from  rec-ommendations placed by Departments. This feature has remained, although therehas been a marked tightening of the criteria and the type of work that fits to theaccountability regimes of the 21st century. In any event, Stuart Smedley solicitedproposals from chemistry staff and invited those who had so done to attend forinterview with those of the Departmental Executive not involved. I was fortunate74 -A Young Family, a Career, and Momentumin having my proposal referred, via the Faculty, to the VUW selection committeeand subsequently funded. Robin Ferrier was also a contender but he disputed theDepartmental decision and, I gathered later, took his concerns to the Faculty andperhaps higher.The fruitful times with Barry and Cliff in the laboratory saw the first of thejointly  published  papers  with  Peter  Stang48  of  that  valuable  and  viable  21  yearcollaboration. This work has had many successes and given much enjoyment and,as Peter Garratt of London’s University College put it on one of my visits: Themethylenecycloproparenes have been good to you. So it was that my proposal fora postdoctoral fellow was for further study of the cycloproparenes. Unlike manyorganizations, VUW itself called for applications to the areas chosen, ranked themand  then  sought  the  academic’s  approval  to  make  an  offer  to  the  person  it  hadselected. The best of the chemistry applicants was Simon Buckland, a graduatingPhD chemist from London’s City University. He had a wide range of skills thatimpressed, was offered and accepted the post, and joined me in February 1985. Hestayed for more than two years, became engaged and married a New Zealanderduring  his  tenure,  and  left  for  a  position  with  DSIR’s  Chemistry  Division.  Hisresearches  led  to  some  ten  publications  that  appeared  between  1986  and  1990.After the mandatory report was submitted to the Scholarships Committee, its thenconvener (and subsequent University Chancellor), Prof. Tim Beaglehole, saw meto tell me that since this man had done so much good work I could not possiblyneed  another  postdoctoral  …..  and  I  did  not  get  funding  for  another  until  1993when Mark Cooney joined me from Larry Scott’s lab.The  time  after  the  1983  surgery  until  1985  was  spent  coming  to  terms  withteaching and research, and retaining good health. I did a minimum of travelling,supervised four Honours students and saw Cliff and Barry through to completion.Of the Honours students, Anna de Raadt gained a 1st–class degree and went on toPhD, not with me but with Robin Ferrier. During this time and until 1989, my sur-geon required that I see him on an annual basis for a check-up. Always the progno-sis remained unchanged – if lucky, I might live for another five years. From about1985, his daughter was taking chemistry at VUW and much of the consultationtime was taken up discussing her progress and the prospects of subsequent gradu-ate  study;  she  completed  an  Honours  degree  with  my  colleague,  David  Weath-erburn. I maintained the collaboration with Peter Stang and developed that withYitzhak Apeloig, to the extent that our computational work continued into the 21stcentury. Peter visited NZ for the first time in 1984 to attend the 7th IUPAC PhysicalOrganic Chemistry meeting in Auckland, which marked the major contributionsof retiring Professor Peter de la Mare. He travelled much of the country giving lec-tures and spent time in Wellington prior to our both attending and presenting work.By the beginning of the next year, 1985, I was encouraged to do all the things that I75 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistwanted to do and to return to full participation in all things chemical. VUW fundedconferences outside NZ only once every three years and, as I had not been to aconference since the Las Vegas ACS meeting in 1981, I elected to attend ISNA-5in St Andrews (Scotland) that summer. Yitzhak Apeloig and Mord Rubin at Israel’sTechnion were keen to meet with me and so my time was extended to allow fortwo weeks in Israel under the auspices of the Technion Vice-Presidential Fund.So it was that in the summer of 1985 I travelled to to Tel Aviv (amid the delaysimposed by El Al the day after the aircraft hijack in Beirut, Lebanon). The timeat  the Technion  was  very  valuable  and  allowed  me  to  cement  the  collaborativerelationship with Yitzhak. With visits to Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and the WeizmannInstitute, the entire time was both chemically stimulating and personally satisfy-ing. A bonus was the conducted tour of Jerusalem that I was given by Shalom Sarel(Professor  of  Pharmaceutical  Chemistry  at  the  Hebrew  University  and  1960-64President  of  the  Israel  Chemical  Society  who,  incidentally,  still  attended  Israelichemistry meetings in 2009, his 92nd year). Shalom had visited Wellington in thelate 1970s while on leave at ANU and, as an amateur archaeologist, he gave me aspectacular tour that included some of the underground excavations, with accessand egress through a synagogue and a home! Return to London was followed bythe ISNA meeting that was chaired by the late Charles Rees with Peter Garratt assecretary. Not only were many of the attendees known to me (Vogel and Prinzbachwere featured speakers) but the meeting provided an opportunity to get to knowother  stalwarts  of  novel  aromatic  chemistry.  My  attendance  there  was  followedby an invitation to speak at the 1989 meeting in Japan and the beginning of an as-sociation with the ISNA movement that lasted through ISNA-12 also in Japan, bythen Novel Aromatics rather than Nonbenzenoid Aromatics.76 -Chemistry and ServiceA Postdoc for Planar StrainSimon Buckland arrived in Wellington in February 1985 and, as much of his PhDstudy  had  centred  on  photochemical  reactions,  he  began  his  programme  by  at-tempting to synthesize some heterocyclic cycloproparenes. This did not eventu-ate but he was able to trap the diradical intermediates that were involved in the3H-pyrazole  photolyses.  With  Cliff  in  the  throes  of  completing  his  degree,  thetime was right for Simon to move to the newly discovered exocyclic alkenes. Thestrong and highly unpleasant odour of cyclopropabenzene (27) was such that theonly work with it in Salt Lake City had been limited to my own synthesis of thecompound in 1982. The corresponding naphthalene 36, however, although some-what smelly, provided no such impediment and aspects of our programme involv-ing derivatives of 36 were carried out in Utah by PhD student Qiu Mei.A detailed study of the alkylidenecycloproparenes was of such fascination tous because of the strain imposed to the nucleus by the three-membered ring, withplanarization of the molecular framework and the expectation of charge donationto, and withdrawal from, the aromatic core, dependent on the nature of the exocy-clic substituents (Scheme 22). The schematicsummary has appeared before in various guis-es.  Simon  began  his  contribution  by  extend-ing  Cliff’s  initial  syntheses  to  the  first  of  thepush-pull benzocalicenes and benzotriahepta-fulvalenes as depicted by 65-68 in the benzeneseries; Qiu Mei repeated the experiments in the naphthalene series and prepared69  as  well. These  compounds  clearly  showed  that  the  cycloproparene  could  beannulated  with  both  donating  (cycloheptatrienylidene,  cf.  66,  67)  and  electronwithdrawing  (cyclopentadienylidene,  65)  moieties. We  studied  spectrochemical,spectroelectrochemical  and  photoelectron  properties  of  these  compounds  usingthe  facilities  available  not  only  in  Salt  Lake  City  but  also,  in  Eugene,  Oregonand Washington DC. The behaviour of the range of compounds towards electro-philes and nucleophiles, oxidizing and reducing agents and other general reagentsfollowed and a short review on the area was published in Accounts of ChemicalResearch by Peter and me.51 By this time, Simon Buckland was reaching the end77 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistof his time at VUW and I wasfortunate  in  having  the  fund-ing  for  a  1987  Teaching  As-sistant. However, there was noVUW student qualified and in-terested in the position and theproblem  became  one  of  find-ing an appropriate appointee.By chance, a student from Fudan University in Shanghai, Qi (Chi) Lu, wroteto see if there was any possibility of studying for PhD in Wellington. As Fudan isone of the oldest and most prestigious of China’s C9 League universities (China’sIvy  League  equivalent),  competence  seemed  likely  and  the  references  bore  thisout. Chi accepted the teaching post, fully aware that he would need to communi-cate effectively in English, and he arrived in late 1986. He studied English hard,improved his ability with it and took on the teaching work, but not without trepida-tion. His chemical knowledge was far superior to his NZ peers in the laboratoryand  he  slowly  came  to  grips  with  us  and  we  him.  During  the  Chinese  CulturalRevolution he and his family were moved forcibly to Tibet and he was required tostudy music. I was astonished at how quickly he gained his scientific knowledgeafter he was allowed to return to Shanghai. However, the transition from the rigidcontrols of home to the open society of NZ overwhelmed him and he was found tohave taken clothing for his sister from one of Wellington’s stores. The then Chair-man of Chemistry, John Tomlinson, provided outstanding support and rallied theDepartment behind Chi. I provided the Court with a statement, attended for hishearing, and found the Bench to be occupied by the only Wellington judge that Iknew. Chi received a small fine, never to err again. This did not mean that the Chi-nese Embassy let him off. Staff members (presumably their secret service) weresent to the university in search of him and we responded by putting Chi in a securelocation. I made an appointment with the Embassy’s First Secretary Lin Xinglan,and sought to smooth matters so that Chi could continue his studies. The one vividrecollection of that meeting that I retain is that had the slight Mrs. Lin decided Iwas not to leave, I would never have got past her! Chi stayed, and I have kept theNew Year card the Lin’s sent at the end of 1987 to remind me of that auspiciousmeeting. To the best of my knowledge, Chi was the first Chinese national to studyfor a higher degree at VUW, certainly in chemistry and the sciences.One of the things that we had wanted to do in extending our exocyclic alkenechemistry  was  to  make  meaningful  measurements  of  the  polarities  of  the  com-pounds. However, there was no suitable cell available for the small quantities ofthe  compounds  that  we  had.  The  original  Guggenheim  procedure  had  used  thenow  impractical  100  mL  of  ca.  0.1  M  solutions  of  the  compounds,  and  conse-78 -Chemistry and Servicequently a miniature capacitance cell had to be designed. Our then highly skilledglassblower, Ian Crighton, rose to the challenge, obtained the remaining supplyof small variable capacitors from DSIR and built two cells(see  opposite)  with  which  readings  were  taken  from  ca.  2mL  of  0.05  –  0.15  M  benzene  solutions.  Impedance  read-ings were taken with the cell open and closed (done by ro-tating the glass socket spanner shown protruding above thecap) and the necessary refractive index measurements werefrom an Abbe refractometer. The cell gave results for knowncompounds that lay within 5% of the literature values, andfor  every  alkylidenecycloproparene  whose  dipole  momentwas determined, a standard was measured before and after-wards.  Eventually,  the  dipole  moments  of  almost  90  com-pounds were obtained in this way. It was Chi Lu who began expanding the seriesof compounds and he made the first dipole measurements on the known and newcompounds. In 1987, when he started this work, we had no personal computers,but my good friend and physical chemistry colleague, Jim Pearce, lent us his HP75C programmed microprocessor to make the mathematical transformations. Ourinitial report covered the dipole moments of the then known compounds and thiswas followed by one on the ambiphilicity of the system.52 It had been our intentionto compare the polarities of cyclopentadienylidene and cycloheptatrienylidene 65and 67. Indeed, the dipole moment data on 65 (R = H; μ 2.6 D) and 67 (R = H; μ 1.2D) could easily be taken as supporting cyclopentadienyl anion and cycloheptatrie-nyl cation (tropylium ion) character, respectively. However, further computationalresults from Apeloig were convincing in having both dipoles caused by electrondonation from the cycloproparene core; the seven-membered ring was sustainingan increase in electron density. Thus, we turned our attention tothe well recognised electron donor, N,N-dimethylaminophenyl.Chi made the benzo and naphtho derivatives 70 and 71 in shortorder and recorded their dipoles as 3.0 and 2.2 D, respectively.The ability of the cycloproparene to sustain both positive andnegative charge was clear, especially when the effects of UV-vis data and nitrogen quaternization were considered. The dualnature of the cycloproparene was confirmed by subsequent experimental, crystal-lographic and computational study. I collected my first Recognition of Researchaward and a DSc degree from Victoria University that year.The year of 1987 was notable for several other reasons: the textbook OrganicPhotochemistry underwent revision for a second edition (published in 1988), I wasPresident of the NZIC, and we had visits from Al Padwa from Emory University,Atlanta  (with  whom  Tony  Woolhouse  had  spent  a  period  of  leave  from  DSIR)79 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistand Merle Battiste. Merle spent his sabbatical at Canterbury as an Erskine Fellowwith Jim Coxon as bequest funds have always allowed Canterbury to attract moreinternational  visitors  than  Victoria.  Jim  had  spent  his  first  leave  with  Merle  inFlorida in the 1970s after discussing the U of F and Merle with me. Merle’s firstvisit to NZ was all the more memorable as he met his (subsequent) second wife,Jan, while in Christchurch. While both of these occasions were stimulating in theirown right, a third visitor sought permission to come and meet with me. He distin-guished himself with Margaret, becoming known as ‘the vegetarian’ – he only toldme of his dietary needs on the way home to stay with us with a lamb-based dinneralmost ready! He was a crystallographer, Roland Boese by name, and his visit her-alded not just 20 years of collaboration but a strong lifelong friendship with himand his family. He arrived from Essen in Germany en route to the InternationalUnion of Crystallography meeting in Western Australia, gave us a great lecture,and asked me if he might have some of our small-ring compounds as he wished tofocus his crystallographic study towards strained molecules. Our samples requir-ing structural characterization were on his desk before he got back home! What hisanalyses showed us was that, while the aryl substituents of 71 were twisted out ofplane, the extent of the distortion was much less than in comparable compounds– the absence of pendant hydrogen atoms adjacent to the ring fusion sites allowedfor the aryl rings to be closer to planarity with a twist angle of ca. 28o rather thanthe ca. 45o of diarylethenes. The expectation of small twist angles had had us seekmonoaryl derivatives and the synthesis of 72 had much in its favour.Chi Lu appeared in my office one morning to seek advice on how to get hisglassware  clean  which,  despite  much  washing,  glowed  green! This  was  not  hisinability,  rather  the  exceptional  fluorescence  of  72  that  he  had  just  prepared.  Ittriggered  a  further  aspect  of  our  study,  namely  an  examina-tion  of  the  absorption/emission  characteristics  of  the  alkyli-dene compounds. In that era, VUW had no fluorescence spec-trophotometers  and  there  was  nothing  available  to  allow  usto study the excited states involved. However, fluorescence measurements weremade using equipment at the Otago Medical School in Wellington’s Public Hos-pital, and we enlisted the services of DSIR’s Hugh Melluish, NZ’s leader in thefield of photophysical measurement and a member of the IUPAC Commission onPhotochemistry. His work provided a reliable absolute quantum yield (Φ72 = 96 inboth cyclohexane and acetonitrile) and led to the conclusion that the exceptionalfluorescence  was  due  to  a  twisted  internal  charge  transfer  state. The  compoundand its potential as a laser dye were placed under provisional patent in 1988 by theUniversity at the instigation of Ted Harvey. In those days, the recognition of intel-lectual property rights and the facility to promote their exploitation had not beenthought of in most academic institutions and it advanced no further. Multinationals80 -Chemistry and Serviceoverseas with minimal exposure in New Zealand were interested in having accessto the compound but no one was willing to provide financial support to an aca-demic institution here to advance the study. The data were published subsequentlyin the chemical literature.53That same year of 1987 saw Sarah Russell begin her PhD studies as my lastUniversity  Grants  Committee  postgraduate  scholar.  Her  work  was  focussed  onour continuing exploration of structural types carrying a fused cyclopropene ring.Specifically, she studied nonbenzenoid cycloproparenes and was able to providethe  sole  air-stable  cyclopropa[10]annulene,  73,  whilstexploiting much three-membered ring chemistry in poly-cyclic  assemblies.  Chlorine-containing  73  was  easilyreduced  to  parent  cyclopropa[10]annulene,  a  moleculesynthesized  by Vogel  using  the  Billups  route  many  years  earlier. An  interestingconsequence of her work was the π-facial selectivity of the chloro-substituted tri-cyclic diene 74 recorded in, for example, carbene additions. Following a lecture atImperial College in London late in 1991, Henry Rezpa was keen to perform somecalculations and they led to a Perkin Communication that was prepared over threedays by circulating the draft manuscript via e-mail from Wellington to London toEssen and back; electronic mail had certainly made its impact!Service in New Zealand and BeyondMy year as President of the New Zealand Institute of Chemistry started on October1, 1986. At that time, the Institute was a fully professional organization requiringappropriate qualification in the subject to gain membership and job advertisementshad (traditionally) carried the qualification in chemistry needed for the job in ques-tion. All of the various professional demands of qualification and registration weredealt with by long standing Registrar, Denis Hogan (1927-2006). However, soci-ety and professionalism were beginning to change and much of my year was spentholding the two factions of the organization at bay. On the one hand, there existedthose  who  felt  that  professionalism  and  all  its  ramifications  had  to  be  retainedto ensure that standards were maintained and the profession appropriately recog-nised. On the other hand, a more vocal group foresaw a decline in membership, adeparture from professional needs, and a requirement for the organization to be-come more open. Membership and number predictions dominated and the debatewas rampant. For my part, I saw the environment changing but felt that it was toosoon for NZIC to make major change. In fact, it did not until after Denis had re-signed as Registrar some while later. The growth in membership that deregulationhad predicted did not eventuate and current numbers are somewhat lower than theywere more than 20 years ago. As 1987 President, I was required to visit all of the81 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistNZIC’s six Branches and lecture at their main and outlying centres, ten lecturesin all, and I did this giving an overview of small rings in chemistry. As for mostincumbents  to  the  position,  making  these  visits  was  the  highlight  of  my  year.  Iwas shown generous hospitality and everyone went out of their way for me. I wasgiven tours of the Ivan-Watkins-Dow plant at New Plymouth that had the noto-riety of being the last site to make 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T, NZ’s cottage acid industryproducing hydrochloric and sulfuric acids as Scientific Services Laboratory Ltd. inNapier and run by Gerry Hussher, Nelson’s Cawthron Institute and Invercargill’saluminium smelter at Tiwai Point. In those days Institute Presidents did not stayon the Council for a subsequent year and the end of my tenure provided more timefor other things.What I will always associate with my 1987 NZIC visit to Invercargill and Ti-wai Point is the fact that it was in mid-winter with a howling gale blowing fromthe west, difficult to walk against and chilling to the bone. After taking the trainto Dunedin and meeting the main Otago Branch members, I was back in Welling-ton for a day or so before making my first visit to Japan. The transition from thecold southernmost point of NZ to Tokyo’s July heat and humidity was somethingmore than dramatic! As NZIC President and an academic, I was the one chosento represent the organization as an observer at a Pacific Basin Societies’ PlanningMeeting for the 1989 Congress to be held in Hawaii. I had know of this meetingsufficiently far in advance to be able to set up a meeting with Prof. Renji Okazakiat  Tokyo  University  as  he,  too,  had  become  involved  with  cycloproparenes.  Incorrespondence, he asked me to allow him to set visits to a couple of other univer-sities and so I also attended Waseda and Osaka. The visit with Okazaki initiatedmuch correspondence and personal contact, and Renji came to Wellington in 1998.Waseda University provided my first experience of a Japanese private institutionand the formalities that go with such visits. After my lecture a selected group ofgraduate students each presented a summary of the research they were involvedwith, but this was decidedly formal and in front of the Faculty Dean, the Head ofSchool and several chemistry staff. As one with no experience of the country orits customs, it was not at all clear if I should simply thank the student or questionhim/her. I elected to put questions, found the session to take more than the allot-ted time, and secured a place in history! For Osaka, I was met at Tokyo RailwayStation by Ichiro Murata and taken to Kyoto by train where I spent a Sunday atthe end of the hurricane season – and got thoroughly drenched seeing the magnifi-cent sights – even the Shinkansen (bullet trains) were cancelled by the ferociousdownpour. Osaka University was reached easily by bus on the Monday morningand the discussions and lecture there was the first of many years of interaction withMurata-san. The late Monday afternoon bullet train had me in Tokyo well aheadof the morning committee meeting and, as is so common with our Japanese hosts,82 -Chemistry and ServiceI was met at the station and escorted to the Hilltop Hotel in Ochanomizu, close tothe Chemical Society of Japan building.The Pacific Basin Societies meeting was a significant affair. The three organ-izing  societies  were  the American  (ACS),  Canadian  (CSC)  and  Japanese  (CSJ)chemical societies, with the last as the host society. Michinori Oki, a Professor ofChemistry from Tokyo University and former CSJ President was congress chair-man. Both NZIC and RACI had had observers for the 1984 Pan-Pacific meeting,and so we were invited in the same guise for the 1989 event. The meeting was heldin the new CSJ building and the banner entry board welcomed all the delegates byname; Bob Breakspear was my RACI counterpart and President of that organiza-tion, and we were accompanied by Sang Up Choi (Korea) and Zhand Dehe (Chi-na). The last two took little part in the proceedings and were not further involved.The morning session was dominated by the search for an appropriate, easily recog-nisable name for the congress and it was the Japanese hosts that proposed the namePacifichem; it could not be bettered, was unanimously accepted, and is now knownto almost every chemist the world over. The various discussions that shaped thenature  of  the  1989  meeting  were  wide  ranging  and  open  to  all.  However,  at  anearly break, Guy Dutton (1923-1997), Head of the Canadian delegation, took measide to remind me that I was but an observer, that I had no voting rights, and thatit was inappropriate of me to attempt to contribute. Those who know me will rec-ognize that such comments would never win me over. Indeed, I took precisely theopposite tack, contributed to my limit and came away as Chairman of the YoungScholars Fund that was set to bring some 25 young chemistry professionals fromemerging countries to the 1989 meeting.But the comments and the meeting itself ran deeper than that with me. To me,it was clear that if Pacifichem was to survive as a truly Pacific Basin meeting thenits organization had to involve more than three northern hemisphere societies. Ispent much of the non-meeting time in Tokyo with the American delegation, NormLeBel (1931-2003) and Chris Pruitt in particular. Norm, a Chemistry Professor atWayne State University for more than four decades, is regarded as the ‘Father ofPacifichem’ as he was involved from its inception to his death; we became firmfriends. Chris, on the other hand, was an administrator par excellence and becameCongress Manager for the 1995 and 2000 meetings. They both recognised the needto expand the organizing committee and saw involvement from Australasia as theonly way forward. Early suggestions were for one member selected from betweenthe  two  societies,  but  that  would  have  had  little  chance  of  success  in  any  earlyinvolvement. I left Tokyo with the view that an increase in the organizing societiesfrom three was critical and, as NZ is but a small country, the expansion needed toencompass both NZ and Australia. Over the next two years, having gained NZICapproval, I made approaches to the RACI in Melbourne and secured an agreement83 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistfor that organization also to be an organizing society of Pacifichem were the ACS,CSC and CSJ willing to accept us. Securing the support of the ACS was easy asNorm was all for the expansion and he persuaded the Canadians for me. The moredifficult task was to convince the Japanese that an increase in the size of the struc-ture would serve them well in the future. Norm LeBel and Chris Pruitt were gen-erous in ensuring that my time at Pacifichem 1989 was spent meeting individualswho could further our cause. They ensured that I left appreciating that Pacifichemextended beyond chemistry and national boundaries to international collaboration,cooperation and a demonstration of how peoples could live and work alongsideone another in peace.I mentioned earlier that I was an invited speaker at ISNA-6 in Toyonaka, Osakain 1989. I am sure that this came about from my 1987 interactions with Renji Oka-zaki, his colleague Hiizu Iwamura (then at Tokyo University), and Ichiro Murata.Murata was Conference Chairman and Iwamura its Treasurer. Returning to Japanto attend that meeting provided the chance to meet with Renji again in a more re-laxed atmosphere than the conference – a fact that has been a feature of my career,initially because conference leave overseas was only available every three years.This I did, but I also spent time discussing the Pacifichem issues with CSJ staff inTokyo and then, much more seriously, at a meeting with Michinori Oki during theISNA meeting and some months ahead of ‘his’ Pacifichem 1989. I had been toldthat Michinori Oki was of Samurai warrior descent and that was entirely believ-able from his tall solid stature and voice. My recollections of the meeting are thathe was not too enthusiastic in expanding the organization as Australasia had fewchemists and would be unable to contribute at an appropriate level. Nonetheless,we concluded with a favourable agreement and, in late 1990, after the post-con-gress ‘wrap-up’ meeting, I was informed that the membership bid had succeeded.Both  NZIC  and  RACI  have  been  involved  continuously  ever  since  and  Korea(2005) and China (2010) joined subsequently. NZIC needed look no further thanme for a willing Pacifichem representative. I was elected to the role in 1990 andattended the 1991 meeting to sign the agreement for Pacifichem 1995. I held theposition until after my retirement (and inability to secure medical travel insurancefor the US) in 2004. Participation at Pa-cifichem climbed from 1989 through the1995 and 2000 meetings for it to becomethe  largest  chemistry  event  worldwide.There were well in excess of 11,000 reg-istrants  for  Pacifichem  2010  and  some11,500 presentations. Those meetings in-volved a lot of hard work, none less thanthat done by Chris Pruitt and Stan Israel84 -Chemistry and Service(1944–2004), who joined the group with me in 1991. The pair had typed reportsand programme proposals in everyone’s room by the time we woke up, having notcompleted the typing and photocopying until well after midnight. The committeemeeting in December 2001, at which the 2005 agreement was signed, was a cleardemonstration of Pacifichem unity, being just two months after the shock of 9/11.I  am  left  with  many  memories  of  this  work,  of  the  terms  of  Michinori  Oki,Norm LeBel and Shinji Murai as Congress Chairman for 1989, 2000 and 2005,respectively,  and  of  friendships  strengthened,  especially  that  with  Paul  Walter,congress treasurer supérieur and an ACS president during that time. Indeed, at the1996 signing ceremony meeting Paul Walter was President-elect of the ACS andRon Breslow, of Columbia University in New York City, was the then Presidentclose to the end of his term of office. I was more than aware of Ron’s work in thesmall ring area of organic chemistry and that Merle Battiste had been his first PhDstudent with Bob Grubbs moving to Ron from Florida for his PhD in the mid-late1960s;  we  had  not  met  and  the  opportunity  was  more  than  enjoyable.  The  sadloss of Norm LeBel in 2003 was superseded only by the untimely death of StanIsrael in 2004; he was, by then, a very close friend. In fact, hehad  wanted  me  to  transfer  to  Texas  State  University  in  SanMarcos, where monies for research would be provided withoutapplications. Such a move from the comparatively low salarybase of NZ would have meant major mortgage commitments,a feature I could not take on. As for the congresses themselves,I gather that I hold some sort of record in asking the waitingstaff  at  Sheraton  Waikiki  to  serve  me  dinner  so  that  I  couldleave within 30 minutes, and also in setting judges on the Stu-dent Poster Award trail with minimal criteria to follow. I wasgiven the duty only the day before the competition began and,as judges could only be gained at the last minute, the simplest of criteria, visualimpact of the poster had to apply; the number of young lady winners proved high!I lost Christmas Day 2000 as the only flight I could get from Honolulu was onChristmas  Eve  crossing  the  date  line  and  arriving  on  Boxing  Day.  Peter  Stangjoined the American delegation for the 2005 meeting and had to carry Stan’s loadas well as his own for the last year.Stan Israel 1944-2004More Chemistry and Some RecognitionI have described Chi Lu’s discovery of the highly fluorescent cycloproparene 72and Victoria placing the results under patent. He continued his studies after myNZIC Presidential year and laid the foundation of the invited lecture to ISNA-6.A substantial component of his PhD thesis work covered the synthesis of a large85 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistrange  of  exocyclic  methylene  compounds  and  then  recording  a  range  of  phys-icochemical properties including the IR and laser Raman spectra, absorption andemission spectra, the molecular polarities and the 1H and 13C NMR chemical shiftdata. A range of the compounds were subjected to crystallographic study by Bo-ese and his students and, as was noted earlier, the twist of the diaryl substitutedderivatives  is  a  mere  28o,  while  the  monoaryl-substituted  compounds  have  theexocyclic bound aromatic ring essentially coplanar with the cycloproparene core;fluorenylidene compound 65 is almost flat. Chi Lu completed his study by synthe-sizing dimer 75 from the C1 carbene derivedfrom  our  first  cycloproparene  29,  in  higheryield than recorded in the literature and thenexplored the chemistry of dicyclopropanaph-thalene 76, again prepared in better yield thanformerly recorded. Comparisons and correla-tions of the structural parameters of the threehydrocarbons show the geometry of 76 to lie between those of 27 and 36. Sadly,we were never able to transform 76 into its corresponding anion and provide exo-cyclic alkenes of either one or both of the three-membered rings; dialkylidene de-rivatives could have provided extended push-pull systems as illustrated by, e.g. 77.Two of Roland’s students came to our NZ labs over our summer months, fore-runners  of  the  now  common  German  exchange  students  that  Jim  Johnston  hasregularly.  In  the  late  1980s  my  students  from  Essen  brought  their  own  monieswith them as VUW had nothing in place, though I was able to glean some summerresearch funds to assist a little.During 1988 one of the most dedicated of Honours students worked with me.Janet Bridle set to work attempting to generate cyclopropa-fused furans, a pieceof work that provided interesting chemistry but not the desired compounds. It wasbrought  to  a  publication  state  by  Dr.  Eva  Lovett,  who  was  here  on  leave  fromPetrolite Corporation of St. Louis (Missouri) in 1989. Janet gained a IIi Honoursdegree, spent time in the UK and married and, most distressingly, developed ToxicShock Syndrome from which she never recovered and has been under continuousmedical supervision for many years. Before her debilitating illness she was alwayskeen to hear of developments, even thought seriously of returning for PhD studyand was a joy to have had as a member of the team. During her year, Richard Nei-dlein visited NZ under the auspices of NZIC. It was the first of several visits that hemade and our discussions were always profitable. However, Richard distinguishedhimself in more ways than he might have wished and caused an element of notori-ety in Wellington, and especially at our home where he was supposed to stay; hisunannounced travelling companion was a female PhD student.As it was then six years since my last sabbatical, 1988 denoted the maximum86 -Chemistry and Serviceaccumulation of leave entitlement. By this time, our eldest son, Mark, was in thelatter part of his school education and, with public examinations, it was impracti-cal to take leave as a family overseas. My programme involved an October returnto Utah for a few days with Peter Stang, visits to various places in the US, and thenon to London and another lecture tour of Germany and Switzerland. This was fol-lowed by a return to the Southern Hemisphere to give a plenary lecture at the Mel-bourne Synthesis meeting in early December and then the bulk of the summer atMonash University carrying out some flash vacuum pyrolysis studies with RogerBrown. The northern lecture tour was useful in several ways. Firstly, it providedmore time with Peter to settle future directions of the cycloproparene work faceto face, and that was coupled with a desire that I try to spend a longer period therethe following year. I saw Al Padwa at Emory University as he had encouraged thevisit when he was in Wellington the previous year, and that meeting changed thedirection of my ‘spare time’ for most of my remaining career. By 1988, Al was theSeries Editor of the JAI Press texts on organic chemistry and he was keen for meto take on the editorship of a volume on strained organic molecules. The invitationwas tantalizing, not least because he was so adept and prolific in his own chemistryto think me up to the task. Despite the pressure Al applied, I promised to give thematter serious consideration and over the following months did just that. Eventu-ally, I wrote and accepted, giving an undertaking to have the first volume in theseries published in early 1991.In Germany, Richard Neidlein had put together a three week lecturing schedulebut it was by no means a circular tour, rather a trekking back and forth across thecountry from Essen in the West, to Regensburg in the East, Hamburg in the Northand then to Geneva in the south. The train travel became tedious and a stretch ofrailway line near Mannheim reminded me of Jerome K. Jerome’s book Three Menin a Boat, but rather than repeatedly seeing a bun it was washing on a clothes line!Nonetheless, the travel had a bright spot. On the sector between Cologne and Es-sen my compartment was shared by another chemist and north country English-man. He was the then President of the Royal Society of Chemistry, Sir Jack Lewis(now Baron Lewis of Nownham). We had an exhilarating discussion, brought to aclose all too soon by arrival in Essen.The  meetings  that  Neidlein  provided  for  me  were  by  far  the  most  compre-hensive  I  have  ever  had.  Thus,  I  met,  and  subsequently  came  to  know,  KlausHafner  in  Darmstadt,  renewed  my  acquaintance  with  Klaus  Müllen,  then  at  theJohannes Gutenberg University in Mainz, that has evolved into a true friendship. Imet Armin de Meijere in Hamburg, renewed my 1985 ISNA-5 acquaintance withNeuenschwander in Bern, and made my first visit to the Max Plank Institute forCoal  Research  in  Mulheim. Visits  to  my  well  established  contacts  and  collabo-rators  were  also  included. My  last  visit  was  to  Heinz  Dürr  in  Saarbrücken  and,87 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistwith a day and a half in hand before my flight to Australia, I returned to Mainz tohave dinner with Klaus Müllen and discuss future interactions. As my departurewas the next evening, I was able to meet Rolf and Angelica Rehberg at FrankfurtAirport when they returned from an overseas holiday. It was a happy reunion, ourfirst since they left Gainesville in 1967. Rolf spent his entire career working forHoechst AG  (it  became Aventis  after  its  merger  with  Rhône-Poulenc  in  1999),initially in Frankfurt and as a senior representative for the company in Japan for aperiod that covered my earlier visit to Germany. It was the beginning of infrequentbut enjoyable times with them. He moved to Cologne after being relocated to theKnapsack plant, which I visited in 1991 to see the 500 L scale diazotizations usedin the dyestuffs industry.Once in Australia, I spent a few days at the University of Melbourne stayingwith Martin and Cathy Banwell. The first couple of days provided time out afterthe long flight and then it was the RACI Victoria Section 13th Annual SynthesisSymposium at Melbourne University on Friday, December 2. The meeting has be-come a focal point of the RACI Victorian calendar and continues to attract fullrepresentation from the region. The 80+ registrants were stimulated by the openingplenary from Prof. Bernd Giese, at the time a colleague of Hafner’s in Darmstadtand already in Australia when I had visited there just a few weeks earlier. The lastmorning lecture was from Prof. Frank Bachelor (Calgary, Canada) and I had thepleasure  of  presenting  the  closing  plenary  Methylenecycloproparenes:  Strainedand Polar Aromatics. There were about a dozen posters that were judged duringthe session breaks and after my lecture. The student prizes were sponsored by TheAustralian Journal of Chemistry and presented by its then editor, John Zdysiewicz(John Z; 1943-2010); that was the first time that I met this remarkable and humbleman. The time at MU served me well as discussions with Martin, David Kelly andDon Cameron influenced some of our subsequent work.On my first Sunday in Melbourne, I moved south of the Yarra River to stay withRoger Brown and his wife Mary in their home in the suburb of Prahran. Roger hadarranged a university apartment for when Margaret and the boys came to join meat the end of the NZ school year, but it was not immediately available. I had thepleasure of sharing the Brown home for a little over a week when we commutedsouth  to  Clayton  and  the  Monash  campus  each  day  and  I  slowly  acclimatised,not  just  to  the Australian  summer  but  to  a  campus  that  was  comparable  in  sizeto that of the University Florida. The first task was to finalise my manuscript ofthe third review on the cycloproparenes and get it off to Josef Michl, then editorof  Chemical  Reviews,  and  this  I  did.  David  Black  had  moved  from  Monash  toSydney by this time but the summer gave me ample opportunity to interact withRoy Jackson (another Lancastrian who held the Organic Chair), Ian Rae, DavidCollins, Syd Middleton (who had spent a leave with Robin Ferrier in Wellington)88 -Chemistry and Serviceand, of course, Frank Eastwood. I say ‘of course’ as it was the pairing of Frank andRoger that had established Monash as the centre for pyrolysis chemistry. My timewas to be spent assessing the behaviour of the simplest of the alkylidenecyclopro-parenes under flash vacuum pyrolytic conditions. The fluorenylidene 65 (Scheme23) and diphenyl 58 derivatives were those chosen as they were available in suf-ficient quantity for study. The pyrolysis work used the very simple, yet especiallyfunctional and well used equipment that Frank and Roger had. Both compoundsgave a series of products, the latter converting into the former by cyclodehydro-genation at 750 oC prior to opening of the three-membered ring and expansion toa series of polycyclic aromatics (Scheme 23). As we were aware of the potentialcarcinogenicity of the products, the work was performed on small scale and it wasnot possible, at that time, to be sure which products we actually had, other thanthe known dibenz[e.k]acephenanthrylene 78. As the years passed, the number ofpolycyclic aromatics with data matching our own, e.g. 79, increased, but it was notuntil 2006, some ten years after Roger had retired from Monash as professor thatthe study appeared in print. It formed a Tetrahedron Letter, for which I receivedsurprisingly generous reviews from its assessors. I had asked Roger to co-authorthe paper but he declined and, in so doing, gave me my only primary publicationas sole author.54Returning to Wellington in late February 1989, I hosted Eva Lovett who hadleave  from  her  St.  Louis  job  as  I  noted  above.  She  was  able  to  bring  the  bicy-clo[4.1.0]hept-1(7)-ene work to a nice conclusion that, subsequently, I was able toincorporate into my Pacifichem ‘89 presentation in the symposium on Strain Ef-fects. However, I needed to think more carefully about the invited lecture I was togive at the August ISNA-6 meeting in Toyonaka, Osaka, and to see if it would bepossible to revisit Peter Stang in Salt Lake City, as he had been encouraging me todo. Sarah Russell and Chi Lu were, by then, sufficiently advanced with their studiesthat my absence late in the year would be non-problematic and so I sought fundingto spend time in Utah ahead of the 1989 Pacific Basin Congress in Honolulu.89 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistIt was a very hectic time for us as by then Margaret had gained her essentialTeacher Training Certificate that she was able to do while teaching part-time. Thisshe had done at Karori’s Samuel Marsden Collegiate School, a job to which shewas encouraged and led into by one of New Zealand’s famed chemical immigrants,Dr. Dora Suuring, then about to leave her role there as the temporary ChemistryTeacher.  Dora  came  to  NZ  after WWII  and,  it  transpires,  had  been  actively  in-volved in the Dutch underground movement providing falsified documents and thelike; she is one of the longest surviving Wellington members of the NZIC as faras I am aware. With her registration and our boys in secondary school, Margarethad become a full-time teacher and accepted the role as Head of Science from thebeginning of 1989. She rose to become Dean of Student Achievement some yearslater, retiring in 2005 as she had been worked to the bone and no longer felt thatshe should keep me in the lifestyle to which I had become accustomed! My timeat  ISNA-6  included  a  visit  to  Okazaki  in Tokyo  before  travelling  to  Osaka  andthen the Post-Conference meeting in Sendai, for which I was also asked to give alecture. However, not being sufficiently familiar with Japan at that time, I declinedthe invitation as, with only a small group by international standards, I did not feelable to deliver two highly relevant first-rate lectures and did not want to deliver thesame one twice, as did others.The author and Emanuel Vogel (1927-2011)ISNA-6 was held in August 1989 in theheat and humidity of the Japanese summer.Simply exiting the air-conditioned environ-ment of the meeting for lunch took me backto  my  time  in  Florida.  The  lectures  werestimulating,  none  less  than  that  by  (nowSir) Harry Kroto on the C60 discovery andsubsequent  study.  However,  the  plenarylectures  and  subsequent  interactions  withFritz  Bickelhaupt,  Fumio  Toda  and,  to  alesser extent, Siegfried Hünig led to ongoing enjoyable chemical and personal in-teractions. Of course, this second visit to Japan extended my appreciation for theculture of the country and my friendship with a number of its people. One of thethings  that  the  ISNA-6  organizers  did  was  to  place  registrants  new  to  Japan  incontact with Osaka chemists who were area members of bilateral societies. Thus, Ireceived a delightful invitation from one Haruyasu Shiota to meet with him at theend of the meeting. I did and we have maintained contact since. We exchange cardsat New Year and have dinner whenever I visit Osaka. His son spent time in ourhome on a visit to New Zealand but, although Haruy has been to NZ as an execu-tive of the Osaka Japan-NZ Society, he has yet to come to Wellington. He recentlyretired from his role as a flavour chemist in Shiono Flavor and Fragrance Co.90 -Chemistry and ServiceThe Osaka meeting provided an opportunity to discuss more chemistry withEd Billups from Rice University, who was also an attendee. In fact, we both wenton to Sendai to be hosted by one of Chemistry’s junior staff, Tadayoshi Morita, ashis English was better than that of TsutomuKumagai.  They  took  us  to  Shiogama  foran  excursion  on  Matsushima  Bay  on  theboat  shown  in  the  photograph.  The  morerelaxed  atmosphere  gave  a  great  oppor-tunity  to  get  to  know  our  Japanese  hostsand explore our common interest. In fact,it was this meeting more than ISNA-6 thataligned me with Koichi Komatsu who haslooked  after  me  in  Japan  on  many  occa-sions – but more of that later.Morita, Billups, Halton & KumagaiBack in NZ, I applied for a Claude McCarthy scholarship as, having gained aNew Zealand DSc, I met the criteria, namely to enable any university staff memberwho is a graduate of a New Zealand university to take leave and travel overseas,other than at the time of their normal entitlement for refresher leave and addition-al to it, to undertake short periods of research in important recent developmentsrelevant to their specialties. Why I raise this is that for the first time I was asked tosubmit a budget for the period, with costing geared to public service rates – some-thing that does not form any part of a university leave scheme. My application wassuccessfully submitted and I spent some six weeks at the University of Utah overNovember-December of 1989. We planned what we could continue to collaborateon, given US funding agencies were becoming more sensitive to the nature of thework involved and Peter less likely to gain support for fused aromatic chemistry. Incontrast, the NZ scene still had no funding for fundamental studies except throughuniversity monies. Funding though the Ministry of Science was being establishedbut it emerged to be only for applied science in areas dictated by the Ministry. Themore important task in SLC was to writeup the studies that had been completedand the time passed quickly with the completion of four manuscripts. These cov-ered the remaining work of Chi Lu in Wellington and that of Lingsheng Song inUtah, which had concentrated on reactions with organometallic reagents. Song’sdeparture left Aileen McNichols as the last researcher in the cycloproparene areain Utah. My departure from SLC to Hawaii was by way of Reno and a visit withLarry Scott at the University of Nevada, my last before his move to Boston Col-lege. I had got to know Larry even better at ISNA-6.At Pacifichem, my oral presentation was in the Symposium on Strain Effects,scheduled for the first full day of the meeting. Almost all of those at the forefrontof the field were present; my range of contacts was extended and the opportunity to91 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistmeet many of those I had not seen for some time arose. The symposium includeda  luncheon  organized  by  Phil  Eaton  (Chicago)  to  which  a  good  number  of  theparticipants were invited. I had run across Phil in passing but this gave us a goodpersonal introduction. This aside, Norm LeBel went out of his way to be my host,introducing me to the working of the conference, and he led me to the conclusionthat the NZ and Australia bid to become formal partners in the organization wouldbe sympathetically heard and, as I have said earlier, it succeeded. The inclusionof  the Australian  and  New  Zealand  chemical  societies  among  those  organizingPacifichem  has  to  be  my  most  significant  contribution  to  NZ  chemistry.  It  hasserved to formalize internationalization, given the profession added visibility andstrengthened ties worldwide. I received a VUW Research Recognition award thatyear as well.The return from the McCarthy Fellowship coincided with Christmas, the newdecade, the expectation that Chi Lu would soon defend his PhD work, and thatSarah (Russell) would have her’s submitted by about the middle of the year – butno prospects of replacements for them. NZ science was undergoing major restruc-turing  and  university  funding,  never  great,  was  suffering  as  academics  had  thegreatest difficulty in obtaining monies from the emerging contestable fund … and,on the personal front, I was advised that my mother was showing increased signsof dementia.The year was comparatively quiet but set to a good start by Chi gaining excel-lent reports from his PhD examiners and performing well at his oral in Februaryof 1990. Had awards been offered and theses graded in that era, I am sure that hewould have collected a distinction and an award. Without doubt, he was the mostproductive PhD student in the Department at that time, and indeed for many years,but that was partly the project and not just him. His demeanour changed and hewas less than happy tying up the ends of his work while waiting for his move fromNZ. In 1990, any return to China would have resulted in serious repercussions forhis 1987 indiscretion and he was very keen to get to the US and work there forsome time. Chi had made contact with Professor J. H. Boyer in the University ofNew Orleans, an expert in fluorescence, who offered to sponsor him for a ‘greencard’. This he did and the time came for Chi’s all important interview at the USembassy in Wellington. His most prodigious hobby was the game of bridge, whichhe played at the Wellington Bridge Club (the largest and most prestigious in thecountry it is claimed). I recall his departing for the interview in trepidation, andhis sheer elation on return – the immigration interview had been conducted by theonly American he knew, his bridge partner! He was granted the green card, wentto New Orleans University and then spent a second postdoctoral at Tulane beforejoining Monsanto in St. Louis (Missouri). When Chi arrived in NZ, he was ada-mant that chemistry was what he had always wanted to study but by the time he92 -Chemistry and Serviceleft this had changed to medicine, and the early period of his time with Monsantowas spent seeking admission to a US medical school. As far as I am aware thisnever happened and he left Monsanto sometime after 1996 and may well now beback in China, but I have lost contact with him.Sarah  Russell  had  her  thesis  completed  by  the  middle  of  the  year  and  wasexamined  by  Frank  Eastwood  at  Monash  and  Con  Cambie  in Auckland.  Sarahexperienced no difficulties through her examination process and left Wellingtonin mid-August 1990 for a postdoctoral with Prof. Jaeger in Laramie, Wyoming.He would have kept her on for a second year had the project not been declinedfurther funding. Her approaches for a postdoctoral position had problems in thatthe reference from a colleague was, in her view, biased. It is not that she obtaineda copy in an untoward manner rather than being given it by one of the Departmentsecretaries because she, too, was concerned. The issue was a difficult one and thethen Head of Department, the late Professor John Tomlinson, handled the matterwith  much  skill  and  diplomacy.  Sarah  returned  to  New  Zealand  and  secured  aposition in Forensic Science in Auckland, with what was DSIR and transformedinto Environmental Science and Research Ltd. (ESR) with the reorganization ofNZ government science shortly after she joined. She transferred to the Wellington(Porirua) facility and has had a distinguished career with them.93 -From Recognition to RetirementA New DirectionThe  year  of  1990  had  my  research  work  largely  on  hold  as  the  laboratory  wasempty, save for one Honours student, and I had even less time available to devoteto serious laboratory work myself. Thus, it was largely a time of taking stock andtransforming the idea of Advances in Strain in Organic Chemistry that I had agreedto edit under Al Padwa in JAI Press series, into reality. I had selected a range ofrecognized authors –including Padwa by way of retribution – Mark Baird (whomoved to Bangor that year), Martin Banwell, Ed Lee-Ruff (with whom I had beenassociated at Pacifichem ’89) and Herbert Meier, who I had met in Mainz in 1988:everyone agreed to contribute. The manuscripts arrived as expected and gave memy first experience at personal editorship. As all academics do, I had served ap-prenticeship as a referee for a number of periodicals in my area, not least thosefrom the US and UK. Thus, the standard for the articles was much less of an issuethan presentation and level for the targeted senior undergraduate/graduate studentaudience. I had had a reasonable amount of experience in writing and in havingreview articles accepted with minimal amendment, so I stumbled along. Al wasparticularly supportive as the volume took shape, and proof was eventually issuedfor publication in 1991; Ed Billups provided a nice review of the volume in theJournal of the American Chemical Society, but that did not appear until 2003. Themost difficult aspect of editing the first volume was in deciding just how much ofHerbert Meier’s English should be altered. It was not an easy decision to make. Idid not wish to offend him, but I came to the conclusion that if the series was tosucceed, then it needed internationally recognised researchers summarizing theirown field of research, and for this to be edited, heavily if necessary, to provide auniform standard with easily understandable English. This concept led me to Vol-ume II that carried four of the five chapters from authors in Continental Europe,with English as their second language. Volume III included the first of the Japanesecontributions and the series continued to progress well. My title in the JAI serieswas initially produced out of the UK office and then moved to its US counterpartbefore the series was terminated. That happened after JAI was taken over by El-sevier  who  felt  that  Strain  generated  insufficient  profit.  But  the  experience  andcamaraderie that I got from the editorial role and the frequent communications and94 -From Recognition to Retirementmeetings with the contributors persuaded me that this was a role that I could hap-pily revisit should the occasion arise. Indeed, comments from some of the authorsserved to encourage me into what has become a major part of my professional lifein retirement.By the middle of 1990, my step-father had advised us that my mother’s de-mentia was becoming more serious and that it would be best to make a visit dur-ing the year, if at all possible. Sadly, it was not possible for all four of us to get toLondon, but as December of that year signified Mark’s eighteenth birthday, he andI spent Christmas in London. As it so happened, the well respected Fritz Bickel-haupt (Vrije University, Amsterdam) had encouraged me to spend some time inHolland and so a short lecture tour was set up for me in December 1990. AlthoughI was ineligible for sabbatical leave from VUW, the then convener of the Leaveand Grants committees, Librarian Vic Elliot, was always sympathetic to my lec-ture tours and provided some financial support to assist. However, before I left, Istarted a summer student, one Andy Kay, who worked that summer in my absenceand then continued on for Honours in 1991 and PhD training from 1992.The lectures in Holland were preceded by a short visit to Essen and RolandBoese, as our structural work had reached an interesting stage. The bond lengthswithin the aromatic cycloproparene moieties were showing some consistency; theinternuclear bond separation of the bridge bond was short while the electron den-sity path of the bent π and s bonds matched very closely those of a normal benze-noid and s bond, respectively. The 1990 visit to Essen has more than an elementof notoriety associated with it. My flight from London was to Amsterdam (for theNetherlands tour) and then by direct train to Essen. Although the aircraft on whichI was a passenger was fitted with all the modern equipment to allow it to take offin fog, it was held in line behind all the aircraft not so equipped until the fog liftedfrom Heathrow; arrival into Schiphol was late in the afternoon and without lunch.I was quickly ticketed for a train to Essen but it had no dining facilities. Beingwithout food so soon after my departure from Wellington did not augur well and Iwas not in such good shape, even though Roland had me into a café very quickly.It was only the next morning that I realised I was without passport, tickets andmoney. All that I could imagine was that my documents case must have been left inthe restaurant, but the morning staff knew nothing of it and it was only just beforelunch that the owner made contact to say that it was safely locked away. We wentto collect the essentials, only to have the proprietor insist on us drinking Schnappsto settle matters before my lecture.That evening I returned to Amsterdam to be met by Fritz, dined and entertainedat his home and then settled to an apartment at the Vrije University for the durationof my visit to the country. The arrangements were excellent as I had the weekendfree to see the canals, markets and, of course, the van Gogh gallery. The downside95 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistwas that I had to take the tram to the centre of the city and collect a worker’s trainpass for the following week. In itself, this was simple enough. However, when Itried to pay my fare to the tram driver as I had been instructed, I was told to board.There was nowhere to purchase a ticket but numerous machines in which a ticketcould be validated – all emblazoned with the penalties for riding without one! Isurvived without challenge. The lectures went well and my hosts provided me withmuch fascinating chemistry that once again led to subsequent visitors to the NZscene, most notably Binne Zwanenburg from Nijmegen, who brought his researchgroup on an Australasian tour some eight years later.The year of 1991 was significant for the Department and also me in more waysthan one. Firstly, John Craig, my organic colleague, retired at the end of January.In  those  days,  the  university  maintained  continuity  in  teaching  by  having  staffretire on January 31st after their 65th birthday, unless it fell in February when retire-ment was on January 31 beforehand. It meant that academics were employed forthe full teaching year with a known retirement date. What was even more notablewith John’s position – formally a lectureship in chemistry – was that it was adver-tised in 1990 ahead of his departure, not as a permanent tenured post but a limitedterm three year appointment; student numbers in chemistry had declined and theDepartment was under pressure to contract. By the time I left for my visit to theNetherlands, the shortlist had been drawn up with the leading applicant, ChristinaChai, a Chinese Malay with Australian citizenship. She had taken her PhD underAthel Beckwith’s supervision at the Australian National and was part way througha  postdoctoral  in  Oxford. As  I  was  to  be  in  London  in  very  early  December,  Iwas asked to interview her and report back. The interview was held in a Univer-sity College office, arranged for me by Peter Garratt; I was suitably impressed byChristina and returned my summary of the interview. I was told that she wouldbe offered the position. However, by the time the offer was to be formalized, theUniversity  terminated  the  post.  Robin  Ferrier  was  adamant  that  the  teaching  oforganic chemistry demanded a minimum of three people and he was successful innegotiating a joint appointment between Victoria and what had just become DSIRChemistry. By the time Christina received her offer of appointment, it was not forthe limited term position for which she had been interviewed but as a joint VUW/DSIR job for three years. She accepted, joined us for the beginning of the 1991teaching year, and quickly established a first-rate teaching and research reputation.Her free radical chemistry had much emphasis directed towards the biological/me-dicinal environment, but we jointly supervised a Masters student, Malcolm Starr,who attempted to detect the cycloproparenyl radical. The work overlapped withsome of Neidlein’s in Heidelberg and was jointly published.Sadly, Christina’s lot in Wellington was far from easy. She was given a normalfull-time  teaching  allocation  as  the  50% VUW  component  of  her  role,  with  the96 -From Recognition to Retirementother 50% at DSIR for research where she had no student assistance; but she wasencouraged to start students at VUW. She did her very best to keep everyone hap-py, but the task was too great, as it would have been for just about anyone knowingthat full-time teaching demands more than 60% of one’s time. She was discour-aged from conference or other leave, and from seeking promotion even by way ofan accelerated salary increment, all because she was part-time. Such features nolonger play a part in VUW ethos and, indeed, have been contrary to a part-timelimited term position for a long time now; likely they were not the norm even then.The increase in part-time positions demanded that the duties be consistent fromarea to area and no one is now allowed to be given more than a 50% teaching loadin a half-time position. By the time her three year term was coming to an end, afull-time permanent lectureship in organic chemistry was reinstated and Christinashould have been appointed to it. However, with an equivalent job offered in theSchool of General Studies at ANU in Canberra, and a refusal by Victoria to giveher advancement, she left in early 1994. She was a great colleague and a dedicatedteacher whose research opportunity had been limited by her Wellington joint posi-tion. Robin Ferrier was the Departmental Chairman when Christina was appointedand just how much of her lot resulted from his decisions is not known.Two other major events occurred in 1991. The first, that of Curt Wentrup’s firstReactive Intermediates meeting on Heron Island, Great Barrier Reef, to which Iwas invited and this was a stunning event both chemically and scenically. Most ofthe chemists with significant research in intermediate/reactive molecule chemistrywere  there.  I  got  to  know  Leo  Radom  better  as  we  were  billeted  together,  thenMaitland  Jones  and Akira  Oku,  who  I  met  for  the  first  time.  Friendships  wererenewed with Peter Stang, Roger Brown, Armin de Meijere and Leiv Sydnes toname but four. The last 1991 event at Victoria University was the removal of the1983 embargo on personal chairs. I was encouraged to let my name go forward– it was not a matter of completing forms and submitting an application as now,but neither was it the same as the nomination process followed by DepartmentalHeads in the 1970s. That year Robin Ferrier had taken over as Departmental Chair-man and he was careful to ensure that I was nominatedand that it received the support needed. Reports weresought from some outside New Zealand who knew me,but with no formal connection to me, and others withwhom I had had contact for some time. Peter Stang wasmore than willing to give support and the late Profes-sors  Charles  Rees  (of  Imperial College, London)  andAthel  Beckwith  (of ANU)  were  named  as  ones  whocould  comment  independently  on  my  standing  in  theprofession. The outcome of the first personal chair ex-A Chair of Chemistry97 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistercise at VUW for some eight years was two appointments, both in science – theywere to John Lekner in Physics and me in Chemistry. We each accepted the chairin  our  respective  subject,  effective  from  September  1991.  The  elevations  weretreated with great aplomb by the university and there followed a series of inter-views and lectures, not least that of the inaugural lecture, which I entitled BatteredBenzenes and Beautiful Bicycles. Of the interviews, one for Radio New Zealandwas conducted by Shona Willis, one of the better New Zealand radio journalistsand she came to my office to make the recording. Once again, fate reared its headas  Shona’s  mother-in-law  became  our  delightful  next  door  neighbour  when  wemoved to our second home.A further recognition came a year later as I was elected to Fellowship of theRoyal Society of New Zealand in November 1992. My good friend Jim Coxon hadbeen elected in 1991 and he was awarded a personal chair in chemistry at about thetime as my 1992 RSNZ election. As was customary in those days, newly electedFellows were appointed to the selection panel for their area and I served my timethrough two terms that took me to 2001. The donation of accolades two years in arow had a clear message – I had to be close to my highest level of incompetence!And so it was. As Robin Ferrier’s term as Departmental Chairman drew to a close,the academics were encouraged to put their names forward for election to the posi-tion. There was a dearth of activity and so, after some considerable thought, I sawJohn Wells (the then Dean of Science) and gave him my name. The chairperson ofa department or school at Victoria has always been a difficult one because of thebureaucracy involved and the need to do a good job. I had always felt that this wasa task for those close to retirement, as research could be reduced over the last yearsas opposed to having the role early, losing track of one’s research field and fallingbehind with the chemical literature. However, the Dean released my name aheadof the closing date for the chairmanship role, and it proved an excellent move asa number of names were submitted in short order. With such keen departmentalinterest evident, I then did the unthinkable; I withdrew from the race and infuriatedthe Dean.During the time that I was distracted from the Wellington lab, Andy Kay madegood progress, initially in his 1990-91 summer studentship and then through hisHonours year. Part way through that time Mrs Zha Zhi-mei arrived from SichuanNormal University for a year of research experience. She settled into the exocyclicolefin and quinone chemistry that was then carried on by Andy, when he returnedfor PhD after his gaining a IIi Honours degree. Before coming, and while seekingacceptance to join us as a Visiting Fellow, Zha had communicated well in writtenEnglish; it was only after she was here she told us that her Russian was better thanher English, and asked if we could communicate in that language. That was not anoption as I have never been competent with languages and so Zha struggled, but98 -From Recognition to Retirementimproved enough to cope, although she never mastered her spoken English. None-theless, she proved a convivial lady to have around and she tried hard to succeedat the bench. The only difficulty that she presented was with help to get permis-sion for her husband to visit for a few days. Her visa did not allow her to leaveNZ, while her husband, who was involved in official trade with Hong Kong, wasnot allowed to travel beyond there from China. A second session with staff in theChinese embassy (the Lins had left by then) served to settle things there and theyagreed that Mr. Zha could come provided that he was chaperoned by embassy staffonce here. The next hurdle was Immigration NZ. Only through the good graces ofMr Schroff was Zha’s husband allowed into the country, and then only for a fewdays – but enough for Zha to persuade him that she should go to the US after hertime in Wellington. On our day out sightseeing, we had a Chinese embassy stafferin the car and his presence created a somewhat different atmosphere to the normwhen I am host.Andy’s actual research carved out two major areas of cycloproparene chem-istry  and  showed  us  the  limitations  in  another.  He  completed  Zha’s  efforts  andsynthesised  81,  the  first  stable  quinone  in  the  cycloproparene  series.  Our  hopewas that this compound would lead to more extended conjugation and give rise toextended ‘push-pull’ polar molecules. In the process of pursuing this, Andy foundcerium ammonium nitrate to be most efficaciousfor demethylation of 80 and obtained 81 in 85%yield. This provided sufficient compound for thefull range of spectroscopic, crystallographic andchemical  properties  to  be  recorded,  includingthe  electrochemical  reduction  potentials.  Whatwe  found  totally  frustrating  was  that,  while  thediether  80  could  be  silylated  and  transformedinto  alkylidene  derivatives  such  as  82  (Scheme24),  neither  81  nor  the  disilylated  diether  couldbe  converted  into  quinone  83  (and  hence  84).Moreover, olefin 82 did not lose its ether moietieswithout also involving reaction of the exocyclicalkene; extensions into the ‘push-pull’ arena hadto wait.The second part of Andy’s study combined with Utah work in examining thebehaviour of exocyclic olefins to cycloaddition. What was found was that the alky-lidene compounds add dienophiles in a Diels-Alder sense. However, the benzenederivatives underwent addition exclusively across the bridge bond while the naph-thalene analogues gave products only from addition to the exocyclic double bond(Scheme  25).  The  nature  and  orientation  of  the  benzene  adduct  was  proved  by99 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistcrystal  structure  analysis  in  Essen  andthe  additions  were  further  rationalizedby  computation,  also  studied  in  Essen.By  then  one  of  Roland  students,  An-dreas Maulitz, had spent time with Ape-loig  and  was  trained  in  computationalchemistry. He put this to good use on ourbehalf. As Scheme 25 shows, there is abasic difference in the bridge bond char-acter in moving from benzo to naphthofusion. The last part of Andy’s study wasto  extend  conjugation  in  the  exocyclicolefins  through  functionalization  at  the  carbon  atom  adjacent  to  the  ring  fusion(C2), but this did not eventuate. He made the passage to a PhD chemist by servingas a teaching assistant, not in the traditional half-time post, but by taking a frac-tional position that allowed four rather than three students to have some funding.He completed his PhD in 1996, had a postdoctoral with Hiizu Iwamura, then atKyushu University, and subsequently returned to what was by then the metamor-phosis of DSIR Chemistry – Industrial Research Limited; he is now the Managerof the Energy and Materials Group.It was during Andy’s time that the funding of science in NZ was dramaticallyaltered and government science reorganized. The various parts of Scientific and In-dustrial Research were carved into Crown Research Institutes, each charged withreturning a profit on the public investment. Science funding was diminishing andthe catch phrase became ‘accountability’. The universities were no exception andthe push for a ‘blue skies’ research fund gained momentum, ultimately to succeedwith the creation of the Marsden Fund largely as a result of the work of Simon Up-ton, then Minister of Science. He was subsequently elected to Fellowship of RSNZfor this. National Postgraduate Scholarships through the University Grants Com-mittee disappeared, to be replaced by awards offered by each institution, initiallyon a simple application basis and then by the institution selecting the project workthat it would sponsor. The effect of this was (and is) that despite a run of good PhDcandidates, Victoria had insufficient scholarships to retain them. Not surprisingly,students with very good upper second class honours degrees gained PhD scholar-ships from other places in NZ and left VUW. Thus, over three years from 1993,I  saw  four  of  my  BSc  (Hons)  graduates  leave  for  PhD  training  elsewhere,  twoin NZ, one at ANU, and one in Boston College, USA. Each had made a genuinecontribution to my research, but the writing was being etched indelibly into thewall, namely, unless one’s work was deemed relevant then funding was not goingto be made available. As best I recall it, the postdoctoral fellowships were the first100 -From Recognition to Retirementsubjected to project selection. Much to my surprise, I was able to put forward aproposal directly to the faculty in 1992 for scholarship consideration, a processthat was quickly terminated in favour of internal departmental selection. Be that asit may, I succeeded and gained my second and last postdoctoral. Moreover, I wasable to solicit applications by writing to colleagues overseas and then ranking theapplicants gained that way with those who applied directly to the university. LarryScott, who was in the process of moving from Reno to Boston College, had a mankeen to join me and, with the relevant paperwork completed, Mark Cooney arrivedin Wellington for a two year postdoctoral at the end of August 1993.Mark was, and probably still is, a quiet individual, particularly knowledgeablein  the  art  of  science  and  exceptionally  adept  in  the  laboratory.  Not  only  did  hebring a range of modern techniques to the Department, but also he gave his timeto those around him who needed assistance. He worked well, initially coming toterms with the area and then completing and delving into a raft of topics in ourfield. His publications numbered eight from a mere twenty-two months at VUW.They included the synthesis and spectral characterization of the first oxaspiropen-tene 85 (RR = benzo fusion) that was much more stable than we had expected, butit transformed into the ring expanded cyclobutarenone 86 on standing.55 Moreover,the simpler starting material (85, R = H) underwent an identical series of reactionsshowing that it is only cycloaddition that involves the bridge bond. It served toremind us that small ring systems annelated to an aromatic core have increased sta-bility over their non-annelated analogues, allowing for easy characterization andstudy. A range of heterocyclic-substituted methylenecycloproparenes were madeand the series of polar dyes 87, e.g xanthone (X = O), obtained. They were sub-jected to detailed crystallographic and theoretical study, again involving the Boeseand Apeloig groups, and shownto  be  essentially  planar.  Initialwork  by  Mark,  involving  thesilyl-Wittig reaction of 57 withdiphenylcyclopropenone(thedimesityl and di-t-butyl deriva-tives  followed),  ultimately  ledus  to  settle  on  a  reaction  se-quence  to  1,4-anthraquinonesthat  proceeds  via  bicyclopro-penylidene  88  (R  =  Ph),  for-mally  a  valence  bond  isomerof benzyne (C6H4), and the first non-annulated derivative to be spectroscopicallycharacterized. Mark’s other contributions involved chemistry directed to the cy-cloproparenyl radical and radical anion. The synthesis of a dioxacycloproparene101 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistprovided  extended  conjugation  and  set  in  train  subsequent  work  on  π-extendedalkylidenecycloproparenes, which somehow did not get published until 2006. Heleft Wellington in mid-1995 to settle to life as an industrial research chemist in hishome country. He was very much our loss and industry’s gain.One  thing  that  I  remember  after  Mark’s  departure  was  the  need  to  keep  theadministration  happy  with  his  appointment  by  way  of  a  formal  report  –  it  wasno longer appropriate to say he came, he saw and he conquered. At that point intime, bureaucracy was in the early stage of proliferation and corporatization, anda concise account that included publication off-prints was not quite what the As-sistant Vice-Chancellor demanded. The clear requirement, as I saw it, was for asubstantial report, with the all-important précis attached. I decided that this wasan ideal time to test the waters and so, rather than send double-sided copy of ar-ticle  preprints,  double  spaced,  single-sided  copy  at  a  minimum  print  width  andpage length was the order of the day. And so it was that a very substantial ‘report’was handed in, which probably had had a few extraneous pages inserted for goodmeasure. In due course, I received a glowing letter of thanks for my very detailedsummary of Dr. Cooney’s tenure and successes. As far as I am aware, that veryheavy folder lies buried in a filing cabinet in the (corporate) archives of the uni-versity, most likely never opened beyond the précis. It seemed to me that this wasfair recompense for having been classified as one with ‘no overseas collaborators’from an earlier survey when, in fact, I had more than most. The ‘zero’ came fromthe fact that none of my overseas collaborators funded Victoria – only those thatput money into the institution’s coffers were counted!Later in that year of 1993 I took my fourth sabbatical but, unlike the earlierones, the pressures meant that I could not be away for long periods and somewhatcontrived absences became the norm. Instead of spending most of the availabletime in one place, I chose to accept invitations to lecture and to couple those withnew experiences, and so I asked Koichi Komatsu if hewould be able to co-ordinate a visit to Japan for me.This he did, and I spent almost two weeks there withmeetings around Tokyo, Kyoto and on to Hiroshima,and  then  across  the  Ituski-nada  Sea  and  into  Mat-suyama, where I was a guest at Fumio Toda’s sympo-sympo-sium on Solid State Organic Chemistry. I ended withSho Ito (who I first met at ISNA-6) bestowing me withthe Dean’s Lecture at Tokushima Bunri University, thefirst  of  many  meetings  with  him  as  will  become  ap-parent later. From there I flew to Germany and spent alittle less than two months with Klaus Müllen, who bythen had formally moved from the Gutenberg Univer-Fumio Toda102 -From Recognition to Retirementsity to the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPI–P), also on the Mainzcampus. It was a very happy time as Klaus and I have got on well since we firstmet in 1982, and my time in his institute proved no different. On a chemical note,I  tried  to  gain  evidence  for  a  cycloproparenyl  radical  anion  from  conventionalelectron transfer using the expertise of Martin Baumgarten, but all we were ableto show was that cyclopropa[b]naphthalene (58) ring opens and dimerizes beforethe cycloproparenyl anion radical (or its ring-cleaved naphthalene analogue) couldbe detected; only the radical anion of pentacene was characterized. Mark Cooneycompleted the study  by  carrying  out  equivalent conventional  chemistry prior  topublication.New Staff, New Challenges, and a New HomeI made comment earlier about the need to gain funding for research and howthis was beginning to become more and more important in NZ. It seems to havecontinued unabated in this country from the early 1990s to a situation that nowmakes it almost impossible to perform any meaningful research, or gain promo-tion, without it. What is lacking is an adequate size of fund to meet needs beyondthose of areas deemed of national importance. It was at the time that this was beingadvanced that Christina Chai’s replacement, and permanent appointee, arrived inthe first part of 1994. The position had been widely advertised and it attracted agood range of serious contenders, from which Peter Northcote was duly appointed.Peter,  a  Canadian  marine  natural  products  chemist,  who  had  done  some  schoolteaching in Tonga prior to his PhD training and a postdoctoral position with theBlunt-Munro combination at Canterbury University, arrived from his post with aNew York pharmaceuticals research organization. He was thrown into first-yearteaching and had his independent research initiated by gaining an MSc student,Anthony  Fake,  who  needed  serious  supervision.  Peter  settled  amazingly  welland started what has been a very decisive foray into NZ marine sponge naturalproducts chemistry. He has attracted attention internationally with peloruside A, aserendipitous discovery from a native sponge. He gained pharmaceutical fundingbecause of its potency as an anticancer treatment and is now on the board of ReataPharmaceuticals  Inc.,  who  licensed  the  compound.  What  quickly  became  clearwith Peter’s work was that the aged 80 MHz Varian electromagnet NMR was notgoing to meet the needs of a modern natural products chemist intent on structureidentification from tiny amounts of sample, rather than the minimum 20 mg for agood 13C spectrum on our instrument.The aging VUW instrument had survived being deluged in a flood caused byfailure of an elbow bend of the mains water inlet pipe on the top floor of the East-erfield Building early in the 1980’s and then, later, smoke damage from a fire in103 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistthe adjacent chemical store. It had come through these events well and continuedto serve us despite its limitations. One of the interesting impacts of science on thelocal workforce followed the flood, in that a new mains server for Chemistry wasinstalled on Kelburn Parade, outside the Department. At that time, charging forwater used by the University was being introduced, and so the new system camenot only with a water meter but also an ability to cut the supply to the building.When I asked how a permanent low flow-rate supply to the NMR could be guar-anteed,  the  city  workmen  responded  simply:  apparently  they  installed  a  bypassthat avoided the cut-off and likely the meter. The effect was that the FT80A haduninterrupted  water  for  life,  presumably  unknown  to  anyone  but  the  workmenand me! The lifetime of the machine was enhanced by our acquiring the Chem-istry  Division  of  DSIR’s  sister  FT80A  when  the  government  lab  upgraded  to  asuperconducting instrument. This was another interesting acquisition. I resisted arequest for payment, saying that it would be just as easy to transfer the machine toour truck at the Hutt Valley rubbish disposal site! In the end, DSIR transported it tous and even managed to damage the tray of their truck in the process, all at no cost!Despite all of this, Peter’s presence was just the trigger needed to set in motiona move for a replacement instrument. It was not so much a case of the FT80A notoperating to its specifications, as to it being a second generation instrument stillin  use  in  the  third  generation  era;  ‘supercons’  with  multinuclear  and  2D  NMRfacilities  were  in  every  place  that  serious  chemistry  was  researched.  In  a  shorttime, Peter and I had surveyed the range of instruments available, made a case formajor instrument funding to the Department, the Faculty and the Vice-Chancellor,and utilised the opportunity to seek the best possible financial arrangements andinstrument capability that we could get. Apart from his natural products expertise,Peter was (and is) an order of magnitude up the NMR ladder of knowledge thanme, and so it was that he went to Brucker’s NMR facility in Germany, while theVarian sales and engineering people came to us, as NZ was dominantly Varian atthat time. The final hurdle turned out to be not so much the fund-raising as havingto  gain  support  from  Robin  Ferrier,  who  felt  that  our  electromagnet  instrumentwas adequate and wanted to know the cost of a straight replacement for it. Dur-ing our negotiations, a team of Varian’s senior executives had happened to passthough NZ and called in to meet us. They were especially enthused when I toldthem that our electromagnet was working and they insisted on seeing the instru-ment. This was a new experience for them, as they were under the impression thatthe only remaining FT80 in operating condition was in interior NW China. TheChinese instrument could have been available to us second-hand, while the costof building a new FT80 specifically for us was markedly higher than the 300 MHzsupercon  instrument  we  wanted. Approval  for  the  latter  became  automatic,  themonies (including a grant from the NZ Lotteries Commission) became available,104 -From Recognition to Retirementand a multinuclear Varian 300 instrument duly arrived with its cryogenic probesmanufactured by Nalorac Corp., which was subsequently taken over by Varian (it-self now a part of Agilent Technologies). It was installed in late 1996, became fullyoperational early the next year and is still in excellent working order. However, itwas not located with Chemistry in the Easterfield building but with the physicistsin Laby. The size of the superconducting magnet and the need for access to its corefrom underneath, coupled with the external magnetic field, meant that no room inChemistry was suitable. I cannot remember just what favours I was owed by theWorks and Services Section (now the more grandiose Facilities Management) but,after some considerable bartering, I was offered a large room on the ground floorof the Laby Building alongside the physicists; it was modified and fitted out forthe new instrument.Installing  a  superconducting  magnet  in  New  Zealand  in  the  mid-late  1990swas no easy task. All the necessary equipment had (and still has) to be importedinto the country and, depending upon the whim of NZ Customs, the port of entrycould vary. Varian had competent technicians in Australia and their senior men didthe installation. The large quantity of helium needed to initiate the superconduct-ing magnet arrived by air from Sydney (NZ does not have its own liquefactionplant) and the instrument came up with the minimum of effort. Peter mastered theinstrument quickly and had superior spectra produced routinely because of the at-tention that he had paid to having the best probes possible as part of our package.Of course, routine maintenance was not easy and even having the vital supply ofliquid helium here when needed always caused a missed heart beat or two. Thiswas no more so than when the ‘can of helium’ sat on the tarmac of Sydney’s King-sford Smith airport because the pilot of the daily freighter elected not to carry it(yes, they can make that decision!); no one took it out of the summer 30+ oC heatand its volume on arrival was markedly short of the needed quantity! Beyond this,the instrument needed a continuous supply of compressed air and this had to besupplied and installed by our Works and Service personnel. Sadly, they tried tominimize costs by ordering an inferior compressor and not allowing adequatelyfor the storage of the helium and nitrogen cylinders that had to be kept outsidethe NMR room; much instrument time was lost with more still invested by Peterto ensure that this vital need was met. One of the matters that Victoria Universityhas never come to grips with adequately is the time commitment involved by staffin maintaining an instrument. The responsibility for a new piece of equipment isalways passed to a staff member and, until quite recently, it was presumed that thiswas part of the research commitment with minimal additional cost involved in run-ning the facility. For the life of the FT80A, I was the one with that responsibilityand changed NMR samples most weekends and evenings until the then organictechnician, Rhys Batchelor, was able to assist. Rhys moved over to the 300 MHz105 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistinstrument and provided a good service for that. Nonetheless, problems were notalien to us as the supercon quenched more than once, the last time damaging themagnet and putting the instrument out of action for six months or so; that singleevent had major consequence for organic chemical research as we shall see.But  to  return  to  the  time  that  the  NMR  replacement  was  being  planned,  thenorthern summer of 1995, I attended my fourth ISNA meeting, that time in Ger-many. I had been on the International Advisory Board (IAB) and had attended themeetings since the 1985 conference in Scotland. With the cost of travel from NZ toEurope, there was little point in simply attending the conference and I asked Man-fred Regitz (Kaiserslautern) if he could arrange a few visits for me. Once againI was well served, meeting Gerhard Maas in Ulm and Paul Binger at MPI–CoalResearch. The ISNA meeting, organized by Klaus Müllen and Henning Hopf, washeld in Braunschweig, Henning’s home territory, and it was a little more intensivethan the earlier events. Nonetheless, it was more than pleasant as I had enjoyedHenning’s company in Victoria (Canada) in 1993 where, inadvertently, we man-aged to take breakfast at the same time most days. There were three particularlynotable events at this meeting, leaving aside the meeting of colleagues from thepast. The first was that the IAB set ISNA-9 for Hong Kong under the steward-ship of Henry Wong of the Chinese University. Henry wanted to have a RegionalOrganizing Committee in place for this 1998 meeting and I became its convener.Secondly, the subsequent meeting was proposed for Europe, with Leo Jenneskensof Utrecht in Holland offering to put things in place. The last, and most significantfor me, was that after the meeting I had a free day before an evening flight to Lon-don to visit my mother in her hospice for what proved to be the final time. I spentthat free day alone revisiting Göttingen, only to find that the main Japanese partyescorting Professor Tetsuo Nozoe, the father of ISNA and in his 93rd year but stillactive, was also sightseeing. We crossed paths several times including the samerestaurant  for  lunch. At  the  railway  station,  waiting  for  a  train  to  Hamburg  andthe flight to London, I found the opposite platform to be occupied by my Japanesefriends awaiting their train south. My train arrived first and, after boarding, I foundthe entire group, Nozoe included, lined up along their platform where they courte-ously bowed as my train pulled away. That was the last time that I saw Nozoe ashe died on April 4th in 1996, two months after our eldest son’s wedding.With involvement in the upcoming 1998 ISNA-9 in Hong Kong, the news ofNozoe’s death came not just as the loss of a mentor but as the loss of the doyen ofJapanese organic chemistry and the founder of ISNA. It meant that ISNA-9 couldnot take place without some significant recognition of the great man. Henry Wongand  I  saw  a  Nozoe  symposium  as  one  possibility  but  a  commemorative  NozoeLecture as the better choice. Sho Ito, an early Nozoe student who had spent his for-mal teaching years at Sendai University, was the next senior Japanese and he has106 -From Recognition to Retirementably filled Nozoe’s shoes, thoughunable  to  attend  all  the  ISNAmeetings.  Thus,  I  wrote  to  Shosuggesting  that  we  included  aNozoe Memorial Lecture to openthe ISNA-9 meeting, and that theNozoe students themselves selectthe speaker. Not only was this ac-cepted but it went one better. The group established a fund to commemorate TetsuoNozoe and set about raising money to secure The Nozoe Memorial Lecture andhold  the  Nozoe  Memorial  International  Symposium  on  Organic  Chemistry,  thelatter taking place in Sendai in August 1997. A book commemorating Nozoe’s lifewas  issued  after  the  symposium  and  some  255  people  were  involved  in  gettingthe commemorative events started; just one American and three European namesappear (Ron Breslow, Klaus Hafner, Brian Halton and Emanuel Vogel). Naturally,to establish the lectureship there needed to be a nomination process, an interna-tional advisory board (to select the lecturer and prevent the current ISNA organizerdominating), and stipulations on what the stipend would cover.This, in essence, comprised my contribution to ISNA-9 with the various friendsthat I had in Japan. As it happened, Fumio Toda invited me to his 1997 NovemberMini-International Symposium in Okudogo, just outside Matsuyama on ShikokuIsland, and this provided an ideal opportunity to meet with Sho Ito as he was stillin Tokushima. So, after the wonderful conference at the Okudogo onsen, I againtook the train to Tokushima, where I had the potency of the Japanese puffer fish(fugu) demonstrated in one of Sho’s favourite sushi restaurants. The owner stirredthe tank containing one fugu with a range of other fish, all available for eating.The impact of the ejected toxin on the other species was spectacular, with waterfrom the tank being splashed a fair distance. Before my departure home, we bothtravelled to the new Osaka airport by boat where we met Ichiro Murata (by thenretired from Osaka University) and transposed our ideas into the final details forthe  Nozoe  Memorial  Lecture.  The  first  of  the  series  was  notified,  nominations/applications were sought, and the panel of Japanese Nozoe students decided thatthe inaugural lecturer should be Larry Scott of Boston College. I was privileged tochair that inaugural lecture as the opening event of ISNA-9. As an aside, the newHong Kong airport opened just a few days before my arrival for ISNA, but I wasassured  by Roland Boese that my luggage would not be lost as his brother haddesigned the excellent facility.The  ISNA  series  continued,  with  Klaus  Müllen  opening  ISNA-10  under  JaySiegel’s  stewardship  in  San  Diego  in  2001,  and  again  I  was  asked  to  chair  hisNozoe  lecture. At  that  meeting,  Leo  Jenneskens  of  Utrecht  University  accepted107 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistthe  challenge  of  running  the  next  novel  aromatics  meeting  somewhere  in  Hol-land (to be the ISNA-11 mooted in Hong Kong in 1998) but it never eventuated.The Canada-based Graham Bodwell and Rik Tykwinski rose to the challenge andsaved things by running the meeting in St. John’s in 2005, and my good friendKoichi Komatsu of Kyoto gave the third Nozoe lecture. I had been invited to at-tend as Guest of Honour but it was not medically possible for me to travel at thattime and so, unbeknown to me, Graham Bodwell had a photograph printed at lifesize and mounted (below). I was told that I chaired one session, attended the dinnerand visited one of the local hostelries one evening. Larry Scott has told me that Iwas alive and well in Graham’s Newfoundland office in late 2010! It was a greatprivilege for me to be involved with theseries and to have three of my personalfriends selected as Nozoe speakers. Thefunds  raised  by  the  Japanese  coveredthe  series  including  ISNA-12,  whichwas  back  in  Japan  under  the  auspicesof Yoshito Tobe at Osaka University. Atthat  meeting  François  Diederich  of  theETH  in  Zurich,  Switzerland,  was  theNozoe  speaker.  Fortunately,  and  sensi-bly,  the  IAB  decided  that  the  name  ofTetsuo Nozoe was too closely associated with the congress series, to be allowedto disappear and it enshrined the Nozoe Memorial Lecture in the series, with eachconference offering some sponsorship. Europe was redeemed by Diederich as heorganized the 2009 meeting that was held in Luxembourg, while the 2011 meetingis being held in Oregon in late July.Koichi KomatsuNot  too  long  after  my  return  from  Okudogo  and  Toda’s  mini-conference  in1997,  Robin  Ferrier  retired. At  that  time,  65  was  the  mandatory  retirement  age(scrapped in NZ in 1999) and his formal departure was on Jan 31 of the followingyear in accord with the ‘old contract’. Robin’s departure was expected but he madeno comment to Peter or me about it, his plans for the future, or when he wouldleave. He had often taken his summer holiday later than most and, when I went tosee him a few days before he was due to depart, I found that he had already left.He did return a little while later to give a ‘post-departure’ lecture and was hostedto a farewell function, but there was no personal word of encouragement for thefuture to those left behind. For the entire 1998 teaching year, Peter Northcote andI were left to cope with all of the organic chemistry lecture, laboratory and tuto-rial work. In its ‘all too customary’ manner, the university chose not to decide onwhether there would be a replacement until long after the incumbent had departed.In Robin’s case, it was clear that there would be no continuation of an organic chair108 -From Recognition to Retirementand, with the advent of the Departmental Chairperson, it was not within my man-date to become the Organic Professor as had been the case with Neil Curtis, whobecome Professor of Inorganic Chemistry on Duncan’s retirement. Eventually, achemistry lectureship was advertised in mid-1998 and among the applicants wasone John Hoberg, an American carbohydrate chemist from the National Renew-able Energy Laboratory in Colorado. After telephone interview (by then acceptedfor non-senior applicants from overseas) and appropriate discussion, he was ap-pointed. He arrived in late 1998 but took some time to settle to the NZ way ofthings. Sometime later, the senior organic laboratory programme was reorganizedand the communal research group meeting was replaced by area specific ones. Iassume that Jim Johnston, then chairman of SCPS, had some part in this but it wasonly after the events that I became aware of them. It had always been my hope tointroduce change to our syllabus but, other than for comparatively minor adjust-ments with new courses and the like, I never had adequate opportunity to discussor evolve the sub-discipline as I might wish.John Hoberg rapidly gathered a sizeable research group, did some good chem-istry using the equipment that had been available to all the organic people priorto his arrival, and alienated both Peter and me. To assist his independent start inacademia, I encouraged John to write an article on strained carbohydrates for mybook series, which he did with one of his PhD students, Ghislane Cousins (nowemployed  by  NZ  Pharmaceuticals).  John  had  his  first  child  in  NZ  but  his  wifenever settled to life here and they left Wellington just before Christmas in 2003.Joanne Harvey, his replacement, arrived six months later having gained her Hon-ours degree at Victoria with Robin Ferrier and PhD with my own former student,Martin Banwell, at the ANU.But to return to chemistry. At the time the new NMR arrived I took on GarethDixon as an Honours student. He stayed with me until 2002 and was the last ofmy PhD students to finish. It is not that Gareth took his time rather than the cir-cumstances that he found himself in. He started his PhD training in 1997 after anhonours year that gained him a IIi from researching some new polar alkylidene-cycloproparenes. He continued in the same area for his PhD degree but with aninitial foray into the precise conditions needed for the silyl-Wittig reaction. We hadmoved to an era of completing the studies we had done and determining the mostappropriate ways of obtaining the various products. From his study, Gareth madea range of conjugated and cross-conjugated alkylidenes, recorded the dipole mo-ments of all the ones still needing measurement, and completed a significant andthorough  survey  of  the  polar  and  spectroscopic  properties  of  these  compounds;the work provided him with a number of publications. Most notable among thesewas confirmation that the cycloproparenyl core acts as both an electron donor andan  electron  acceptor  from  synthesis  of  various  p-substituted  phenyl  derivatives109 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistof,  e.g.  58  (Scheme  25),  and  that  the  ability  of  the  cycloheptatrienyl  moiety  todonate electrons is lower than that of the cycloproparene. Coupled with a theo-retical study, the last of the results were decisive in showing that in the unknowncyclopropenylidene  compound  89  (Scheme  26),  it  is  the  cyclopropenyl  moietythat is the stronger electron donor. Witha cyclopentadienylidene attachment as in90, donation is to the five-membered ringas expected from first principles, but in-tuition  argued  that  the  seven-memberedring of 91 should be the donor. Theoreti-cal  calculations  in  Haifa  and  Essen  dif-fered with this and served to dispel suchthought as did Gareth’s subsequent workwith  substituted  compounds.  Thus,  bypreparing  the  previously  known  seven-membered ring-containing hydrocarbons66  and  67  and  the  new  ethers  92  and93,  the  dipole  moments  were  all  telling(Scheme 26); the presence of the electrondonating ether moieties in 92 and 93 results in an increase in polarity. Even moreimportant was the X-ray crystal structure of 93 that has the seven-membered ringbent out of the plane of the cycloproparene to a greater extent than in non-ether 65;the cycloheptatriene resists the increase in electron density that would require it tobecome an 8π7C antiaromatic ring.56As Gareth started his PhD training, Carissa Jones entered the BSc (Hons) pro-gramme and  spent  most  of  her  time delineating the  detail of  our  reactions withsilylcycloproparenyl  anions,  which  shecontinued  into  her  PhD  that  started  thefollowing  year.  She  had  much  success,inevitable  failures,  but  discovered  sideproducts not detected by earlier workers,and  she  was  able  to  provide  a  series  ofcross-conjugated π-extended compounds.Her  final  contributions  transformed  cy-clopropaquinone 81 into its higher anthra-cene  homologue  94,  and  facilitated  thesynthesis  of  the  precursor  to  our  cyclo-propabenzenylidenethenone  96  (Scheme27) that was obtained by a ‘reverse electron mode’ process. This used our originalcyclopropabenzene 29, which ionized and let its cation be captured by the anion110 -From Recognition to Retirementof Meldrum’s acid. In work performed in conjunction with Curt Wentrup in Bris-bane – we did not have flash vacuum pyrolysis and low temperature IR facilities atVUW – the decomposition of 95 was monitored and 96 isolated at low temperature(Scheme 27).57 After leaving Wellington, Carissa had postdoctoral positions in SanDiego, with Jay Siegel, and then Oregon, with Mike Haley, both of whom I hadcome to know well.Gareth’s PhD languished for some time, but not all of it of his making. Whenhe registered for his degree, VUW was in the process of added change, this timedirected at the postgraduate student. Accountability and a mandatory research pro-posal for all PhD candidates had been set. Until this point in time it was assumedthat chemists could direct research and supervise PhD students in a responsiblefashion merely from reputation in one’s discipline, assuming that university fundswere  available.  Gareth  registered  shortly  before  thechangeover and, although the offer of a proposal andcost analysis/budget for his programme was made, itwas declined; we were still under the old rules. One ofthe important phases set for the cycloproparene pro-gramme was to extend the exocyclic olefin series ofstrained cyclopropabenzenes into molecules that alsoincorporated  a  four-membered  ring,  e.g.  97,  that  wenamed  ‘rocketene’.  This  compound  and  its  angular-ly substituted isomer had been known for almost 25years  but  their  chemistries  had  not  been  studied.  Inthe early part of the programme we were able to ob-tain a supply of hexa-1,5-diyne, the essential startingmaterial for the new route reported by Peter Stang andAileen McNichols in 1992 for 97 (Scheme 28).Our  difficulties  began with  the  diyne-to-propyne cycloaddition  that  failed togive the organotin substituted benzocyclobutene in measureable quantities underthe conditions stated; most of our diyne was used up attempting to persuade thereaction to behave. Eventually, we learned from Mike Haley that the reaction waslikely best performed with external irradiation from an air cooled halogen lamp,and this proved to be the case; a 46% conversion was effected. The subsequent1,3-elimination proceeded without difficulty and gave us rocketene (97), but wehad little starting material left and no way of synthesizing the compound ourselvesgiven local safety regulations. Worse still, the financial situation had deterioratedand we were not allowed to renew our supply. Garth was left in limbo, active inother aspects of our programme but so close to the end of this appealing synthe-sis. With  no  softening  of  local  attitudes  but  monies  being  dispensed  elsewhere,I had little option but to beg. This I did, securing funds in the US to provide the111 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistvital hexadiyne for us. The synthesis of 97 was repeated and thechemistry advanced to generate the derived anion, silylate it andprovide  98,  the  first  and  only  methylenecylobutacyclopropaben-zene.58 Sadly, we were unable to proceed to the range of deriva-tives that we had hoped for, nor to pursue the ramblings of an aging chemist to-wards cross-conjugated trienes as illustrated by 99.Attempted  silver(I)-mediated  dimerization  of  various  alkylidene  compoundsnever led to any of the hoped for products but charge-transfer complexation didprovide  some  interesting  results  that  await  others  to  confirm  and  extend. Thesecomplexes were generated by my final honours student, Jarrod Ward (2001), whosubsequently worked in UK industry before undertaking his PhD at Auckland Uni-versity and, like Gareth Dixon, is now a thriving patent attorney.It was during Gareth’s tenure as a student that academic members were strong-ly encouraged to apply for monies for research from the Marsden Fund. Like mostof my chemistry colleagues, I had made applications from the earliest time andthe new ‘push’ was easily satisfied by putting the development to tri-olefins, asillustrated by 99, before the selection panel. The effect of this was that my 1999application passed through the preliminary round and I was required to submit thedetailed ‘round two’ application. The procedure remains one of submitting a briefproject synopsis for assessment and then, if invited, a full formal application tothe second round, from which projects are selected for funding. As it happened,my application was the first from a VUW chemist to go to the second round and Iwas sent a glowing letter of appreciation from Dr. John Morrow, the then AssistantVice-Chancellor  (Research).  Nonetheless,  the  project  was  turned  down  becauseone referee had questioned the predicted outcome of one particular reaction. Whilethis might seem harsh to some, it needs to be noted that, even today, the successrate for chemists from this (nominal) blue skies research fund is a mere 5%, 1 in20; it is rightly regarded as a lotto more than a serious fund. This is not to criticizethe few who rank the applications, as their task in a small country such as NZ is touse the slightest reason for rejection so as to reduce numbers to fit the paucity offunding available.The decade of the 1990s had many things happening as I have discussed already.It also initiated me further into the role of editor, not simply from the ‘Strain’ seriesbut from being appointed to the International Advisory Boards of (in sequence) theJournal of the Chemical Society, Perkin 1 (1993-97), Perkin 2 (1997-2002) and theAustralian Journal of Chemistry (1994-99). With my involvement in Pacifichem, itwas pleasing to find that those members of the UK RSC publication boards presentin Honolulu for both 1995 (Perkin 1) and 2000 (Perkin 2), met with Sheila Buxtonwho was, in my view, an excellent managing editor for RSC. By comparison, AJC,being closer to home, meant a more ‘hands-on’ involvement and it proved to be112 -From Recognition to Retirementa delightful time working with John Zdysiewicz and the board chairmen, initiallyDon Cameron and then co-ordination chemist Len Lindoy. John and Don I havereferred  to  before,  while  Len,  who  moved  from  the  James  Cook  University  ofNorth Queensland in Townsville to Sydney, was more than familiar with the forcesof  change  that  were  blowing  through Australia’s  CSIRO  in  the  late  1990s.  Hewas  an  astute  and  perceptive  Board  Chairman.  For  me,  the  most  frequent  taskwas to assess manuscripts from emerging country authors whose language abilitywas poor, and it was from this that my patience with English-as-second languageauthors evolved. I continue to offer to rewrite suchpapers in the hope that subsequent submissions areimproved, but I do this only once for a given author.There was an annual face-to-face meeting that JohnZ  organized,  usually  late  in  the  year  and  always  apleasure  to  attend.  It  was  not  simply  the  generoushospitality  that  John  showed,  but  the  camaraderieand  dedication  to  maintaining  AJC  as  the  flagshipCSIRO periodical that made the time so worthwhile– the AJC subscribers more than doubled the numberof its next best rival in the stable. Back in those daysit  was  accepted  as  the  pre-eminent  chemistry  peri-odical of the region and although its editors wouldaccept material from other countries, that was domi-nantly by invitation. All of that has changed since John retired. AJC now strivesto  excel  as  an(other)  international  publication;  the  regionalism  that  made  it  sorecognizable (and known) is gone. The moves to government agency ratings andstaff assessments based upon publication and citation numbers have done nothingbut exacerbate matters.John Z in his officeOne of the other tasks that emerged in the mid-to-late 1990s after Peter North-cote’s arrival was the serious need to upgrade our mass spectral facilities. My per-sonal involvement with mass spectrometers and mass spectrometry date to my fac-ulty position at Florida and those research outcomes have already been discussed.What, in fact, was involved in Florida was a first generation mass spectrometerthat arrived in the Chemistry Department in the summer of 1967. It was assembledby  the  manufacturers  and  a  graduate  student  gained  his  PhD  degree  from  workusing and maintaining it; I hate to think what my own work vapourizing organicsalts did to the instrument’s interior! Nonetheless, I had a grounding in instrumentoperation and so when VUW obtained its own instrument (again brought in by TedHarvey) in 1974 from Micromass in Manchester (UK), I was an operator. The in-strument was housed in its own sizeable room adjacent to one of the lecture roomsin the McLaurin Lecture Block, now the Mail Room. The Micromass 12F was a113 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistsecond generation electron impact instrument with a large flight tube, huge pumpsand was difficult to service, but it was state-of-the-art. I geared myself up to usingthe machine and spent a week with Micromass becoming familiar with its intrica-cies in 1975, whilst at Reading. It served us well, but advances in the art of massspectrometry were fast and all too soon the 12F was outdated. By this time, JohnCraig had become interested in volatiles chemistry and after some negotiation, theNZ  Racing  Conference  (the  organization  that  oversees  the  country’s  horse  rac-ing) placed a Hewlett-Packard 5595 desktop mass spectrometer in Chemistry. Theold Micromass instrument was decommissioned in the mid-1980’s and its variousparts put to good use in science around Wellington – even the flight tube went to agood home. The Racing Conference contracted a technician to perform the neces-sary horse urine analyses and we had the instrument for the balance of the time.Eventually these analyses were transferred to Auckland and, after some protracteddiscussions, the aging desktop 5595 was left with us as our MS instrument.The general research of Chemistry and the Northcote marine natural productsprogramme really needed a modern instrument and so one was mooted in 1997,especially since the biochemists were keen to have a MALDI time-of-flight instru-ment. Serious negotiations began late that year and ran well into 1998. After muchdiscussion  with VUW’s  senior  administration,  including  the  Dean,  as  well  as  araft of manufacturers, our decision was narrowed to either one from PE Biosys-tems (near Boston) or Finnigan (in San Francisco). The Biosystems instrument,a Mariner, seemed better suited to the natural products chemists than an ion-trapinstrument from Finnigan that was ideal for me. Someone had to inspect the in-struments and put them through a strenuous test process. As I had had the mostexperience (and am able to shut down most instruments and computers in minimaltime!),  I  was  the  one  to  make  the  trip. The  Mariner  was  in  the  process  of  finaldevelopment  and  the  timing  for  my  visit  was  put  back  a  few  times,  eventuallytaking place in a one week break from teaching. The manufacturers split the costof my travel (which I had insisted to be business class as I would only return theday before lectures recommenced) and the Biosystems salesman accommodatedme  in  a  Venice  Beach  hotel  near  LAX  for  two  nights.  I  flew  to  Boston  on  theSunday and met him at the airport there. The time was hectic but the instrumentperformed well and handled the samples that I had brought with me with flyingcolours. On the Wednesday morning we arose before 7 am, drove back to Bostonand I left for San Francisco, arriving late morning local time. I was whisked to myhotel, lunched and then taken to the Finnigan facility to ‘play’ with the ion-trap.Just as I was about to ask to be returned to the hotel (it was by then 6 pm Pacifictime, 9 pm Eastern) I was told that I was being taken to dinner … and so the longday progressed. The time with Finnigan was well spent and although I preferred tohave their instrument for my own needs, it was the Biosystems Mariner that won114 -From Recognition to Retirementout. My return to Wellington was on the 14 hour United Airlines flight to Sydneyand then home, arriving mid-afternoon, 18 hours before my Monday lecture. TheBiosystems man gave me an upgrade coupon and the United flight was in 1st class;the food was awful but the wine superb – I slept for 11 of the 14 hours.With decisions made, a combined Biochemistry-Chemistry order was placedonce the price finally had been settled for this ‘first-in-NZ’ purchase and the mon-ies confirmed available. At that time Les Holborow was in his last year as Vice-Chancellor and, as happened for the NMR, payment was to be met by the centraladministration. However, with Holborow’s departure at the end of his term and fol-lowing the arrival of Michael Irving in January 1999, all of the arrangements weresubsequently  negated  and  the  instrument  costs  were  levied  against  the  ScienceFaculty. There was significant impact as the funds for routine equipment replace-ments were swallowed up and no science department was able to get anything newfor more than a year. As far as I was concerned, this was a reversal, not simply ofthe policy, but the reneging on an agreement. I am sure that Les Holborow wouldnever have initiated it. John Hoberg took charge of the instrument after its arrivaland attended a training course in Boston, which had been negotiated into the all upcost. For the first time, Victoria had accurate mass measurement facilities. It sig-nified the end of a long standing arrangement with Canterbury University and itsfirst-rate technician, Bruce Clark, who had provided me with high resolution massspectra (at least 150) for many years; they were run at a cost that was close to zero,a far cry from today’s charging regimes that pervade every sector of academia.In the early days of the Mariner’s short life, we had a Russian immigrant, OlegZubkov, master the instrument and have it perform to specification. However, dur-ing 2002, the Varian NMR instrument suffered a quench that damaged the mag-net and it was out of service for some six months; this impacted on the Mariner.Whereas an NMR instrument accepts crude samples within a sample tube, a massspectrometer  is  only  as  good  as  the  sample  that  is  inserted  into  it,  unless  sepa-ration  is  done  by  way  of  gas  chromatography.  Unfortunately,  research  studentswere allowed to use the instrument as a ‘crude sample analyzer’ whilst the NMRwas down and the inlet, source and ion-tube became clogged; costly repairs wereneeded. The manufacturers did not help matters by not maintaining a supply ofspare parts and the quality of the mass spectra never returned to the former level.Ultimately, after Oleg’s departure in 2006, the instrument became almost impos-sible  to  maintain  (and  certainly  too  expensive),  not  because  it  was  inferior,  butbecause of the maltreatment that it had been subjected to. It was decommissionedin 2008 and its replacement is due soon.The period that covered the Mariner installation was one of further change forthe Chemistry. For many years the chemists had held the view that amalgamationwith a larger unit was desirable, the organic staff favouring an affiliation with the115 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistbiological  sciences  and  the  rest  of  the  Department  preferring  Physics. A  coupleof the earlier Departmental reviews had recommended amalgamation with Phys-ics but the university administration rejected the calls. However, from 1997 therewas  a  change  of  heart  which,  when  coupled  with  the  paucity  of  undergraduatenumbers, led to amalgamation to ‘The School of Chemical and Physical Sciences’(SCPS) during the last part of John Well’s term as Dean. Not surprisingly, therewas considerable concern about the name of the new unit and, recognising that itwould never be accepted, I was to the forefront pushing “The School of Physicsand Chemistry” as the order reads and sounds better than the reverse. Of course itwas rejected as being insufficiently appropriate to define a new collaborative enti-ty. And so my preferred (but previously unannounced) SCPS, with chemistry first,won the day. After this, and when the facilities in Physics were being modified toprovide  teaching  and  research  laboratories  for  chemistry,  my  time  for  ‘researchand refresher leave’ (as it had become known) came around again. For a variety ofreasons, it was no longer possible to spend long periods away and so this particularsabbatical was divided into three. The first segment was to be a two month spellin Ron Warrener’s Centre for Molecular Architecture at Central Queensland Uni-versity in Rockhampton, the second a similar time at the Australian National withMartin Banwell and the last, another two months with Klaus Müllen in Mainz.The first component, with Ron and his delightful colleague Doug Butler, wasset for the NZ winter over June-July 1999. On my way to ‘Rocky’, I stopped inBrisbane to see Curt Wentrup and then made the 8 hour drive north the next day.My arrival was carefully scheduled so that I could meet John Warkentin (McMas-ter University, Ontario) before he left. John had begun some work on the additionof dimethoxycarbene to ring-fused cyclobutenes as a part of the elegant Warrener-Butler programme that led the way to large, rigid molecules with functional unitsprecisely located on the carbon framework. It is continued by others even today.I  spent  time  modifying  the  reaction  conditions  and  characterizing  the  productsin order to bring the work to a successful conclusion; it gave rise to my secondpublication with full-time academics as its only authors.59 Ron had rented a smallhouse  for  me  on  Ocean  Parade  by  the  beach  in Yeppoon,  a  30-40  minute  drivefrom the University. The location was glori-ous and a far cry from winter in Wellington.I took early morning walks along the beachand became familiar with the sea eagles andibis,  saw  the  brolgas  in  the  marshlands  tothe north, and enjoyed the local old miningtown to the interior. Margaret joined me forthe winter holiday break that the NZ schoolshad during July. But it was not holiday for116 -From Recognition to Retirementme. I had forwarded a sample of cyclopropaquinone 81 in order to use Ron’s hightemperature/pressure  facilities  for  cycloaddition.  What  we  found  was  that  theolefinic bond of 81 did not add furan under 14 x 105 kPa pressure, even at 65 oC.By comparison, the more reactive isobenzofuran added at 40 oC and atmosphericpressure  giving  100,  but  attempts  to  deoxygenate  the  furan  ring  to  liberate  thecorresponding tetracenedione (Scheme 29) failed. Nonetheless, I was more thanpleased to have had two publications from my last sojourn at the laboratory bench.The second component, at ANU, was hosted by Martin Banwell over October-November 1999 at the time he was appointed to his Chair. En route to Canberra,I stopped over in Sydney to visit my old friends at the University of New SouthWales, especially David Black, and the newer ones at Sydney University, particu-larly Len Lindoy, who was in the last period of his AJC Board chairmanship. InCanberra, I stayed with Martin and his wife Cathy for almost a week and got toknow their two boys, the elder one then 11, but only a baby when I had been withthem in Melbourne in 1988. Martin had arranged an on-campus apartment for mebut it was unavailable for the first two weeks of my stay, and so Christina Chaimade a room in her home available for my second week. The time I spent on theANU  campus  provided  a  great  renewal  of  chemistry  with  international  visitorsand their seminars, and the RACI (Royal Australian Chemical Institute) eveningmeetings and the camaraderie of the organic chemists. It was especially gratifyingto meet up again with Leo Radom and the late Athel Beckwith (1930-2010) as wehad enjoyed our time on Heron Island some eight years earlier.The plan for my stay was to use the time, not in the laboratory as in Rockhamp-ton, but by writing a review with Martin on the use of gem-dihalocyclopropanesin natural products synthesis. Many hours were spent in ANU’s excellent Chemis-try Library searching Chemical Abstracts as electronic searching with SciFinder®,routine today, had not yet advanced adequately at that time. In any event, the lit-erature was collated, the references read and the draft manuscript prepared. Notsurprisingly, Martin had had little time to contribute and felt that were the reviewto be published, he would need to make a significant contribution. The project hadarisen because Martin had been approached by Peter Vollhardt for a review to ap-pear as an Account in Synlett. When I left in late November 1999, Martin was todraw most of schematics but he never found the necessary time and the text laydormant until late 2004.During my stay in Canberra, I was advised by Jim Johnston, still Chairman ofSCPS, that the comparatively new Dean had placed the School under review andthat staff numbers were to be reduced with all positions under scrutiny. Asked if Ishould return to better cope with the issues, Jim’s response was non-committal andoffered little by way of hope or expectation; it was bureaucratic, but it did tell methat I needed to make a submission, which I did. When I got back I needed to move117 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistfrom my home of 31 years in the Easterfield Building to a new office in the Schoolof Chemical and Physical Sciences located in the Laby Building, and this I did,leaving Gareth to clean up and vacate the Easterfield laboratory. In itself a simpletask one would imagine, but one simple slip – omitting to ‘kill’ the remnants of ourcyclopropabenzene with an alkali wash – resulted in one of the Psychology staffcalling the fire brigade because of a chlorine leak. The psychologists evacuated butwhen Easterfield was checked no chlorine was found – only those chemists yet tomove happily having afternoon tea.The revamped facilities in Laby gave the chemists about half of the space thatthey had had and teaching laboratories that were markedly smaller. The renova-tions were  Science’s major project for the new  millennium and, while nice andnew, there remains insufficient space for storage and too few fume cupboards forthe number of students involved in synthetic work. Of course, these deficienciesonly emerged when numbers increased significantly a couple of years later. As onewould imagine, the design and construction of the modifications to Laby had beenunder contract and, whilst visually impressive, the reality was not. We had to havea light well to the central area that borders a small instrument room and studentcomputing facilities on one side and a teaching lab on the other, with the remainingsides corridors; within days, the blinds in the computer unit were shut. Offices hadtheir computer work stations set back-to-back to minimize wiring costs – but theeffect was that one side was in the sun with its computer screen impossible to read.Main support columns pierce work areas making sections inaccessible and, as hashappened throughout my lengthy time at VUW, the join of the ‘add-on’ to the ex-isting roof was anything but watertight. What NZ has never learnt is that countriesfar larger have had bigger science laboratories operating for many years with trueand tested designs. Despite their availability, VUW seems incapable of acceptingsuch designs, preferring instead to see if the wheel can be reinvented. My office isin a section of the revamped old structure that had its heating decommissioned forthe renovation. Reconnection, though perhaps obvious, was not attended to and soheaters were supplied, supposedly to be removed when the connection was rein-stated over a year later. The temperature dips below 15 oC much of the time and theheaters remain. What was new in Laby was the provision of a separate laboratoryfor each of the organic staff to locate their students. This marked the beginningsof a divide into separate and independent operations. In the early stages, the majorconcern was with the few fume cupboards available and I was more than happy forone of those in my lab to be used by the Hoberg group, but the new environmentled to strained relationships as much of what had been communal equipment wasamassed into just one area.The final part of my sabbatical was to be a period with Klaus Müllen at thePolymer Institute over February-March of the new millennium. Unfortunately, it118 -From Recognition to Retirementdid not eventuate, not because I had had to reapply for my position as all thosein the organic area were renewed, but because I suffered a second heart attack inJanuary 2000, while on holiday. Margaret drove me back to Wellington and I wasimmediately hospitalized. By this time, the procedure of stent implantation was tothe fore and my blockage was treated speedily and efficiently in this manner. Sincemy return from Canberra, I had not been feeling as well as usual and my then GPhad suggested seeing my cardiologist, Ron Easthope. Unfortunately this did nothappen, not that the NZ health system failed but because Ron had made attempts toreach me when we were away. In the event, he suggested that, since his retirementwas imminent, I should accept a more recently trained and competent man – and Ihave been in the care of Phil Matsis ever since. Because of the infarct and keyholesurgery,  I  was  not  able  to  obtain  international  health  insurance  for  a  six-monthperiod and so the visit to Mainz had to be put off and, when coupled with otheruniversity commitments, it could not be rescheduled until mid-2002.My hospitalization and convalescence period also had an impact on my leaveallowance. Since about 1998, the NZ government had required employers to keepa record of the leave taken by their staff members; Victoria was no exception and,like every academic, I was asked how much leave, if any, I was owed. After about30 years in the employ of Victoria University, I came to the conclusion that the40 hour working week insisted upon by the government agencies (and university)over that length of time led to a considerable period of leave due – especially al-lowing for all the weekend time changing NMR samples on the FT80A. The 40hour week had brought me into disrepute with one government agency earlier. Icannot remember when, but there was a survey of academic duties, responsibili-ties and times taken performing the various tasks. This was no simple exercise asstaff were randomly selected for interview and my name was on the list. I recallthe interview being lengthy by the time all the boxes had been ticked, crossed andexpanded, and questions answered. Finally, I was asked to say what proportion ofmy time was spent on teaching, research and administration. This was about 33%each but, not surprisingly, the interviewer insisted on expressing this as 33% of 40hours and entered these into the boxes. The truth was that it needed to read 50%each if 40 hours was taken as the norm; this did not fit to the survey being appliedand its entry was refused. So I took the forms, tore them up and put the pieces inthe wastepaper bin. I have always felt that ⅓ teaching, ⅓ research and ⅓ admin-istration is a fair rule of thumb, but never at 13 hours 20 minutes each per week!Thus, my simple calculation of the time in excess of the assumed 40-hour weekover the 30 years for which untaken holiday was to be claimed led to insufficienttime in one calendar year for this to be taken! I suggested that my entitlement berecorded as 90 days and there was no argument. At the time that I was hospitalized,I was taking ‘leave due’ but this had to be cancelled and ‘sick leave’ inserted in its119 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistplace for this and the subsequent recuperation dictated by the medics; my arrearsdid little but grow!The impact of this second heart attack was more significant than just prevent-ing leave in Germany. The six-month ‘no insurance’ period also covered the timeof the major Pacifichem 2000 planning meeting scheduled for Washington, DC.Sadly, I missed it and a hosted tour of The White House that ACS had arrangedfor  the  delegates.  This  meeting  scheduled  the  accepted  symposia  and  allocatedthe various rooms to be used in Waikiki. Despite my inability to attend the DCmeeting, I was back to normal by the time of the congress and I attended. It was atthe final planning meeting, the day before the congress opened, when I found thatthe student poster competition had attracted far more entrants than had been pre-sumed. Rich Oakley of Waterloo University in Ontario asked me if I would assistwith the event. At that time, papers were scheduled within the various symposiarather than being a student event at one place with a predetermined number of ses-sions. We both worked harder than ever before with the outcomes as I indicatedearlier. The congress was another outstanding success and there was no dissensionin  holding  another  in  the  series  in  2005. Again,  I  signed  the  agreement  for  theNZIC and was delighted to support the Korean chemists’ move to join the organ-izing committee. These duties took place at the first of the planning meetings forPacifichem 2005 that was held in Hawaii a few months after the dramatic events ofSeptember 11, 2001. Stan Israel took over as Head of the ACS delegation and PeterStang was the replacement for Paul Walter as treasurer. That 2001 meeting and thesubsequent one in Tokyo had great camaraderie. It was agreed that the congressmust move into the modern era as its growth had almost outstripped the facilitieswe had available. Registration and abstract submission went to an on-line formatfor the 2005 meeting through the good graces of Rich Oakley and some Canadiansoftware colleagues. However, someone was needed to test the Canadian-designedsoftware and, of the committee members, the task fell to me. I managed to shut thesystem down rapidly and then with increasing difficulty until the software becameidiot proof! That Tokyo planning meeting was the last time that I was with StanIsrael, whereas Peter Stang has visited NZ a number of times since then.For  VUW  staff,  the  Pacifichem  meeting  in  2000  was  more  than  interestingbecause one of its former chemistry graduates, Alan MacDiarmid, had just beenawarded the Nobel Prize (with Heeger and Shirakawa) for his work on conductingpolymers; VUW’s name was recognised more than usual. In a rare case of ‘gettingit right’, VUW had awarded an honorary DSc to MacDiarmid in December 1999, ayear ahead of the Nobel Prize. After the auspicious occasion, Alan revisited VUWChemistry a number of times and had some of our staff, including John Spencer,the Head of School since 2005, visit him at his home-base in the University ofPennsylvania. Alan  gave  his  name  to  a  number  of  institutes  and  organizations,120 -From Recognition to RetirementThe MacDiarmid Building, VUWnone  less  than  the  MacDiarmid  In-stitute  for  Advanced  Materials  andNanotechnology based on the VUWcampus.  By  the  time  of  his  NobelPrize,  NZ  science  was  being  con-centrated  and  focussed  even  more,with  government  pushing  for  cen-tres of research excellence (CoREs).Eventually, it was decided that thereshould be six of these. Perhaps as aresult of the Nobel, or perhaps from good advice, the decision was for one of theseto encompass new materials. ‘Bids’ by reputed scientists in conjunction with oth-ers elsewhere in the country were sought for the six centres. By that time, Prof.(now Sir) Paul Callaghan had been appointed to a Chair in Physics and he led theinitiative for a materials science and nanotechnology centre to be located at VUW.The VUW bid included Massey, Canterbury, and Otago Universities, as well astwo  Crown  Research  Institutes  (GNS  Science  and  IRL  Ltd.),  and  it  succeeded.The MacDiarmid Institute was opened in 2002 as a partnership among these or-ganizations. What the significant funding did for Chemistry, unintentionally, wasto  create  a  two  tier  system:  those  with  MacDiarmid  monies  and  those  without.Fortunately, as time has passed, the discrepancies have become less significant,but the School’s doors still carry signs designating the nature of the laboratory. TheCoRE not only survived its initial six-year funding period, but retained an equallysignificant budget for its second six year period. Victoria named its newest (2010)science building, after Alan.In  2001,  Carissa  Jones  departed  for  her  postdoctoral  with  Jay  Siegel  in  SanDiego and I saw her there as Jay hosted ISNA-10 that year. It was also the year thatJarrod Ward examined the charge transfer complexation of our π-extended cyclo-proparenes for his Honours year. Moreover, despite thelack of monies for chemicals, I was allowed to purchasethe  School’s  only  copy  of  the  Warren  Hehre  Spartansoftware for ab initio molecular orbital calculations. Ithen began to use the software to compute properties ofmany of our molecules; the most notable outcome wasa  delightful  illustration  on  the  cover  of  No.  23  of  theEuropean Journal of Organic Chemistry in November2003.60 The year also allowed me to reschedule the visitto  the  Max  Planck  Polymer  Institute  and  Klaus  Mül-len for the following June. Over the years Leiv Sydnes,initially at Tromsø then Bergen in Norway, had been toScott and Ito – ISNA-10121 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistvisit, always staying with us at home and always with a mutual interest in three-membered ring  chemistry.  Leiv  was  keen  for  me  to  go  to  Norway. With  this  inmind,  a  two  month  period  from  mid-May  2002  was  set  to  include  almost  twoweeks there and several days with Roland Boese in Essen, prior to some six weeksback at the MPI–P in Mainz. The time in Norway was most rewarding, not simplybecause I had over a week in Leiv’s comfortable home, but because I was ableto meet Lars Skattebøl in Oslo. Many years earlier he had invited me to a NATOchemistry  meeting  but  I  had  been  unable  to  attend  because  of  funding  and  the1-in-3-year  overseas  conference  regime.As any small ring chemist will know, Larsis acclaimed for his pioneering work withcyclopropanes and their derived carbenes,and the time with him was rather special.Not only this, but Leiv had arranged forme  to  fly  to  Trondheim  and  lecture  aswell. However, the Norwegian custom ofa visitor spending time only with the hostgroup  surprised  me  as  remarkably  fewother  staff  were  seen.  I  then  returned  toBergen on the overnight ferry, the maid-en voyage of the new boat MS Trollfjord. The experience of daylight well into thesmall hours of the morning was exhilarating and the time in Bergen stimulating.The weekend was spent with Leiv and wife Kirsty at a cabin on Hardanger fjord,with friends Terry and Ruth.L-R: Terry, Ruth, Leiv and KirstyFrom Bergen it was a short hop to Dortmund. Roland Boese met me at the air-port and took me back to his home as it had become the norm to stay there whenin Essen, in the same way that he always stayed with us in Wellington. I rememberarriving on a Saturday afternoon and being told that he and Renate were to havea group of chemists round for lunch the next day. This proved to be a most enjoy-able  occasion  as  Frank-Garret  Klarner  and  other  organic  chemists  were  there.  Istayed with Roland and Renate until the middle of the following week, lecturing atwhat is now the old University of Essen (the University of Duisburg-Essen sincethe  2003  amalgamation)  and  spending  a  day  at  Bochum  with  Wolfram  Sander.He had been a contributor to my ‘Strain’ series and had moved to Bochum sometime earlier to establish what has been a spectacularly successful group studyingmatrix isolated molecules and other reactive intermediates. Then it was a longerthan usual train journey to Mainz. The railway lines on the southern side of theRhine were being renovated and a slow winding trip on the left side of the riverwas needed before crossing back upstream ahead of the Mainz station.As in 1993, Klaus had set up accommodation in an MPI-P guest room. Life122 -From Recognition to Retirementwas easy to adapt to and the newly constructed organic lab wing well designed.My first lecture was in Heidelberg, but with Rolf Gleiter as Neidlein had, by then,retired. I had first met Rolf in Utah, and then at conferences before he came to NZin 1998, but my visit to him was the same as in Norway. Of the people that I waskeen to see again, Klaus Hafner in Darmstadt rated highly. Heis another of the distinguished German chemists, but with a re-alistic and perceptive grasp of the discipline in the country andof the individuals involved. Indeed, I well recall him describingone national as a ‘me too’ chemist that precisely described thisperson’s ability to take and use whatever had been discoveredelsewhere. It was a delightful day, no lecture commitments andtime to simply enjoy his company. However, after returning toMainz by train and then dining at a Greek restaurant, I began tofeel uncomfortable but, early the next morning, a Friday, I wasup and off to Utrecht to see Leo Jenneskens and deliver a lecture. Unfortunately,the overnight discomfort continued and I suffered another heart attack, the third,somewhere en route. After Leo had collected me from the station and taken me tothe Debye Institute, I decided that I was in no state to do anything other than callthe NZ insurance company and get to a hospital.Klaus HafnerWhat happened has to be the worst nightmare any academic can face, namelythat of having a visitor taken ill while host. Leo and his wife were more than gener-ous. Initially, Leo got me to the university hospital where an infarct was confirmedand hospitalization mandated. The difficulty that Leo had was that, in Holland, be-ing a geographically small country, the patient is located at that hospital best ableto take him, not the closest. However, because I knew few people in the country,he was able (eventually) to have me admitted to the hospital in the small town ofZeist, not far outside Utrecht and close to his home. One of the cardiologists wasOxford-trained Dr. Bredero, with impeccable English, and I was assigned to him.I also had a nurse whose command of the language was good. This was Lilian Ol-limans who went out of her way to be of assistance and she has become a closecontact. I was well cared for; Leo went and bought me pyjamas and other essen-tials as I had arrived only with enough clothes for the weekend stay, and he wasinstrumental in having a bed provided for Margaret in my room when she arrivedfrom NZ. The only other non-native to have stayed in the hospital was a Russianand his treatment set the precedent. The system in the Netherlands at that time wasfor  angioplasty  and  open  heart  surgeries  to  be  performed  in  a  few  centres  withdiagnostic testing done elsewhere; the patient was moved as needed. For me, theangiogram dictated changed medication and a probable second by-pass surgery athome, a journey to be taken only under medical supervision.As a long journey by air was designated in Zeist as ‘Amsterdam to New York’,123 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistthe 24+ hours needed to return to NZ could only be agreed to after being symptomfree  for  a  week. This  time  was  spend  in  a  hotel  in  the  neighbourhood  as  I  wasnot allowed to take up the Zwannenburg’s offer of accommodation, but to remainclose to the hospital should its services subsequently be needed. The NZ insurancecompany, by this time one that covered all the Victoria University travelling em-ployees, was good to deal with and they, in turn, liaised with Margaret. The onlytime the service fell down was when payments were needed in Holland.I was visited by Klaus and Renate Müllen, who brought my belongings fromMainz, the Rehbergs from Cologne, and the Zwannenburgs from Nijmegen. But itwas Roland, who drove from Essen twice each week, who kept me in good spirits.It was he who introduced me to Henning Mankell and the ‘Kurt Wallender’ seriesof crime novels (see frontispiece) saying that he thought I might like them; I haveread  every  one  in  the  series  and  many  others  by  the  same  author.  Roland  wenteven further, offering to cover any expense that I could not meet; a very generousgesture but not needed as it happened. The hotel that Margaret and I had to stay inwas by no means inexpensive and the account due at the time I left had to be sig-nificant. However, the insurers had agreed to this place and their NZ medic settledall the accounts before we eventually left. Margaret was unable to get flights backwith the medic and me, and so she had a weekend in London with Mark and hisfamily (who had come across to Zeist for a weekend to see me) before flying backto NZ via Los Angeles, arriving home some six hours ahead of me. My journeywas by way of Singapore where we had a daytime layover. After checking in forthe overnight flight to Auckland (and then down to Wellington), we ran into DavidOfficer in the Singapore Airlines lounge! Upon return, the videotape of my Dutchangioplasty was left with my cardiologist and a follow-up appointment scheduled.This led to another angiogram and Phil Matsis’ decision to open the blockage andinsert stents number three and four.Unfortunately,  Phil  was  proved  wrong  and  the  Dutch  right,  as  the  blockagestayed open only for a few weeks before causing infarct number four in Septem-ber. With this, the decision was that I should have a ‘redo’ by-pass and so I un-derwent surgery in late November of 2002; the surgeon proved to be Mr. Riordan,the assistant during my first such surgery. By 2002, the impact of anaesthesia wasmarkedly less significant than in 1983 and the procedure itself was much faster. Inany event, my anaesthetist’s daughter was one of the chemistry students (JoanneWojnar) and she brought flowers to the hospital for me. This caused all sorts ofconfusion as the hospital staff thought that they had to be for her father and nota patient. I recovered quickly, edited the subsequent issue of Chemistry in NewZealand, (for which I became the editor in 2001) as therapy, and then took a shortbreak to sample some of the Hawkes Bay wines and see the Mike Ponder paint-ings that were being exhibited at the Silini vineyard before returning to the office.124 -From Recognition to RetirementGareth Dixon had been in the process of writing his thesis before I left for theill-fated sabbatical in Europe and his examination procedure ‘ticked along’ dur-ing my northern hemisphere hospitalization. His completion happened after I hadreturned home but before the subsequent by-pass surgery. He left to undertake suc-cessful preliminary patent attorney training in Manchester. This was followed byfurther courses in Wellington before being appointed to Baldwin-Shelston patentattorneys (now ShelstonIP) in Sydney. Another notable event before the surgerywas  notification  and  presentation  of  the  New  Zealand Association  of  Scientists‘Shorland Medal’ to me. It is awarded annually in recognition of major and contin-ued contribution to basic or applied research that has added significantly to scien-tific understanding over one’s career. Its importance to me stems from the fact thatBrian Shorland (1909-1999), a doyen of NZ science, spent his ‘honorary career’in retirement (in biochemistry) at Victoria University for 30 years from 1969. Healways supported my endeavours and I cherish the times we had when he was apassenger in my car on the way from local NZIC meetings, always insisting that hetake the bus home once we reached the Wellington terminus at the railway station.A consequence of my medical misdemeanours was that I had no research stu-dent assigned for 2003 and so the year gave me an opportunity to take stock onceagain. My step-father had died a few weeks after I had returned from Zeist andthe family home in Lee, London SE 12, which he had occupied since my mother’sdeath, was put on the market, a task eased with the help of friend Peter Civil andhis son Roland. In short order, the place was emptied of its contents, put up for saleand a settlement reached. Once the various UK taxes had been paid and the lawyerdone with the paperwork, it was well into 2003, but the consequences were signifi-cant. Whereas I had assumed that I would have to stay at VUW at least until the‘traditional’ retiring age of 65 years, I now found myself in the position of beingable to retire and not be the pauper I might have been. There seemed little virtue incontinuing as a staff member at the university because funding was being targetedmore and more, and staff without such monies or unable to attract students weregoing to have increasing difficulties with their research efforts. Indeed, such aca-demics have become less and less able to make a meaningful research contributionwithout bastardizing their work and twisting their real interest to fit to the modernidiom. Given my health situation, the demands of targeted research, and the pau-city of external funds for very fundamental studies, the direction was clear, but theultimate decision to retire was most difficult. Eventually it was made, as retire Imust, and it was in the full knowledge that my ties to the laboratory bench wouldbe severed. I could never raise the monies needed to rent a bench and purchase thechemicals necessary to push back further the frontiers in strained molecule chem-istry. And so, towards the end of October 2003, it was with much sadness that Isubmitted my resignation. Jim Johnston was still Head of School and he instigated125 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistthe process of my becoming an emeritus professor and retaining my office, withaccess to the associated facilities. My resignation proved to be a little ahead of thatfrom John Hoberg, who returned to the US with his family just before Christmasin 2003 some months ahead of my own departure.One of the last duties that befell me in VUW’s employ was the need to com-plete  a  portfolio  for  the  newly  instigated  performance  based  research  funding(PBRF)  model.  By  mid-2003,  New  Zealand  had  chosen  to  follow  world  trendsand assess  the performance of academic researchers, and this seems soon  to beextended separately to teaching. There is little doubt that having an assessment ofa given discipline can be a good thing. However, as soon as it was announced thatthe exercise would grade each academic according to performance (output) withthe individual results returned to the institution involved, that arrows were drawnand  the  opportunity  for  misuse  legion.  The  concept  was  simple  enough,  assessstaff research across all the institutions and then divide the government money forresearch to fit the profile. Of course, none of this has evolved as was intended andthe universities now use the PBRF outcome at will for any purpose which suits.Thus, it was announced in the spring of 2010 that, henceforth, no new academicstaff member will be appointed to VUW unless the individual’s PBRF rating is Bor better, at least until after the next (2012) round – the NZ universities are movingto buying in staff to raise their profile for a subsequent round(s).But to return to the first such exercise and my involvement in it: by the time theneed to produce a portfolio for the newly established Tertiary Education Commis-sion was known, I had tendered my resignation and felt that, should the institutionrequire a submission from me, then it would need to make its views known in apolite manner. I took the various electronic communications as of little relevanceand awaited the personal touch – my research output as measured by the numberof published papers in the peer reviewed literature was one of the highest in Chem-istry. Eventually, it was the Dean who asked if I would be willing to complete aportfolio; it was very definitely a situation of the institution needing me far morethan I, it. Whereas colleagues had attempted to ‘fill boxes’ as prescribed, I felt itimportant to know precisely what the bureaucrats meant in specifying the maxi-mum size of an entry by way of characters. I had seen enough nonsensical exercis-es to suspect that the characters would also include spaces, and thus minimize theopportunity to say precisely what one wanted; I was proved correct. In 2004, therewere no good comparative data to allow for science and non-science publicationto be matched effectively. This was rectified through a subsequent major exerciseundertaken in Australia (which showed that almost every journal that carried mycolleagues and my own refereed papers ranked ‘A’). Thus, we were required toclassify papers by the nature of the review process, the locality of the publicationhouse, etc., etc. What I found highly amusing was the absence of a suitable box126 -From Recognition to Retirementin  which  one  could  place  one’s  peer  review  exercises  of  refereeing.  I  maintainthe view that, if by my actions of scientific review, a paper is subsequently pub-lished and the author gains an ‘A’ grade for that paper in his PRBF exercise, thenmy action as referee is at least as good, if not better. I included my list of refereereports among the highest ranked papers. Not only did this cause a stir among thepencil-pushing administrators but it elicited a request for the actual reports. Therequest was vehemently refused (naturally, all hard and electronic copies had beendestroyed) and the information that my portfolio would be altered if I did not re-locate the offending material was treated by a simple deletion of the entire folder(backed-up of course but who was to know). The point had been made, my per-sonally completed portfolio was duly submitted without change and the ’A’ gradeoutcome, which Victoria had so desperately wanted, gained. Vindication for mystand followed when a separate category of output, namely, material refereed, wasincluded in subsequent exercises.The decision to retire proved to be a wise one as the sole remaining ‘original’by-pass faltered just after Christmas 2003, a little more than a year after surgery. Itgave rise to infarct number five and the implantation of a new stent, also numberfive. Statistically, one in five stents block within the first six months and mine didjust that. Shortly after my formal retirement, I awoke in the early hours one Aprilmorning feeling unwell but capable of recognizing the heart symptoms. Margaretcalled the ambulance service and I was (again) admitted to Wellington Hospital.It was later that same morning, while having an ECG taken by the coronary careunit (CCU) medical manager that I was told the pattern was changing as the plotemerged from the machine. I was having an(other) heart attack but felt nothinguntoward. That single event had more people moving faster that I had seen previ-ously in the CCU, and I was in the procedures facility for an(other) angioplastywithin fifty minutes. The blockage to stent five was opened and two more stentssuccessfully located. At that point in time, an anti-platelet medication had becomeavailable in NZ, but only for about three weeks after an uncoated metal stent wasimplanted; Canada had their patients on the drug for about six months. The car-diology team were of the view that I needed to be medicated for at least a monthbut the NZ drug purchasing agency ‘Pharmac’, whose medical director earlier hadbeen my GP for several years, declined the request even for a slightly extendedperiod. The hospital staff manipulated matters so as to provide the medication forthe longest possible time, and I purchased the remainder to cover their preferredtime period.It took only a short time to recover and I was soon back to my office at Victoriaand into teaching. Peter Northcote was the sole full-time organic staff member and,although assisted by recent PhD graduate Bridget Stocker (prior to her postdoctor-al appointment), it was a difficult time for him. My health was then stable from that127 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemisttime until November 2008. While pruning a small tree, my blood pressure droppedto the extent that I blacked out, fell from the tree, and regained semi-consciousnessfinding myself in total darkness and with no sensation. The question in my mindwas: had I died? I tried to move a finger, could do so, and ultimately regained fullmobility on the ground in our garden. Margaret found me with no recollection ofwhat had happened. She got the ambulance, and I was off to hospital again. I thenhad a series of black-outs but all attempts to monitor an ‘event’ failed and, after anincident in which I scraped the skin off the left side of my face, I was readmittedto hospital and advised that a pacemaker was essential. As I was declared a dangernot just to myself but to everyone around me, I was required to stay there until onewas inserted. This was done but, being an active chemist, the local anaesthetic didnot numb my sensations sufficiently and I was able to discuss just where the elec-trodes were during the insertions; I had several doses of anaesthetic more than thenorm, but to little effect. Since the 2004 blockage and this 2008 ‘re-wiring’, I havehad no further troubles with my array of expensive metalwork.128 -The Joys of Emeritus Professor– What Better Role?When the time came for my formal retirement on March 31, 2004, there was noreplacement here for John Hoberg, although the position had been advertised andan appointment made; my own post was about to be advertised as a lectureship inchemistry (organic). On my final day, Jim Johnston organized a delightful Schoolgathering  in  the  late  afternoon  and  marked  my  retirement  with  the  presentationof Yearling Sale, a print by local Hutt Valley artist Mike Ponder. It has pride ofplace in our home as I have been a Ponder fan for some time. I had negotiated withJim, who still retained the chairmanship, to retain my office, its facilities with thecomputer, and university services so that I could continue with writing, editing andstudent assistance. I was appointed an emeritus professor some months later. I wasalso asked if I would agree to the School holding a formal retirement symposiumin my honour, to which I acceded, but this could not happen until 2005. It seemedprudent to separate my formal retirement from the new ‘paper chemist’ activitiesI had planned, and this was to have been by way of a month away from the uni-versity. The period was extended for it was during April 2004 that my fifth stentblocked as I have already described.Joanne Harvey, a Victoria graduate, was the replacement for John Hoberg, butshe did not arrive until mid-May of 2004 as she was completing a postdoctoralwith Richard Taylor at York in England. For the second time Peter and I coveredmuch of the organic teaching, Peter as a formal employee, me as one under con-tract, though some of the courses were taught by Crown Research Institute staffand  others.  My  vacant  lectureship  was  subsequently  filled  by  Brendan  Burkett,another ANU graduate, but this time from my former colleague Christina Chai. Hearrived in the early part of 2005 and, together with Joanne, proved to be a delight-ful colleague, each active in establishing their respective research groups.I regard my senior unpaid role as one that allows me to continue with writing,refereeing, editing and assisting any student who wants it – providing only that s/he makes an honest effort. Additionally, it has given me a number of excursionsinto computational chemistry, some published, some not. What the status of emeri-tus has done for me is to provide complete freedom of choice to do what I most129 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistenjoy, in the time that I wish to devote to it, and at a pace that I find pleasing. As astaff member I was always in to the office well before 9 am, but now I prefer thecorridors of knowledge to be aired before I enter at about 10 am, after a leisurelybreakfast, the newspaper and morning crossword.My first tasks were to complete a review that Henning Hopf had invited meto write and to finish off all those papers remaining from our research work. Thereview  was  on  the  fulvalenes  and  it  appeared  in  print  in  2005. With  that  done,and as Joanne Harvey had been in Canberra at the time that I was on sabbatical,the ill-fated review from 1999 on gem-dihalocyclopropanes reared its head. Thecontent encompassed much of Joanne’s ANU PhD work and it seemed an idealopportunity to complete the exercise with her, providing that she was willing andthat Martin (Banwell) had no objections. Peter Vollhardt and Synlett were still in-terested in publishing the item while Martin was happy to leave the task to Joanneand me. Thus, it was in late 2004 that Joanne and I began to think about just how,and in what way, the manuscript should be revised and updated. The exercise itselfshowed Joanne to be adept at the task at hand, effective and efficient, and it wasa pleasure to be involved with her in this way. The duly completed article wentto  Peter  Vollhardt,  received  accolades  from  him,  and  subsequently  appeared  inSynlett in 2006.61 I recall making an enquiry of Peter’s secretary, only to receive arebuke that said ‘with so few amendments required what more did I want’! I thinkit worth noting here that I had not wanted to complete this review for any personalkudos, rather than to provide Joanne with her first article as a VUW staff member.As the time passed, I took great pleasure in being able to explore the industrialuses  to  which  so  many  small-ring  organic  compounds  had  been  put,  somethingthat never quite made it past the ‘wish list’ whilst I was employed. What I foundfascinated  me  and  led  to  a  series  of  articles  for  Chemistry  in  New  Zealand  (allexternally  refereed  since  I  was  editor!)  under  the  title  of  ‘From  small  rings  tobig  things’.  Not  only  this,  but  one  manuscript  provided  the  NZ  readers  with  asynopsis of Alfred Nobel’s life and work that encompassed the nitroglycerin com-mercialization and its pharmacological (heart) use. What better than to dedicatethis to the trio of cardiologists who have tended me over the past 28 years, and Idid just that. Another in the small ring series covered the use of 1-methylcyclopro-pene as a fruit/flower preservative and that fell to my surgeon, Bede Squire, whoin his retirement is growing and grafting New Zealand native shrubs. The Nobelpiece  came  from  my  (editorial)  policy  of  including  a  synopsis  each  year  of  theNobel Prize winning chemistry with someone subsequently saying just how littlehe knew about Nobel himself.Several of the students I had taught continued on to postgraduate study and myfinal senior teaching in 2004 was to an exceptionally competent group individuals.Joanne Wojnar, who I have mentioned previously, took a year away from study130 -The Joys of Emeritus Professorbefore returning for PhD training with Peter Northcote, a postdoctoral in Chicagoand then back to NZ for a fellowship with Margaret Brimble in Auckland. MariaMatvenko,  a  Russian  immigrant,  impressed  and  it  has  been  a  pleasure  to  sup-port her through the choice of PhD supervisor, her study, and her postdoctoral asa  Humboldt  Fellow  in  Munich. Teck  Lim,  a  Malaysian  Chinese,  completed  hisPhD with Richard Tilley (in my view, Richard is an emerging nanoparticle star),then went to Oxford as a postdoctoral and is now employed as a research chem-ist in Resene’s Hutt Valley (Wellington) plant. Jonathan Singh, a local man whohas taken time to display his true talents, is about to complete his PhD with PeterNorthcote as this is written. Indeed, one of the joys of retirement has been to in-teract with those students who have sought some form of assistance and to watchthem develop.The retirement symposium that the School hosted for me took place over twodays at the end of June in 2005. The School asked me to provide a (limited) listof  overseas  chemists  who  could  be  invited  and  extended  the  invitations  aroundUpper: Andy Kay & Leiv Sydnes; Roger Brown, the author, Jun Nishimura and Yoshito Tobe.Lower: Barry Dent, Andy Kay, Tony Woolhouse, Brian Halton, Ted Harvey, David Officer, MartinBanwell and Jarrod Ward131 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistNZ itself. I was humbled by the number of colleagues who came. They includedall the senior organic academics: Jim Coxon, Rob Smith and Margaret Brimble,my former students Tony Woolhouse, Martin Banwell, David Officer, Barry Dent,Andy Kay, and my last Honours man Jarrod Ward, then a PhD student in Auck-land. The visitors from overseas included Martin, Roger Brown (himself retiredfor some years), Jun Nishimura and Yoshito Tobe from Gunma and Osaka Univer-sities, respectively (in Japan), Andrew Grimsdale (who was in Melbourne at thattime and represented Klaus Müllen of MPI–P), and Leiv Sydnes (then President ofthe International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) who travelled the furthest(from Norway), specifically for the event. Koichi Komatsu was unable to attendbut he visited with his wife in 2008 and, like Leiv, stayed with us at home. GrahamBowmaker of Auckland University was also there as President of the NZIC.Immediately  after  the  symposium  opening  by  the  Vice-Chancellor,  Grahamtook  the  floor,  ostensibly  to  chair  the  opening  session  with  Martin  Banwell  asspeaker.  However,  he  diverted  and  advised  the  gathering  that  the  NZ  Institutewished to confer upon me its highest honour, namely that of Honorary Fellowship,and proceeded to present me with the framed certificate. This election by my peersis the most meaningful award I have received as it formalizes my lifetime attemptsto foster chemistry beyond the classroom and laboratory, and my service to theprofession in this country and beyond. At the time of writing, it is the only suchaward this century and the first since the early 1990s. Following this, Martin pro-ceeded to give the opening paper and I was designated the last slot with a title Lifein the Strain Lane. The first day was capped off by a delightful symposium dinnerto which many of the tech-nicians  and  secretariesfrom  the  School  came,as  did  Margaret,  our  sonMark and his wife Debra.What  surprised  me  wasthe fact that Yoshito Tobetook the floor to representthe  Chemical  Society  ofJapan.  He  presented  mewith  a  framed  citationmarking  my  involvementin Pacifichem (Shinji Mu-rai  was  then  President  ofthe CSJ) and, later, the American Chemical Society did a similar thing, giving mea cut glass globe on a Pacifichem-inscribed stand.The CSJ PlaqueSome fifteen weeks after the retirement symposium the School was visited by132 -The Joys of Emeritus ProfessorClockwise: Andrew Grimsdale, Peter Northcote, Jim Johnston, Yoko & Koichi Komatsu, Jim Coxon,and John SpencerBob Grubbs, Merle Battiste’s most renowned student, who, as I mentioned previ-ously, I had met on a visit to Caltech in the early 1990s. Bobby, as he was knownin Florida, gave an inspirational lecture to a large audience and influenced manyof  our  graduate  and  undergraduate  students.  I  had  had  the  impression  that  Bobwas  likely  to  be  awarded  a  Nobel  Prize  for  some  while  and  my  thoughts  werethat 2005 was the right time. It was because of this that I had Bob sign an off-print of that original joint Chemical Communication in my office, ostensibly forMerle Battiste. Bob received the call from Stockholm advising of his Prize laterthat night, after returning to Christchurch where he was a visiting Erskine Fellow.Merle never got the offprint, but Bob took him to Stockholm for the ceremoniesand that became the highlight of Merle’s career.The presence of Brendan Burkett from early 2005 reintroduced some biologi-cally oriented heterocyclic research into the School and Brendan supervised oneRobert O’Reilly as his first student. Robert had entered VUW in 2002, just after his17th birthday and before he had formal university entry requirements, as his chemi-133 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistcal knowledge was ahead of his peers. He had been brought to my attention by theuniversity’s occupational health nurse because he was tutoring the 7th-form classat his school although he was only a 6th-former. He had a better grasp of chem-istry than even the teacher involved. After meeting him in 2002, Jim Pearce andI arranged for the Dean of Students, Shona de Sain (a former chemistry teacher),to interview him. He impressed and was enrolled for an introductory chemistrycourse while still completing his senior school programme and examinations. HisVUW undergraduate degree was completed at the end of 2004 and he then taughtin Thailand for a year before returning for Honours with Brendan in 2006. Robert’sinterests were (and are) dominantly theoretically oriented but with affiliated exper-imental study; he gained a 1st class honours degree and is set to complete his PhDunder Leo Radom’s supervision at Sydney University during 2011. I regard Robertas my protégé student as he has continually performed well above the average witha chemical maturity ahead of his 25 years; likely his PhD will be completed aheadof his peers in this institution.But let me return to Brendan Burkett and the difficulties that he experiencedfrom changing attitudes in the university. He was caught up in a major change inpolicy and protocol. Because Joanne took maternity leave, it was Brendan whohad the responsibility for much of the organic chemistry outreach work, lots ofteaching,  and  the  expectation  that  his  research  would  still  flourish.  Indeed,  hisproposal for a postdoctoral research fellow succeeded and Mattie Timmer was of-fered and accepted the job. After his arrival, Mattie worked on Brendan’s projectas expected, but the Dean of Science and the School encouraged him to followhis  major  interest  that  allied  with  the  Malaghan  Institute  of  Medical  Research,a private research organization housed in rented space on the VUW campus andalongside the School of Chemical and Physical Sciences. As I saw it, what thisdid was simple – it essentially terminated Brendan’s research and made it difficultfor him to make significant progress. Worse still, Mattie was encouraged to seekexternal funding and it seemed that he spent too little time in Brendan’s laboratory,writing research proposals instead. With but 2.7 organic staff, it was obvious to methat another appointment was needed, even if it was to be limited to a three-yearterm. A post was created and Mattie was duly appointed, likely with the MalaghanInstitute meeting a part of the salary. Brendan then sought approval to apply themonies remaining from the postdoctoral position to employ a research assistant(there were neither funds nor time to seek a new postdoctoral researcher) and, evenwith the intercession of the Head of School, these were not well received.Current  policy  now  regards  postdoctorals  as  independent  researchers  ratherthan a recently qualified individual gaining new experiences under the guidanceof an appropriate member of staff whose research proposal was deemed relevantprior to the appointment. The circle is completed with the absence of a fair and134 -The Joys of Emeritus Professorequitable career structure for the recent doctoral graduate, and insufficient fundingeither to provide the vital postdoctoral fellow for a research group or to provide ad-ditional support should limited monies be gained from some other external source.The postdoctoral now is encouraged to seek independent monies from the alreadyoverstretched research funds, such as the Marsden, whose criteria have changedto include them. What is so insidious here is that the postdoctoral (or other short-term appointee) appears to be given promises of a position beyond the length ofany successful grant application and spends much time preparing submissions, asdid Mattie. In comparison, the staff member whose postdoctoral may be divertedfrom the ‘real’ job is still expected to raise external monies for research and gain ahigh ranking in the PBRF exercises that have become a fixture in NZ academia. Ithas a major impact on the ‘doing’ of science, while leaving the administrators freeto criticize and ‘grow’ their own area almost without limit. The University usedto proffer its core business as teaching and research but it seems that this is nowcloser to the management of teaching and research. It is not surprising, then, thatBrendan became disenchanted with the institution and its demands for increasedresearch output: it showed little concern for his extensive teaching and outreachwork. He tendered his resignation and is now in the Singapore Institute of Chemi-cal and Engineering Sciences. He has been replaced by Rob Keyzers, one of PeterNorthcote’s doctoral graduates who gained additional experience in South Africaand South Australia, and who, like Brendan, is being diverted into outreach andother duties above the norm. Mattie’s limited term appointment became permanentat the same time.Apart  from  the  writings  that  I  described,  the  edi-torial  work  with  Chemistry  in  New  Zealand,  and  thevarious peer review editing that I continue with, I gainmuch pleasure from assessing the discipline of chem-istry  locally,  and  supporting  those  chemists  who  ap-pear worthy of nomination for New Zealand prizes andawards. This no less so than the nomination of MartinBanwell for an honorary DSc degree of Victoria Uni-versity. With appropriate support internationally, Mar-tin  was  nominated  for  and  subsequently  awarded  thedegree in May 2010. He graced us by being in Welling-ton for the week that included the graduation ceremony and the School made theoccasion grand by hosting a one day symposium in his honour. I was allowed toentitle the event ‘From Small Rings to Big Things’. Prof. Peter Steel from Canter-bury University was the invited external speaker as he had interacted with Martinin Christchurch when he was an Erskine Fellow and even earlier during Martin’sPhD study when he was there to use the Canterbury NMR facilities.Martin Banwell135 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistThe  local  speakers  includedJoanne  Harvey  and  her  ‘justgraduated’  PhD  student,  RussellHewitt. I was fortunate enough tobe able to outline Martin’s earlycareer  and  chair  his  closing  lec-ture.  The  symposium  was  com-pleted with a dinner at which theday’s proceedings and the degreeaward were commemorated in abound book that was presented toour  guest  of  honour. The  gradu-ation ceremony itself was special, not just for the award to Martin, but becausethe official seating housed four generations of ‘Halton chemists’: Russell Hewitt(PhD supervisor: Joanne Harvey), Joanne (PhD supervisor: Martin Banwell), Mar-tin (PhD supervisor Brian Halton), and the author.L-R: Halton, Banwell, Harvey, Hewitt (18 May 2010)Finally, it is worth recording that my last invited lecture on the strained mol-ecule  chemistry  took  place  in  2009.  Our  younger  son,  Paul,  was  married  to  hisGerman fiancée Sandra, in Winnenden, north of Stuttgart, in October of that year.Much to my surprise, I was able to gain international medical insurance to visit Eu-rope and, when Roland Boese heard of this he insisted that I revisit Essen and givea final lecture. This I did under the title From Cyclopropenes to Novel Moleculesand New Ring Systems. It was a delightful occasion that provided much neededtime to catch up with this good and generous friend before his own retirement inJuly of 2010.So what about the Bread and Butter?This biographical account has run its course with little mention of teaching work,academically oriented extracurricular activities, or the way in which Victoria Uni-versity has evolved in its approach to its staff, and their duties and responsibilities,save for the occasional comment. What follows is no less a personal view thanthose which have already appeared, but I feel that comment is justified.As  I  have said, my teaching began in the University of  Florida  in 1967  andcontinued beyond retirement. Some of my colleagues have preferred to focus theirteaching to the senior years, leaving others to carry the onus of the larger morejunior classes. I have always held the view that it is the senior staff who should in-struct the new student at the beginning level, not on a continuing basis, but amongthe group of that particular chemical specialization, typically the organic, inorgan-ic and physical chemistries in NZ. Moreover, I maintain that every organic chem-136 -The Joys of Emeritus Professorist ought to be able to teach any part of the curriculum save for more specializedcourse work in the final undergraduate year and beyond. From my earliest daysin Florida, through my introduction to work at VUW by Ted Harvey, and for mylifetime, the protocol has been simple: teaching is the first responsibility with lec-tures always met unless health makes it impossible. In comparison, laboratory su-pervision and tutorial work can be delegated if the need to be elsewhere becomesan essential duty. I do not subscribe to the concept of ‘smart teaching’ wherebymuch of the job is handed to research students and postdoctorals as may be justi-fied on paper. I am convinced that it is important for the academic to be availablefor discussion in laboratory sessions, unlike the US norm. Research lines up assecond  and  administration  a  poor  third. This  allies  with  my  1:1:1  time  divisionthat I provided to the witless public service interviewer. Of course, there is alwaysflexibility and when research is not going well respite can be found in teachingand vice versa. To me, teaching has always been a pleasure, with lecturing never achore but something enjoyable. This is despite one student seeing me after a par-ticular class to tell me that it was the best lecture he had heard me give; little didhe know that a total lapse of memory had my attendance there at the last minuteand without preparation! With undergraduate and graduate course work, the questalways has been to impart a balanced approach to organic chemistry and providethe essential base from which the interested student can evolve, never spoon fed.This requires that the courses are given over an appropriate time period that allowsthe candidate to assimilate the material, digest it, and come to grips with it …...and this is markedly different from the current ‘put it in a box, test it and discardit’ that the fractionalization and marginalization of the 21st century now demand.Another part of my role in academia has been with extracurricular activitiesover  and  above  service  to  the  discipline  and  profession  of  chemistry,  and  thesehave gone beyond the NZIC. Regular outreach courses on laboratory safety weregiven to school teachers in a ‘two man show’ with my friend and colleague JimPearce, even advising the Wellington School of Medicine on it safety protocolsmany years ago. I spent three or four terms of service on the University LibraryCommittee that covered periods of financial constraint, library redevelopment andbudget reductions for the sciences accomplished by reducing text and periodicalspending, as well as a range of (limited) activities for the Science Faculty. Furtherafield, I was involved with the Catholic Chaplaincy from the time that the StudentUnion officers ousted the chaplains from the union complex through to the An-glican and Catholic chaplaincies having their own properties on Kelburn Parade.I found one of the chaplains (a Capuchin friar) appear in the university withoutintroduction or direction to the institution by the Church and I became involvedestablishing  a  Chaplaincy Trust  Board.  I  was  appointed  the Victoria  nominatedNewman  Trustee  to  join  two  illustrious  ‘legal  eagles’,  supreme  court  judge  Sir137 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistBarry O’Regan and Maurice O’Brien QC, when the trust expanded from its twoinaugural members to oversee a significant added bequest and then through it, tothe joint Anglican-Catholic Trinity-Newman Trust Board. The Board saw the de-velopment of student accommodation using VUW-owned properties that it reno-vated  using  a  timely  government  summer  employment  initiative.  Ultimately,  itbecame  the  largest  single  non-sectarian  accommodation  provider  for  universitystudents as Trinity-Newman Hall. Rentals were set at no more than market rates,often below, and a part-time warden and support staff were employed. It became a25 year involvement but I never felt that I had given to it as much as I should. Ulti-mately, the accommodation facilities were taken back by the university authoritiesby not renewing the lease that the Trust Board held. VUW felt that the enterprisecould be better managed and return a (good) profit if it ran things. The impact ofthis has been to decimate the work of the Anglican and Catholic trust boards thatcontinue as Trinity-Newman. More importantly, there is now notably less supportfor the student interns whose rentals have added to the institutions coffers (exceptfor 2010 which, through needed major maintenance, seems to have run at a sig-nificant loss). The entire VUW accommodation service has undergone a ‘changereview’, the terminology that administrators use to reduce staff and services in thecause of fiscal efficiency. The outcome of this is that University Flats – the namegiven to the former Trinity Newman Hall – has lost staff and is now centralized,thereby removing its operating personnel from within the environment of the flatswhere they were easily accessible to the students. The long standing and dedicatedmanager of the facility, with whom I worked on Trinity-Newman for many years,has taken voluntary redundancy rather than be forced to lose the student contactthat  she  had  –  another  case  of  the  administration  seeing  victory  in  change  –  invictoria mutatio!The institution that saw me as a formal employee for 34+ years, and to whichI  owe  my  career,  has,  like  many,  evolved  to  one  in  which  the  corporate  modelof administration rules. Curriculum and research matters have become confusedduring the evolution of a university from one with a small administration, whichregarded its role as assisting the (all important) academic staff, to one that has itsenclaves (and here I do mean this as dictionary defined) each insulating itself fromthe others by becoming pernicious and almost autonomous. The corporate admin-istration, and indeed the like-minded governmental agencies, impose a documentrequirement and paper trail so long that they take up too significant a proportion ofthe academic’s time, if the now regulated 37½ hours per week is used as measure.What is most destructive is the one rule for all, whereby every minor problem seenin one sector of the institution is solved by imposing its solution institution-wide.It is sad to see precious research time eroded by bureaucracy, the benefits of seri-ous study reduced because of statutes, regulations and rules introduced for all. Far138 -The Joys of Emeritus Professortoo often, a minor problem in one area could have been solved quietly – but insteadthe largest mallet available is sought to squash the smallest ant! As I complete this,I find that the PhD supervisor is no longer allowed to select appropriate examinersfor his/her student, rather having to comply with a School Committee who makethe judgement – a principle that might work in a large organization but one thatwill be fraught with more than frustration in a small one such as VUW. What iswrong with the supervisor nominating those world leading experts best able to as-sess his student’s work? After all, PhD study in science is a training in which theideas of the supervisor in his or her sphere of activity are advanced: one’s reputa-tion depends upon it. Worse still, the Chairperson for the PhD oral examinationis  now  appointed  by  the  Faculty  of  Graduate  Studies  with  little  recourse  to  thediscipline and subject of the incumbent. As I complete this writing, an invitationto Readers, Associate Professors and Professors to seek appointment to the panelof ‘PhD Oral Chairpersons’ has been issued. Those who do not seek appointmentseem doomed to be labelled ‘unwilling to do their bit’ for the institution, while themediocre researchers will become resplendent in chairing orals in disciplines thatthey know nothing about. The institution in which I have spent my career has as itsmotto sapientia magis auro desideranda – wisdom is preferable to gold. As I saidbefore, VUW’s core business was teaching and research whereas now it seems tobe the management of them, with research in the small time that the managementallows. Given this, and the administrator not to be questioned in public, acclaim byits staff may now better be served by aequalitas sine discrimine or, more cynically:regat volgus nequissimum.But I am retired from the serious doing of chemistry, the production of reportsand the keeping of paper trails, and so it falls to the next generations to fight theirbattles and serve this same discipline that has served me so well. What is importantis that they fight adversity, treat each day as gift, and use each as though it willnever end. They must do this in a way that best fits their time and not mine. Whatremains for me is to keep the memories and to continue serve my discipline as bestI am able.In  its  latest  motto-creating  initiative,  Victoria  University  advises  its  staff  to‘Get Amongst the Best’ when they log on to their personal computer each morning.I am of the firm opinion that my life and career in chemistry has been amongst thebest – and I could never have wished for anything more.139 -PostscriptKeep the Memories - Don’t Send in the ClownsThat Which I Regard as the BestIn completing this autobiographical history of my working life, I feel a need tosummarize what I regard as the best of my best – memories that will serve to keepmy mind functioning by rolling through the years of pleasure doing what to me hasbeen a hobby and a way of life, not simply a job. Indeed, I am reminded of wordsthat Merle Battiste used the last time that I saw him: I am a chemist.My view of my top ten papers (in sequence)1.  The isolation of the first conformational isomers.142.  The thermal rearrangement of tetra-arylcyclopropenes and Grubbs first paper.173.  The mass spectra of carbocations.194.  The  first  cycloproparene  in  New  Zealand  and  the  start  of  a  lifetime  of  theirstudy.295.  The least stable cycloproparene: cyclopropa[l]phenanthrene.506.  The most highly strained benzynes generated: the cyclopropabenzynes.457.  The synthesis of olefins from the cycloproparenes.488.  The oxaspiropentene.559.  The cyclopropabenzenylidenethenone (propadienone).5710.  The bent cycloheptatrienes.56The ten best lectures I heard (in sequence)1.  Sir Lawrence Bragg at the Royal Institution, London, 1958 (and 1959).2.  Sir Christopher Ingold at Southampton, 1965.3.  Bob Woodward at the ACS Biennial Organic meeting in Vermont, 1967.4.  Horst Prinzbach at VUW, 1977.5.  Emanuel Vogel at VUW, 1979.6.  Sir John Cadogan, former research director of BP, at the Massey ANZAS con-ference, 1988.140 -Postscript7.  Sir Harry Kroto at ISNA 6 in Toyonaka, Osaka, 1989.8.  Larry Scott at ISNA-6 in Hong Kong, 1997.9.  Klaus Müllen at ISNA-7 in San Diego, 2001.10.  Bobby Grubbs at VUW on 5 October 2005.My top twenty professional memories (in sequence)1.  My interview to enter Southampton University, 1960.2.  The Southampton lecturers Ken Webb, Ishbel Campbell, Eric Parker and Rich-ard Cookson.3.  Arriving at Gainesville railway station, 1966.4.  Thanksgiving dinner in Miami, 1966.5.  Using a stretched Pan Am limo at Kennedy airport, 1967.6.  My welcome aboard the Oriana on departing Accapulco, Mexico, 1968.7.  The journey up Dixon Street in Stan Slater’s car, 1968.8.  Meeting Heinz Dürr on Saarbrücken railway station, 1975.9.  Seeing my suitcase off-loaded at the wrong terminal in Houston airport, 1982.10.  My taxi ride from Tel Aviv to Haifa when all transport was on strike, June 1985.11.  Having a DB Bhan train held for me at Heidelburg station by Richard Neidlein,1988.12.  The washing on a clothes line north of Mannheim repeatedly seen from trains,1988.13.  The dinners in Tokushima with Sho Ito, 1988-1997.14.  Securing a place for New Zealand and Australia on the Pacifichem OrganizingCommittee, 1990.15.  Being awarded a personal chair at VUW, 1991.16.  The farewell from Tetsuo Nozoe and his Japanese friends on Göttingen railwaystation, 1993.17.  The early morning walks along the Yeppoon foreshore, 1999.18.  Eating reindeer in Norway and then returning business class to NZ from Hol-land with a seat for the O2 cylinder, 2002.19.  Having Bob Grubbs lecture 10 hours before being advised of his Nobel Prize,October 2005.20.  Having four generations of Halton chemists at the May 2010 Science gradua-tion.141 -142 -References1.  Fairclough, I. See: http://www.great-harwood.org.uk. Great Harwood, 2004 (ac-cessed 24 July 2009).2.  Anon. The Manufacturer and Builder, 1893, 25, 1.3.  Ward, J. V. See http://www.stjosephsblackpool.com (accessed 10 July 2009).4.  Anon. Chem. in NZ, 1987, 51, 39.5.  Cartmell, E.; Fowles, G. W. A. Valency and Molecular Structure, 2nd edn. But-terworths: London, 1961.6.  Finar, I. L. Organic Chemistry 2nd edn. Longmans: London, 1959, Vols. 1 & 2;Cram,  D.  J.;  Hammond,  G.  S.  Organic  Chemistry,  McGraw  Hill:  New  York,1958.7.  Partington, J. R. A Textbook of Inorganic Chemistry, 6th edn. Macmillan: London,1950.8.  Cookson, R. C.; Nye, M. J. Proc. Chem. Soc. 1963, 129-30; J. Chem. Soc. 1965,2009-2018.9.  Ettlinger, M. G.; Kennedy, F. Chem & Ind. (London) 1956, 166; Pollard, C. B.;Parcell, R. F. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1951, 73, 2925-2927.10.  Halton, B. PhD Thesis, University of Southampton, 1966, pp.126.11  Cookson, R. C.; Halton, B.; Stevens, I. D. R.; Watts, C. T. J. Chem. Soc. C 1967,928-931.12  Robinson, G. M. J. Chem. Soc. Trans. 1907, 107, 267-276.13.  Lindsey, A. S. Chem. & Ind. (London), 1963, 823-824, J. Chem. Soc. 1965, 1685-1692.14.  Anand, N. K.; Cookson, R. C.; Halton, B.; Stevens, I. D. R. J. Am. Chem. Soc.1966, 88, 370-371.15.  Cookson, R. C.; Halton, B.; Stevens, I. D. R. J. Chem. Soc. B, 1968, 767-774.16.  Coxon, J. M.; Halton, B. Organic Photochemistry; Cambridge University Press:Cambridge, 1974, pp 196; 2nd edn. 1987, pp. 243.17.  Battiste, M. A.; Halton, B.; Grubbs, R. H. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1967,907-909.18.  Halton, B.; Kulig, M.; Battiste, M. A.; Perrenten, J.; Gibson, D. M.; Griffin, G. W.J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1971, 93, 2327-2329.143 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist19.  Battiste, M. A.; Halton, B. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1968, 1368-1370.20.  Battiste, M. A. Chem & Ind. (London) 1961, 550-551.21.  Clarke, S. C.; Johnson, B. L. Tetrahedron Lett. 1967, 8, 617-618.22.  Halton, B.; Battiste, M. A.; Rehberg, R.; Deyrup, C. L.; Brennan, M. E. J. Am.Chem. Soc. 1967, 89, 5964-5965.23.  Ang, W. S.; Halton, B. Aust. J. Chem. 1971, 24, 851-856.24.  Anet, R.; Anet, F. A. L. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1964, 86, 525-526.25.  Vogel, E.; Grimme, W.; Korte, S. Tetrahedron Lett. 1965, 3625-3631.26.  Vogel, E.; Korte, S.; Grimme, W.; Günther, H. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1968,7, 289-290.27.  Ao, M. S.; Burgess, E. M.; Schauer, A.; Taylor, E. A. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Com-mun. 1969, 220-221; Adamson, J. B.; Forster, D. L.; Gilchrist, T. L.; Rees, C. W.J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1969, 221-222, J. Chem. Soc. C 1971, 981-988.28.  Dürr, H.; Schrader, L. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1969, 8, 446-447.29.  Halton, B.; Milsom, P. J. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1971, 814-815.30.  Halton, B.; Woolhouse, A. D. Aust. J. Chem. 1973, 26, 619-627, 1373-1376.31.  Mustafa, A.; Kamel, M. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1953, 75, 2939-2941.32.  Jones, G. W.; Kerur, D. R.; Yamazaki, T.; Shechter, H.; Woolhouse, A. D.; Halton,B. J. Org. Chem. 1974, 39, 492-497.33.  Obituary, Chem. in NZ. 2010, 74, 69.34.  Halton, B. Chem. Rev. 1973, 73, 113-126.35.  Hügel, H. M.; Kelly, D. P.; Browne, A. R.; Halton, B.; Milsom, P. J.; Woolhouse,A. D. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. 1 1977, 2340-2342.36.  Fahey, J. A.; Hügel, H. M.; Kelly, D. P.; Halton, B.; Williams, J. B. J. Org. Chem.1980, 45, 2862-2865; Robinson, W. H.; Ditzel, E. J.; Hügel, H. M.; Kelly, D. P.;Halton, B. J. Org. Chem. 1981, 46, 5003-5005.37.  Halton, B.; Woolhouse, A. D.; Hügel, H. M.; Kelly, D. P. J. Chem. Soc. Chem.Commun. 1974, 247-248.38.  Browne, A. R.; Halton, B. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1972, 1341-1342.39.  Billups, W. E.; Blakeney, A. J.; Chow, W. Y. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1971,1461-1462.40.  De, S. C.; Dutt, D. N. J. Indian Chem. Soc. 1930, 7, 537-544.41.  Halton, B.; Harrison, S. A. R.; Spangler, C. W. Aust. J. Chem. 1975, 28, 681-685.42.  Bryce-Smith,  D.;  Gilbert, A.;  Halton,  B.  J.  Chem.  Soc.  Perkin  Trans.  1  1978,1172-1176.43.  Radlick, P.; Crawford, H. T. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1974, 127.44.  Galloway,  N.;  Halton,  B.  Aust.  J.  Chem.  1979,  32,  1743-1748;  Galloway,  N.;144 -ReferencesDent, B. R.; Halton, B. Aust. J. Chem. 1983, 36, 593-599.45.  Halton, B.; Randall, C. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1983, 105, 6310-6311.46.  Apeloig, Y.; Arad, D. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1986, 108, 3241-3247.47.  Apeloig, Y.; Arad, D.; Halton, B.; Randall, C. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1986, 108,4932-4937.48.  Halton, B.; Randall, C. J.; Stang, P. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1984, 106, 6108-6110.49.  Dent, B. R.; Halton, B. Tetrahedron Lett. 1984, 24, 4279-4282.50.  Halton, B.; Dent, B. R.; Bohm, S.; Officer, D. L.; Schmuckler, H.; Schophoff, F.;Vogel, E. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1985, 107, 7175-7176.51.  Halton, B.; Stang, P. J. Acc. Chem. Res. 1987, 20, 443-448.52.  Halton, B.; Lu, Q.; Stang, P. J. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1988, 879.53.  Halton, B.; Lu, Q.; Melhuish, W. H. J. Photochem Photobiol. A, 1990, 52, 205-208.54.  Halton, B. Tetrahedron Lett. 2006, 47, 1077-1079.55  Halton, B.; Cooney, M. J.; Wong, H. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1994, 116, 11574.56.  Halton, B.; Boese, R.; Dixon, G. M. Tetrahedron Lett. 2004, 48, 2167-2170.57.  Halton, B.; Dixon, G. M.; Jones, C. S.; Parkin, C. T.; Veedu, R. N.; Bornemann,H.; Wentrup, C. Organic Lett. 2005, 7, 949-952.58.  Halton, B.; Dixon, G. M. Organic Lett. 2002, 4, 4563-4565.59.  Butler, D. N.; Halton, B.; Warkentin, J.; Warrener, R. N. Aust. J. Chem. 2000, 53,561-566.60.  Halton, B.; Boese, R.; Dixon, G.M. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2003, 4507-4512.61.  Halton, B.; Harvey, J. Synlett 2006, 1975-2000.145 -146 -AppendicesAppendix IQualifications, Awards & EmploymentQualifications:19631966198719771992BSc (Hons.) Southampton UniversityPhD Southampton UniversityDSc Victoria UniversityFNZIC – Fellow, New Zealand Institute of ChemistryFRSNZ – Fellow of the Royal Society of New ZealandSelected Awards:1974197419801981-1982  Fulbright Research Scholar and Visiting Professor, University of Utah,Research Medal, NZ Association of ScientistsBritish Council Travel AwardICI Prize for Excellence in Chemical Research, NZIC19871988198919891996200220032005USAVictoria University Recognition of Research AwardNZIC Nominee for Federation of Asian Chemical Societies AwardVictoria University Recognition of Research AwardClaude McCarthy Fellowship (NZ) and Visiting Professorship, Univer-sity of Utah, USANZIC In-Service Award for International ServicesShorland Medal, New Zealand Association of ScientistsNZIC Mellor Lecture – Wellington Branch: From Electrostatic Attrac-tion to Molecular MachinesHon. FNZIC – Honorary Fellow, New Zealand Institute of Chemistry147 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistEmployment:1966-1967  Postdoctoral Fellow, University of Florida1967-1968  Assistant Professor of Chemistry, University of Florida1968-1971  Lecturer in Chemistry, Victoria University of Wellington1972-1976  Senior Lecturer in Chemistry, Victoria University of Wellington1977-1991  Reader in Chemistry, Victoria University of Wellington1991-2004  Professor of Chemistry, Victoria University of Wellington2004-Emeritus Professor of Chemistry, Victoria University of Wellington148 -Appendix IIPublications: 1966-2011 (TOTAL 185)Reviews:1.  B. Halton and M. P. Halton, The Triplet State, Chem. in NZ, 1971, 35, 153-157.2.  B. Halton, Benzocyclopropenes, Chem. Rev., 1973, 73, 113-126.3.  B.  Halton,  The  Cycloproparenes,  Ind.  Eng.  Chem.,  Prod.  Res.  Dev.,  1980,  19,349-364.4.  B. Halton, Stress and Strain: A Century of Closed Carbon Chains, Chem in NZ,1981, 45, 87-89.5.  P. J. Stang and B. Halton, Alkylidenecyclopropenes and Related Compounds, Acc.Chem. Res., 1987, 20, 443-448.6.  B.  Halton,  Developments  in  Cycloproparene  Chemistry,  Chem.  Rev.,  1989,  89,1161-1185.7.  B. Halton, Perspectives from 200 Years of Organic Chemistry, NZ Sci. Rev., 1993,50, 47-52.8.  B. Halton, Perspectives from 200 Years of Organic Chemistry, Chem NZ, 1994, No.56, 12-20 (reprinted with permission).9.  B.  Halton  and  P.  J.  Stang,  Methylidenecycloproparenes:  Fascinating  Compoundswith Novel Properties, Synlett, 1997, 145-158.10.  B.  Halton,  Long  Bonds—Weak  Bonds: A  Century  of  Free  Radicals,  Chem  NZ,2000, No. 80, 11-14.11.  B. Halton, Benzynes, Chem. in NZ, 2001, 65(4). 28-32.12.  B. Halton, Cycloproparenes, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1327-1370.13.  B. Halton, The Fulvalenes, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 3391-3415.14.  B. Halton and J. Harvey, Electrocyclic Ring Opening Reaction of gem-Dibromocy-clopropanes: Application of Nucleophilic Trapping to the Synthesis of Natural Prod-ucts and Related Compounds, Synlett, 2006, 1975-2000.15.  B. Halton, From Three-Membered Rings to Important Things: Cyclopropanoids,Chem in NZ, 2007, 71, 53-60.16.  B. Halton, So Who Was Nobel Anyway? Chem in NZ, 2007, 71, 87-91.17.  B. Halton. From Small Rings to Big Things: Xerography, Sensors, and the Squar-aines, Chem in NZ, 2008, 72, 57-62.18.  B. Halton,  From  Small  Rigs  to  Big  Things:  Benzocyclobutenes  and  High  Perfor-mance Polymers, Chem. in NZ, 2008, 72, 155-159.19.  B.  Halton,  From  Small  Rigs  to  Big  Things:  Cyclopropenes,  Fruit  and  Flowers.Chem. in NZ, 2009, 73, 34-37.149 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistBook Chapters:20.  B.  Halton,  Three-membered  Rings.  In Alicyclic  Chemistry,  Vol.  5  (W.  Parker,Senior Reporter), The Chemical Society, London, 1977, 1-99.21.  B. Halton, Three-membered Rings. In Alicyclic Chemistry, Vol. 6 (M. A. McK-ervey, Senior Reporter), The Chemical Society, London, 1978, 1-93.22.  B. Halton and M. G. Banwell, Cyclopropenes. In The Chemistry of the Cyclopro-pyl Group (Z. Rappoport, Ed.), Pt. 2, Wiley, Chichester, 1987, 1223-1339.23.  B. Halton, Strain in Organic Chemistry: A Perspective. In Advances in Strain inOrganic Chemistry, (B. Halton, Ed.), Vol. 1, JAI Press, London, 1991, 1-17.24.  B. Halton, Cycloproparenes. In The Chemistry of the Cyclopropyl Group (Z. Rap-poport, Ed.), Vol. 2, Wiley, Chichester, 1995, 707-772.25.  B. Halton, Cycloproparenes. In Strained Hydrocarbons (H. Dodziuk, Ed.), Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2009, 179-193, 201-203.Books:26.  J.  M.  Coxon  and  B.  Halton,  Organic  Photochemistry,  Cambridge  UniversityPress, Cambridge, 1974, pp. vi, 1-196.27.  Safety  Handbook,  (B.  Halton),  Victoria  University  of  Wellington,  Wellington,1977, 1-39.28.  J.  M.  Coxon  and  B.  Halton,  Organic  Photochemistry,  Cambridge  UniversityPress, Cambridge, 1987, 2nd end., pp. viii, 1-243.Edited Books:29.  Advances in Strain in Organic Chemistry, Vol. 1 (B. Halton, Ed.), JAI Press, London,1991, xii, 1-283.30.  Advances in Strain in Organic Chemistry, Vol. 2 (B. Halton, Ed.), JAI Press, London,1992, x, 1-268.31.  Advances in Strain in Organic Chemistry, Vol. 3 (B. Halton, Ed.), JAI Press, London,1993, ix, 1-295.32.  Advances in Strain in Organic Chemistry, Vol. 4, (B. Halton, Ed.), JAI Press, Green-wich, CN, 1995, xi, 1-350.33.  Advances in Strain in Organic Chemistry, Vol. 5, (B. Halton, Ed.), JAI Press, Green-wich, CN, 1996, xi, 1-287.34.  Advances in Strain in Organic Chemistry, Vol. 6, (B. Halton, Ed), JAI Press, Green-wich, CN, USA, 1997, xi, 1-207.35.  Advances in Strained and Interesting Organic Molecules, Vol. 7, (B. Halton, Ed.),JAI Press, Stamford, CN, USA, 1999, xii, 259 (formerly Advances in Strain inOrganic Chemistry).36.  Advances in Strained and Interesting Organic Molecules, Supplement 1 Carbocyclic150 -and Heterocyclic Cage Compounds and their Building Blocks, (K. K. Laali, Ed.;B. Halton, Series Ed.), JAI Press, Stamford, CN, 1999, xvi, 320.37.  Advances in Strained and Interesting Organic Molecules, Vol. 8, (B. Halton, Ed.),AppendicesJAI Press, Stamford, CN, 2000, xi, 263.Peer-Reviewed Research Papers:38.  N.  K.  Anand,  R.  C.  Cookson,  B.  Halton,  and  I.  D.  R.  Stevens,  The  α-  andβ-Cyclotriveratrylenols. Isolation of Two Conformational Isomers, J. Am. Chem.Soc., 1966, 88, 370-371.39.  M. A.  Battiste,  B.  Halton,  and  R.  H.  Grubbs,  Thermal  Rearrangements  in  theTetraarylcyclopropene Series, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1967, 907-909.40.  B. Halton, M. A. Battiste, R. Rehberg, C. L. Deyrup, and M. E. Brennan, Decar-bonylation  Studies  in  the  endo-  and  exo-Tricyclo[3.2.1.02,4]octan-8-one  Series.Stereoelectronic Requirements for Cyclopropyl Participation, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,1967, 89, 5964-5965.41.  R. C. Cookson, B. Halton, I. D. R. Stevens, and C. T. Watts, Cyclopropanonesand Related Compounds. Part III. Addition of Some Isoelectronic Molecules toOlefins and Dienes, J. Chem. Soc. C, 1967, 928-931.42.  M. A. Battiste and B. Halton, Mass Spectrometry of Carbonium Ion Salts: 3-Hal-ogeno-1,2,3-triphenylcyclopropanes,  J.  Chem.  Soc.,  Chem.  Commun.,  1968,1368-1370.43.  R. C. Cookson, B. Halton, and I. D. R. Stevens, Conformation in the Cyclotriverat-rylene Series, J. Chem. Soc., B, 1968, 767-774.44.  B. Halton, M. Kulig, M. A. Battiste, J. Perrenten, D. M. Gibson, and G. W. Grif-fin, Photocyclization of Aryl-substituted Acetylenes: Application of Di-π-methane-like Rearrangements to Arylcyclopropene Syntheses, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1971, 93,2327-2329.45.  B. Halton and P. J. Milsom, 7,7-Dichloro-2,5-diphenylbenzocyclopropene, J. Chem.Soc., Chem. Commun., 1971, 814-815.46.  W. S. Ang and B. Halton, The Configuration of Some Alkylidenephthalimidine De-rivatives, Aust. J. Chem., 1971, 24, 851-856.47.  B. Halton and A. D. Woolhouse, exo-3-Aza-3-phenyltricyclo[3.2.1.02,4]-oct-6-enes,Tetrahedron Lett., 1971, 4877-4878.48.  A. R. Browne and B. Halton, Synthesis of a Cyclopropa[b]naphthalene, J. Chem.Soc., Chem. Commun., 1972, 1341-1342.49.  B. Halton and M. P. Halton, SCC-EH Molecular Orbital Calculations of the ElectronDistribution in Benzocyclopropene and its Cation, Anion and Radical, Tetrahedron,1973, 29, 1717-1720.50.  B. Halton and A. D. Woolhouse, The Decomposition of Δ2-Triazolines Derived fromBicyclo[2.2.1]heptadienes, Aust. J. Chem., 1973, 26, 619-627.151 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist51.  B. Halton and A. D. Woolhouse, The Decomposition of Δ2-Triazolines Derived fromBicyclo[2.2.1heptenes: Stereospecific Formation of exo-Aziridines, Aust. J. Chem.,1973, 26, 1373-1376.52.  G. W. Jones, D. R. Kerur, T. Yamazaki, H. Shechter, A. D. Woolhouse, and B. Hal-ton, Reactions of 1,4-Quinone N,N-Dibenzenesulfonylimines, 1,4-Quinones and 1,4-Quinone N,N-Dibenzoylimines with Secondary Diazo Compounds: The Structure ofAlleged Arocyclopropenes, J. Org. Chem., 1974, 39, 492-497.53.  A. R. Browne, B. Halton, and C. W. Spangler, Competitive Pathways in the Synthesisof Cyclopropa[b]naphthalene, Tetrahedron, 1974, 30, 3289-3292.54.  B. Halton, A. D. Woolhouse, H. M. Hügel, and D. P. Kelly, Formation of a Benzo-cyclopropenium Ion: Ionization of 1,1-Dichloro-2,5-diphenylcyclopropabenzene, J.Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1974, 247-248.55.  J. T. Craig, B. Halton, and S. F. Lo, A New Coronene Synthesis, Aust. J. Chem., 1975,28, 913-916.56.  B. Halton, S. A. R. Harrison, and C. W. Spangler, Iminocyclopropa[l]phenanthrenesvia  the  Condensation  of  Diarylaminoguanidines  with  9,10-phenanthroquinone: AReinvestigation, Aust. J. Chem., 1975, 28, 681-685.57.  B. Halton, T. J. McLellan, and W. T. Robinson, 1,1-Dichloro-2,5-diphenylcycloprop-abenzene, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 1976, B32, 1889-1891.58.  B. Halton, H. M. Hügel, D. P. Kelly, P. Muller, and U. Burger, CyclopropareniumCations  II:  Carbon-13  N.M.R.  Spectra  of  1-Halogenocyclopropabenzenium  Cati-ons and their 1,1- Dihalogeno Precursors, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1976,258-263.59.  A.  R.  Browne  and  B.  Halton,  Competitive  Pathways  in  the  DehydrochlorinationRoute to Cyclopropa-arenes, Tetrahedron, 1977, 33, 345-348.60.  B. Halton, P. J. Milsom, and A. D. Woolhouse, Dehydrohalogenation of Some Tetra-halogenobicyclo[4.1.0]hept-3-enes: Formation and Decomposition of 1,1-Dihalog-enocyclopropabenzenes, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1977, 731-735.61.  B. Halton, A. D. Woolhouse, and P. J. Milsom, Replacement Reactions of 1,1-Di-chloro-2,5-diphenylcyclopropabenzene  with  Organometallic  Reagents,  J.  Chem.Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1977, 735-740.62.  W. H. Ang and B. Halton, Additivity of Deshielding Effects in the 1H N.M.R. Spec-tra  of  Some  exo-Triazatricyclo[5.2.1.02,6]decenes  and  exo-Azatricyclo[3.2.1.02,4]-octanes, Aust. J. Chem., 1977, 30, 411-415.63.  A. R. Browne and B. Halton, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: Cyclopropa[b]-naphthalenes, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1977, 1177-1182.64.  M. G. Banwell, R. Blattner, A. R. Browne, J. T. Craig, and B. Halton, Studies in theCycloproparene Series: Approaches to Cyclopropa[a]naphthalene, J. Chem. Soc.,Perkin Trans. 1, 1977, 2165-2168.65.  H. M. Hügel, D. P. Kelly, A. R. Browne, B. Halton, P. J. Milsom, and A. D. Wool-152 -Appendiceshouse, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: Acid Catalysed and Thermal Decom-positions of 1,1-Dichlorocyclopropabenzene, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1977,2340-2342.66.  T.  S.  Chuah,  J. T.  Craig,  B.  Halton,  S.A.  R.  Harrison,  and  D.  L.  Officer,  Studiesin  the  Cycloproparene  Series:  Approaches  to  Cyclopropa[a]naphthalene  andCyclopropa[l]phenanthrene, Aust. J. Chem., 1977, 30, 1769-1774.67.  J.  T.  Craig,  B.  Halton,  and  D.  L.  Officer,  Attempted  Synthesis  of  the5,6-Dihydrocyclobuta[l]phenanthrene  System  by  a  Thorpe  Cyclization,  Aust.  J.Chem., 1978, 31, 225-229.68.  D. Bryce-Smith, A. Gilbert, and B. Halton, Photoaddition of Maleimide to Anisole,J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1978, 1172-1176.69.  M. G. Banwell and B. Halton, Studies in the Tricyclooctane Series I: Dehydrohalo-genation of Some Bis-dichlorocarbene Adducts of Cyclohexadiene, Aust. J. Chem.,1979, 32, 849-858.70.  N. Galloway and B. Halton, Oxidative Decarboxylation of Some Bicyclo[4.1.0]hept-3-ene-1,6-dicarboxylic Acids, Aust. J. Chem., 1979, 32, 1743-1748.71.  M. G. Banwell and B. Halton, (Studies in the Tricyclooctane Series: II:) Dehydro-halogenation of the Bis-dichlorocarbene Adducts of Some Cyclohexa-1,4-dienes: ARegiospecific Route to Homotropilidenes, Tetrahedron Lett., 1979, 3191-3192.72.  M. G. Banwell and B. Halton, Studies in the Tricyclooctane Series III: Dehydrobro-mination of Some Bromocarbene Adducts of Cyclohexadienes, Aust. J. Chem., 1979,32, 2689-2699.73.  J. A. Fahey, H. M. Hügel, D. P. Kelly, B. Halton, and J. B. Williams, X-Ray Analy-sis,  Molecular  Structure  and  NMR  Spectra  of  a  Dimer  from  1,1-Dichloro-2,5-di-phenylcyclopropabenzene:  (E)-2,2’,3,3’-Tetrachloro-4,4’,7,7’-tetraphenyl-1,1’-bi-cycloheptatrienylidene, J. Org. Chem., 1980, 45, 2862- 2865.74.  M. G. Banwell and B. Halton, Studies in the Tricyclooctane Series IV: A New andConvenient  Synthesis  of  3,3-Dihalo-cis-transoid-cis-tricyclo[5.1.0.02,4]oct-5-enes,Aust. J. Chem., 1980, 33, 2277-2290.75.  M. G. Banwell and B. Halton, Studies in the Tricyclooctane Series V: Dehydrohalo-genation of the Bis-dihalocarbene Adducts of Some Methoxycyclohexadienes, Aust.J. Chem., 1980, 33, 2673-2683.76.  M. G. Banwell and B. Halton, Studies in the Tricyclooctane Series VI: Dehydrohalo-genation of 8,8-Dihalobicyclo[5.1.0]octa-2,4-dienes: Plausible Intermediates in theTricyclooctane—Styrene Conversion, Aust. J. Chem., 1980, 33, 2685-2691.77.  B.  Halton  and  D.  L.  Officer,  Dehydrohalogenation  of  endo-1-Chloro-1a,9b-dihydrocyclopropa[l]phenanthrene, Tetrahedron Lett., 1981, 22, 3687-3688.78.  W. H. Robinson, E. J. Ditzel, H. M. Hügel, D. P. Kelly, and B. Halton, X-Ray Analy-sis, Molecular Structure and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectra of the SecondDimer  from  Thermal  Decomposition  of  1,1-Dichloro-2,5-diphenylcyclopropaben-153 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistzene:  (Z)-2,2’,3,3’-Tetrachloro-4,4’,7,7’-tetraphenyl-1,1’-bicycloheptatrienylidene,J. Org. Chem., 1981, 46, 5003-5005.79.  B. Halton  and  C.  J.  Randall,  Studies  in  the  Cycloproparene  Series:  2-Halocyclo-propabenzenes, Tetrahedron Lett., 1982, 23, 5591-5594.80.  N. Galloway, B. R. Dent, and B. Halton, Oxidative Decarboxylation of Some Bicy-clo[4.1.0]hept-3-ene-1-carboxylic Acids, Aust. J. Chem., 1983, 36, 593-599.81.  B. Halton and D. L. Officer, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: Halogenation andDehydrohalogenation of Some 1a,9b-Dihydrocyclopropa[l]phenanthrenes, Aust. J.Chem., 1983, 36, 1167-1175.82.  B. Halton and D. L. Officer, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: Approaches toOctahydrocyclopropa[l]phenanthrenes, Aust. J. Chem., 1983, 36, 1291-1297.83.  B. Halton, and C. J. Randall, Cyclopropabenzynes: Generation and Trapping, J. Am.Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 6310-6311.84.  B. Halton, A. I. Maidment, D. L. Officer, and J. M. Warnes,  The Oxidative Con-version of (E)-α-(Arylmethylene)benzene acetates into Substituted Phenanthrenes:The Propitious Use of Boron Trifluoride with Vanadium Trifluoride Oxide, Aust. J.Chem., 1984, 37, 2119-2128.85.  B. R. Dent and B. Halton, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: The Formation andDecomposition of 1,1-Dichlorocyclopropa[l]phenanthrene, Tetrahedron Lett., 1984,24, 4279-4282.86.  B. Halton, C. J. Randall, and P. J. Stang, Synthesis and Spectral Characterization ofMethylenecycloproparene Derivatives, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 6108-6110.87.  B. Halton, B. R. Dent, S. Bohm, D. L. Officer, H. Schmuckler, F. Schophoff, and E.Vogel, Synthesis, Trapping and Spectral Characterization of Cyclopropa[l]phenan-threne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 7175-7176.88.  S. J. Buckland, B. Halton, and B. Stanovnik, 1,3-Diradical Intermediates in 3H-Pyra-zole Photolyses: 1,4-Addition to Dienes, Tetrahedron Lett., 1986, 27, 1309-1310.89.  K. Ashley, K. J. Foley, Q. Mei, J. Ghoroghchian, F. Sarfarazi, J. Cassidy, B. Halton,P. J. Stang, and S. Pons, The Electrochemical Oxidation and Reduction of a Substi-tuted Alkylidenecyclopropanaphthalene, J. Org. Chem., 1986, 51, 2089-2092.90.  Y. Apeloig, D. Arad, B. Halton, and C. J. Randall, A Theoretical and ExperimentalStudy of the Cyclopropabenzynes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 4932-4937.91.  B. R. Dent, B. Halton, and A. M. F. Smith, Synthesis and Trapping of Some ReactiveCyclopropenes, Aust. J. Chem., 1986, 39, 1621-1627.92.  B. Halton, C. J. Randall, G. J. Gainsford, and P. J. Stang, Cycloproparenes: Synthe-sis, Structure and Spectral Properties of Alkylidenecycloproparenes, J. Am. Chem.Soc., 1986, 108, 5949-5956.93.  B. R. Dent and B. Halton, Studies in the Cycloproparenes Series: 1,1-Dichloro-1H-cyclopropa[l]phenanthrene, Aust. J. Chem., 1986, 39, 1789-1801.154 -Appendices94.  B. Halton, S. J. Buckland, Q. Mei, and P. J. Stang, Studies in the CyclopropareneSeries: Benzocalicenes and Benzotriaheptafulvalenes from Cycloproparenes, Tetra-hedron Lett., 1986, 27, 5159-5151.95.  B. Halton, C. J. Randall, G. J. Gainsford, and W. T. Robinson, Studies in the Cy-cloproparene Series: Competitive Pathways in the Dehydrohalogenation Route to2-Halobicyclo[4.1.0]hepta-1,3,5-trienes, Aust. J. Chem., 1987, 40, 475-489.96.  B. R. Dent and B. Halton, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: The Generation andTrapping of 1H-Cyclopropa[l]phenanthrene, Aust. J. Chem., 1987, 40, 925-936.97.  K. Ashley, F. Sarfarazi, S. J. Buckland, J. K. Foley, Q. Mei, B. Halton, P. J. Stang,and S. Pons, An Electrochemical and Spectroelectrochemical Study of SubstitutedAlkylidenecyclopropabenzenes, Can. J. Chem., 1987, 65, 2062-2068.98.  S. J. Buckland, B. Halton, Q. Mei, and P. J. Stang, Studies in the CyclopropareneSeries:  Reactions  of  Alkylidenecycloproparenes  with  Electrophiles,  Aust.  J.Chem., 1987, 40, 1375-1387.99.  S. J. Buckland, B. Halton, and B. Stanovnik, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series:Approaches to Cyclopropaheteroarenes, Aust. J. Chem., 1987, 40, 2037-2047.100. S. J. Buckland, B. Halton, and P. J. Stang, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series:The Behavior of Alkylidenecycloproparenes Towards Nucleophiles and OxidizingAgents, Aust. J. Chem., 1988, 41, 845-854.101. T. Koenig, T. Curtiss, R. Winter, K. Ashley, Q. Mei, P. J. Stang, S. Pons, S. J.Buckland, B. Halton, and D. Rolison, The He(I) Photoelectron Spectrum of Meth-ylenecycloproparene  Derivatives:  Correlation  with  Electrochemical  Oxidation,J. Org. Chem., 1988, 53, 3735-3738.102. S. J. Buckland, B. Halton, Q. Lu, Q. Mei, and P. J. Stang, Studies in the Cyclo-proparene  Series:  On  the  Polarity  of  Some Alkylidenecycloproparenes,  J.  Org.Chem., 1988, 53, 2418-2422.103. B. Halton, Q. Lu, and P. J. Stang, Ambiphilicity of the Cycloproparenyl Moiety, J.Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1988, 879-880.104. B. Halton, Q. Lu, Victoria University of Wellington, Alkylidenecycloproparenesas New Laser Dyes, N.Z. Pat. Appl., 1988, 226398.105. B. Halton, Alkylidenecycloproparenes: Strained and Polar Aromatics, Pure Appl.Chem., 1990, 62, 541-546.106. B. Halton, J. H. Bridle, and E. Lovett, Bicyclo[3.1.0]hex-1(6)-enes: Reactivity ofthe 3-Oxa Derivative, Tetrahedron Lett., 1990, 31, 1313-1314.107. B. Halton, Q. Lu, and P. J. Stang, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: 13C NMRCorrelations for Alkylidenecycloproparenes, J. Org. Chem., 1990, 55, 3056-3060.108. B. Halton, Q. Lu, and W. H. Melhuish, Methylenecycloproparenes: Efficient Flu-orescence and Lasing of Dimethylaminophenyl Derivatives, J. Photochem. Pho-tobiol. A: Chem., 1990, 52, 205-208.155 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist109. P. J. Stang, L. Song, and B. Halton, Metallocyclobutarenes from Cyclopropa[b]-naphthalene: Reactions with Rhodium(I), Platinum(0) and Palladium(0), J. Or-ganomet. Chem., 1990, 388, 215-219.110. P. J. Stang, L. Song, Q. Lu, and B. Halton, Organometallic Complexes of Alky-lidenecycloproparenes:  Reactions  with  Rhodium(I)  and  Platinum(0)  Reagents,Organometallics, 1990, 9, 2149-2154.111. B. Halton, Q. Lu, and P. J. Stang, A Variant of Peterson Olefination: Nitrophe-nyl Substituted Methylenecyclopropa[b]naphthalenes, Aust. J. Chem., 1990, 43,1277-1282.112. G. J. Gainsford, S. J. Buckland, and B. Halton, Spiro[1,3-benzodioxole-2,9(10H)-phenanthrene]-10-one,  Acta  Crystallogr.  C,  Cryst.  Str.  Commun.,  1990,  C46,2226-29.113. B. Halton and S. G. G. Russell, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: Cycloaddi-tion Reactions with Diphenylisobenzofuran, Aust. J. Chem., 1990, 43, 2099-2105.114. B.  Halton  and  E.  G.  Lovett,  Cycloproparenes:  Approaches  to  Cyclopropa[c]-furan, Struct. Chem., 1991, 2, 147-152.115. B.  Halton,  R.  Boese,  D.  Bläser,  and  Q.  Lu,  An  Improved  Synthesis,  MolecularStructure and Properties of Dicyclopropa[b,g]naphthalene, Aust. J. Chem., 1991,44, 265-276.116. B. Halton and S. G. G. Russell, Cycloaddition Reactions of the Methano[10]an-nulene Derivative 9,9-Dichloro-1,4-dihydro-4a,8a-methanonaphthalene, Aust. J.Chem., 1991, 44, 555-565.117. G.  J.  Gainsford,  D.  L.  Officer,  and  B.  Halton,  The  Crystal  Structure  of  Methyl(E)-4(3,4-Dimethoxyphenyl)-3-phenyl-3H-pyrazoline-3-carboxylate,  Acta  Crys-tallogr. C, Cryst. Str. Commun., 1991, 47C, 2397-2400.118. B. Halton, and S. G. G. Russell, π-Selective Dichlorocyclopropanation and Epox-idation  of  9-Chloro-1,4,5,8-Tetrahydro-4a,8a-methanonaphthalene.  ControlledSynthesis of the C9 Epimers of (1aα,2aα,6aα,7aα)-1,8,8-trichloro-1a,2,3,6,7,7a-hexahydro-2a,6a-methanocyclopropa[b]naphthalene,  J.  Org.  Chem.,  1991,  56,5553-5556.119. B. Halton, R. Boese, and H. S. Rzepa, A Molecular and Crystallographic Study ofthe Structure and π-Facial Regioselectivity of 9-Chloro-1,4,5,8-tetrahydro-4a,8a-methanonaphthalene, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1992, 447-448.120. M. G. Banwell, B. Halton, T. W. Hambly, N. K. Ireland, C. Papamihail, S. G. G.Russell,  and  M.  R.  Snow,  Base-Promoted  Elimination  Reactions  within  Halo-genated [m.n.1] Propellene Frameworks , J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans 1, 1992,715-724.121. B. Halton, and S. G. G. Russell, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: Attempt-ed  Cycloadditions  with  Tricyclo[5.4.1.03,5]dodeca-2,5,7,9,11-pentaene,  Aust.  J.Chem., 1992, 45, 911-917.156 -Appendices122. B. Halton and S. G. G. Russell, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: Approachesto Bicyclo[5.1.0]octa-1,3,6-triene, a Cyclopropa-Fused Cycloheptatriene, Aust.J. Chem., 1992, 45, 1069-1076.123. B. Halton, M. D. Diggins, and A. J. Kay, Trapping Reactions of 1,3-Bridged Cyclo-propenes, J. Org. Chem., 1992, 57, 4080-4083.124. A. T. McNichols, P. J. Stang, B. Halton, and A. J. Kay, Cycloaddition Reactions ofDiarylalkylidenecycloproparenes, Tetrahedron Lett., 1993, 34, 3113-3116.125. B. Halton, A. J. Kay, A. T. McNichols, P. J. Stang, Y. Apeloig, A. H. Maulitz, R.Boese, and T. Haumann, Diarylmethylenecyclopropabenzenes in Cycloaddition, Tet-rahedron Lett., 1993, 34, 6151- 6154.126. B. Halton, A. J. Kay, and Z. Zhi-mei, 1H-Cyclopropa[b]naphthalene-3,6-dione, J.Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1993, 2239-2240.127. A. T. McNichols, P. J. Stang, D. M. Addington, and B. Halton, Preparation of Exo-cyclic Functionalized Alkylidenecycloproparenes via a New Procedure, TetrahedronLett., 1994, 35, 437-440.128. M. G. Banwell, R. W. Gable, B. Halton, and J. R. Ryland, Dehydrohalogenation ofBis-dihalocarbene Adducts of Some Methoxy-1,4-hexadienes. Revision of ProductStructure, Aust. J. Chem., 1994, 47, 1879-1884.129. B. Halton, M. J. Cooney, and H. Wong, Spectral Characterization and Rearrange-ment of an Oxaspiropentene, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 11574-11575.130. B. Halton, M. J. Cooney, T. W. Davey, G. S. Forman, Q. Lu, R. Boese, D. Bläser, andA. H. Maulitz, Heterocyclic Substituted Methylidenecyclopropa[b]naphthalenes, J.Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1995, 2819-2827 (Invited Keynote Paper).131. C. C. L. Chai, D. Christen, B. Halton, R. Neidlein, and M. A. E. Starr, Studies in theCycloproparene Series: Reactions with Radicals, Aust. J. Chem., 1995, 48, 577-591.132. M. J. Cooney, B. Halton, M. Baumgarten, and L. Gherghel, Studies in the Cyclopro-parene Series: Electron Transfer Induced Dimerizations of Cyclopropa[b]naphtha-lene, Aust. J. Chem., 1995, 48, 1167-1174.133. B. Halton, A. J. Kay, Z. Zhi-mei, R. Boese, and T. Haumann, Oxygen-containingCyclopropa[b]naphthalenes and their Methylidene Derivatives, J. Chem. Soc., Per-kin Trans. 1, 1996, 1545-1552.134. A. H. Maulitz, Y. Apeloig, R. Boese, and B. Halton, An ab initio Study of the Regi-oselectivity  in  the  Cycloadditions  of  Methylenecycloproparenes, WATOC-Interna-tional Conference, Paper 13, 1996, 1-13.135. M.  J.  Cooney  and  B.  Halton,  3,8-Dioxa-1H-cyclopropa[b]anthracene,  Aust.  J.Chem., 1996, 49, 533- 538.136. C. A. Cutler and B. Halton, Cycloproparenyl Anion Chemistry, Aust. J. Chem., 1997,50, 267-270.137. B. Halton, M. J. Cooney, R. Boese, and A. H. Maulitz, An Experimental and Theo-157 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemistretical Study of Polar Dyes Derived from Cyclopropa[b]naphthalene, J. Org. Chem.,1998, 70, 1583-1590.138. Y. Apeloig, R. Boese, B. Halton, and A. H. Maulitz, The Molecular Structures ofFulvalenes Derived from Methylidenecycloproparenes: X-Ray Structure Determina-tions and ab initio Calculations, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 10147-10153.139. B. Halton and C.S. Jones, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: Chemistry of the1-Trimethylsilyl-1H-cyclopropa[b]naphthalenyl Anion, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans.2, 1998, 2505-2508/1999, 387.140. B. Halton, C. S. Jones, P. T. Northcote, and R. Boese, Studies in the CyclopropareneSeries: Formation of a New Dimer of Cyclopropa[b]naphthalene, Aust. J. Chem.,1999, 52, 285-290.141. P.  T.  Bickers,  B.  Halton,  A.  J.  Kay,  and  P.  T.  Northcote,  Oxygen  transfer  to1-Diphenylmethylidene-1H-cyclopropabenzene,  Aust.  J.  Chem.,  1999,  52,  647-652.142. B. Halton and C. S. Jones, 1H-Cyclopropa[b]anthracene-3,8-dione, TetrahedronLett., 1999, 40, 9367-9369.143. B. Halton, D. A. C. Evans, and R. N. Warrener, Studies in the CyclopropareneSeries:  Approaches  to  Cyclopropatetracenes,  Aust.  J.  Chem.,  1999,  52,  1123-1126.144. D. N. Butler, B. Halton, J. Warkentin, and R. Warrener, Synthesis and Ring Openingof a Fused Bicyclo[2.1.0]pentan-5-one Acetal, Aust. J. Chem., 2000, 53, 561-566.145. B. Halton, C. S. Jones, A. J. Kay, D. Margetic, and S. Sretenovic, Studies in theCycloproparene  Series:  Approaches  to  Cyclopropanthracenes,  J.  Chem.  Soc.,Perkin Trans. 1, 2000, 2205-2210.146. B.  Halton,  C.  S.  Jones,  and  D.  Margetic,  Studies  in  the  CyclopropareneSeries:  Chemistry  of  1-Acyl-1H-cyclopropa[b]naphthalenes  and  Synthesis  ofCyclopropa[b]naphthaleneylidene  Enol  Ethers,  Tetrahedron,  2001,  57,  2529-2536.147. B. Halton, A. J. Kay, A. T. McNicholls, P. J. Stang, Y. Apeloig, R. Boese, A. H.Maulitz,  and T.  Haumann,  Studies  in  the  Cycloproparene  Series:  CycloadditionReactions of Diarylmethylidenecycloproparenes, ARKIVOC, 2001, Vol. 2, Part 3,8-31; ms003 at: http://www.arkat.org/arkat/journal/ Issue11/ms1/ms1-Halton.htm.148. B. Halton and G. M. Dixon, Diphenylmethylidenecyclobuta[a]cyclopropa[d]ben-zene: Synthesis and Characterization, Organic Lett., 2002, 4, 4563-4565.149. B.  Halton,  R.  Boese,  and  G.  M.  Dixon,  Studies  in  the  Cycloproparene  Series:Unexpected Products from Peterson Olefinations, Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2003, 4507-4512.150. B. Halton and C. S. Jones, Conjugated and Cross-Conjugated π-Extended Cyclo-proparenes with Dithiole and Cyclopentadiene Functionality, Eur. J. Org. Chem.2004, 138-146.158 -Appendices151. B. Halton, R. Boese, and G. M. Dixon, The Cyclopropa[b]naphthalene ElectronDonor: Non-planar 8π7C Cycloheptatrienylidene Derivatives, Tetrahedron Lett.2004, 48, 2167-2170.152. G. M. Dixon and B. Halton, Studies in the Cycloproparene Series: Cross-Conju-gated  π-Extended Alkylidenecycloproparenes,  Eur.  J.  Org.  Chem.,  2004,  3707-3713.153. B.  Halton  and  G.  M.  Dixon,  Synthetic  Protocols,  Molecular  Polarity  and  13CNMR Correlations for 1- and 1,1-Diarylcyclopropa[b]naphthalenes, Org. BiomolChem., 2004, 3139-3149.154. M. J. Cooney, B. Halton, C. S. Jones, R. Boese, and D. Bläser, C6H4 Valence BondIsomers: A Reactive Bicyclopropenylidene, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 4017-4020.155. B,  Halton  and  J.  M.  Ward,  Studies  in  the  Cycloproparene  Series:  The  Forma-tion  of  Charge-Transfer  Complexes  from  1-Aryl-  and  1-Diarymethylidene-1H-cyclopropa[b]naphthalenes, Aust. J. Chem., 2005, 58, 147-152.156. B. Halton, G. M. Dixon, C.S. Jones, C. T. Parkin, R. N. Veedu, H. Bornemann, C.Wentrup, A Cyclopropabenzenylidenethenone (Propadienone) via a New Route toAlkylidenecycloproparene, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 949-952.157. B. Halton, Acephenanthrylenes from Flash Vacuum Thermolysis of Diarylmethyl-idenecycloproparenes, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47(7), 1077-1079.158. B.  Halton  and  M.  J.  Cooney,  π-Extended  Alkylidenecycloproparenes,  Aust.  J.Chem., 2006, 59, 118-122.159. B. Halton, G. M. Dixon, G. S. Forman, Aryl-substituted Methylidenecyclopropa[b]-naphthalenes:  Synthesis  and  Attempted  Silver(I)-Mediated  Dimerization,ARKIVOC, 2006, xii, 38-45.Non-Refereed Professional Publications:160. B. Halton, Guest Editorial, Chem. in NZ, 1986, 50, 166.161. B. Halton, Comment, ChemNZ, 1987, No. 34, 1.162. B. Halton, Annual Report of the New Zealand Institute of Chemistry, Chem. in NZ,1987, 51, 101-104.163. B. Halton, Science and Society: Chemistry and the Community, NZIC PresidentialAddress, Aug. 1987, Chem. in NZ, 1987, 51, 151-153.164. B. Halton, Divergence in Cycloadditions to Some Strained π-Systems, 1991, Austra-lian Department of Industry – The Reactive Molecules Conference.165. B.  Halton,  Book  Review  of  Writing  Organic  Reaction  Mechanisms:  A  PracticalGuide, M. Edenborough, Chem. in NZ, 1995, 59, 31.166. B. Halton,  Reminiscences & The Nozoe Lecture. In A Straight Path - The NozoeMemorial Volume, Nozoe Memorial Trust, Tohoku, Japan, 1997, 148, 303, 307-309.167. T. L. Chan and B. Halton, Preface, 9th International Symposium on Novel Aromatic159 -From Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistCompounds, Pure Appl. Chem., 1999, 71, iii-iv, 209-302.168. B. Halton, Editorial, Chem. in NZ, 2001, 65(2), 7.169. B. Halton, Wherefore art thou ‘Journal’, Chem. in NZ, 2002, 66(4) ii.170. A.  Blackman  and  B.  Halton,  The  2002  Nobel  Prize  in  Chemistry,  Chem.  in  NZ,2002, 66(4), 20-24.171. B.  Halton,  The  2003  Nobel  Prizes  -  Chemistry  and  Physiology  or  Medicine,Chem. in NZ, 2003, 67(4), 41-46.172. B. Halton, An Interview with Leiv K. Sydnes – IUPAC President 2002-2004, Chem.in NZ, 2004, 68(1), 40-41.173. B.  Halton,  The  2004  Nobel  Prizes  -  Chemistry  and  Physiology  or  Medicine,Chem. in NZ, 2004, 68(4), 12-15.174. B. Halton, The 2005 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, Chem. in NZ, 2005, 69(4), 18-20.175. B. Halton, The MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology,Chem. in NZ, 2006, 70, 54-56.176. B. Halton, The 2006 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, Chem. in NZ, 2006, 70, 121-123.177. B. Halton and P. Hodder, The 2007 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, Chem. in NZ, 2008,72, 29-32.178. B. Halton, Obituary: W. E. (Ted) Harvey, Chem. in NZ, 2009, 73, 41-42.179. B. Halton, The 2008 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, Chem. in NZ, 2009, 73, 39-41.180. B. Halton, The 2009 Nobel Prize for Chemistry. Chem. in NZ, 2010, 74, 32-38.181. B. Halton, Editorial, Chem. in NZ, 2011, 75, 1.182. J. E. Harvey and B. Halton, The 2010 Nobel Prize for Chemistry, Chem. in NZ,2011, 75, 49-51.183. B. Halton. Book review of Letters to a Young Chemist (A. Ghosh Ed.), Chem. inNZ, 2011, 75, 158.184. B. Halton, Editorial, Chem. in NZ, 2011, 75, in press.185. B. Halton, Dora Suuring – 75 Years a Chemist, Chem. in NZ, 2011, 75, in press.160 -Appendix IIIResearch Personnel 1969-2009PeriodNameProgramme196919691969-7019711971-731972-761973197319731974197419751975197519761977-8119761977-7919771978-79197819791979198019811982-8519811982-8519831984COVENY, RosemaryANG, Weng SoonMILSOM, Paul, J.MILSOM, Paul, J.WOOLHOUSE, Anthony, D.BROWNE, Alan, R.SPANGLER, Charles, W.ANG, Weng, HiongTASKER, StevenHARRISON, Sylvana, R.R.CHUAH, Teng SeeCHUAH, Teng SeeMITCHELL, Gary, M.OFFICER, David, L.OFFICER, David, L.OFFICER, David, L.BANWELL, Martin, G.BANWELL, Martin, G.GALLOWAY, NeilGALLOWAY, NeilSLEEMAN, John, R.ROMIJN, Simon, J.JAMES, Mark, A.VIATOS, JamesDENT, Barry, R.DENT, Barry, R.RANDALL, Clifford, J.RANDALL, Clifford, J.WARNES, Jeremy, M.MAIDMENT, Anthony, I.161 -Research AssistantMScResearch AssistantMScPhDPhD (JL)Visiting ProfessorMScMSc (incomplete)MScMScPhD (incomplete)BSc (Hons)Research AssistantBSc (Hons)IPhD (JL)BSc (Hons)IPhD. 1979BSc (Hons)IMSc (by thesis)BSc (Hons)BSc (Hons)BSc (Hons)BSc (Hons)BSc (Hons)IPhDBSc (Hons)PhD (TA)BSc (Hons)Research AssistantFrom Coronation Street to a Consummate ChemistCOATES, Helen, P.de RAADT, AnnaSMITH, Anthony, F.M.BUCKLAND, SimonRUSSELL, Sarah, G.G.RUSSELL, Sarah, G.G.1984198419851985-871986-1987-901986(11)-90 LU Qi (Chi) (now Q. Ronnie)BRIDLE, Janet1988CLARK, Heather1989LOVETT, Eva1989DIGGINS, Mathew, D.1990KAY, Andrew J.1990-91KAY, Andrew J.1991ZHA, Zhi-mei1991-92KAY, Andrew J.1992-96DAVEY, Tim, W.1992-93DAVEY, Tim, W.1993STEINER, Antony1993STARR, Malcolm, A.E.*1993-94STARR, Malcolm, A.E.*1993-94COONEY, Mark, J.1993-95FORMAN, Grant, S.1994CUTTLER, Charlotte, A.1994-95CUTTLER, Charlotte, A.1995CUTTLER, Charlotte, A.1995-961996DIXON, Gareth1997-2002 DIXON, Gareth (TA)DIXON, Gareth (TA)2002JONES, Carrisa, S.1996/7JONES, Carrisa, S.1997JONES, Carrisa, S.1998-2001STRETENOVIC, Sanja,1997-98BICKERS, Peter W. T.1998BICKERS, Peter W. T.1998-99162 -BSc (Hons)BSc (Hons)IBSc (Hons)Postdoctoral FellowBSc (Hons)PhDPhD (TA)BSc (Hons)BSc (Hons) (aegrotat)Visiting FellowBSc (Hons)Summer StudentBSc (Hons)Visiting FellowPhDSummer StudentBSc (Hons)I (PhD Otago)BSc (Hons) (PhD Boston Coll)Summer StudentMSc (Hons)Postdoctoral FellowBSc (Hons) (PhD ANU)Summer StudentBSc (Hons)Summer Student (PhD Wollongong)BSc (Hons)PhDResearch AssistantSummer StudentBSc (Hons)PhDMSc (by Thesis)BSc (Hons)I (aegrotat)Reserach AssistantAppendices200020012008PARKIN, Chris TWARD, Jarrod, M.SYDNES, LeivBSc (Hons)BSc Tech (PhD AKL)Sabbatical VisitorJointly supervised with Dr, C. C. L. Chai. JL: Junior lecturer. TA: Teaching assistant.TOTAL: 47 Graduate Students as per:6 MSc (Hons) 1969-1974; 26 BSc (Hons) 1975-2000; 1 BSc Tech (Hons) 2001;1 MSc (Hons) 1993-4;2 MSc (by thesis); 11 PhD; 2 (x 2 year) Postdoctorals; 4 Visiting Academics.163 -Appendix IVOverseas Visitors With NZ Lecture ToursNameYear1974 Dr. R.F.C. BrownProf. H. Prinzbach1977Prof. D. Bryce-Smith1979Prof. E. Vogel1980Prof. M.B. Rubin19831984Prof. S. Sarel1984 Dr. P. Sykes1987 Dr. R. Boese*19871987 Dr. L.A. Cohen*Prof. A. Padwa*19871988 Dr. M.G. Banwell*19881989Prof. R. NeidleinProf. Y. MazurProf. M.A.Battiste*Prof. M. RegitzProf. L.K. SydnesProf. U. BrinkerProf. R. Keese1990199119931993 Dr. M.G. Banwell*19941995 Dr. M.G. Banwell*19971998199819991999200020012001Prof. S. HünigProf. R. GleiterProf. R. Okazaki*Prof. L.K. Sydnes*Prof. B. ZwannenbergProf. C. Wentrup*Prof. M. A. Battiste*Prof. C. Wentrup*Institution/Sponsor(Monash, Australia)(Freiburg, Germany), 1977 German NationalFellow(Reading, UK)(Cologne, Germany), NZIC Sponsored Visitor(Technion, Isreal), NZIC Sponsored Visitor(Hebrew University, Israel)(Cambridge, UK), NZIC Sponsored Visitor(Essen, Germany)(Florida, USA)(NIH, Bethesda, USA)(Emory, Atlanta, USA)(Melbourne, Australia)(Heidelberg, Germany), NZIC Sponsored Visitor(Weizmann Institute, Israel), NZIC SponsoredVisitor(Tromso, Norway)(SUNY-Binghamton, USA)(Bern, Switzerland), NZIC Sponsored Visitor(Melbourne, Australia)(Kaiserslautern, Germany), NZIC Visitor(Melbourne, Australia)(Würzburg, Germany)(Heidelberg, Germany)(University of Tokyo)(Tromso, Norway)(Neijmegan, Holland)(Queensland, Brisbane)(Florida, USA)(Queensland, Brisbane)164 -AppendicesProf. Z. Rappoport*Prof. L.K. Sydnes*Prof. S. Polanc*Prof. M. Rabinovitz*Prof. M. M. HaleyProf. R. BoeseProf. J. NishimuraProf. L. SydnesProf. M. G. BanwellProf. M.A. Battiste*Prof. E SchaumannProf. A. de MeijereProf. K. KomatsuProf. L.K. SydnesProf. M. G. Banwell*200120022002200220022003200520052005200620072008200820082011VUW only(Hebrew, Jerusalem)(Bergen, Norway)(Ljubljana, Slovenia)(Hebrew, Jerusalem)(Oregon, USA)(Essen, Germany)(Gunma, Japan)(Bergen, Norway)(Australian National)(Florida, USA)(Clausthal TU, Germany)(Götttingen, Germany)(Kyoto, Japan)(Bergen, Norway; sabbatical visitor May-June)(Australian National)165 -ISBN 978-0-473-22319-9