I 

THIS IS THE STORY OF A LITTLE GIRL 

S EVERAL instances of sudden consciousness of 
herself flash into her memory as she muses on 
her first self-acquaintance. There is the back- 
ground: the big house in Beshiktash, on a hill over- 
looking the blue Marmora at a distance, and near at 
hand the hills of Yildiz with the majestic white buildings 
surrounded by the rich dark green of pines and willows 
which are pointed out to her as the residence of his 
Majesty Abdul Hamid. 

She is not, however, interested in what the distance 
held, for the old wisteria-covered house, peeping through 
the purple flowers, with its many windows flashing in 
the evening blaze, is dominating her. The garden is on 
terraces, and there are tall acacias, a low fruit orchard 
with its spring freshness and glory, and a long primitive 
vine-trellis casting an enchanting green light and shade 
on the narrow pathway beneath it. This is the place 
where she moves and plays. There is a little fountain 
too, with a pair of lions spouting water from their 
mouths in the evening hours — making the only music 
in the twilight there. In the early morning, pigeons, 

3 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

ever so many pigeons, walk round her, and she quietly 
watches granny feeding them with crumbs. The won- 
derful smell, the wonderful color-scheme, and the won- 
derful feeling of stepping into the world for the first 
time in that garden. 

There is another flash, which faintly lights up another 
house, not granny’s any longer, but her father’s own 
house near-by. . . . An intense uneasiness and an ob- 
scure feeling, perhaps of undefined fear. The woman 
whom she calls “mother” is lying in semi-darkness be- 
side her, in a large bed, clad in her white gown. There 
are those two long, silky plaits, which seem to coil with 
the life of some mysterious coiling animals, and that 
small, pale face with its unusually long, curly black 
lashes resting on the sickly pallor of the drawn cheeks. 
This mother is a thing of mystery and uneasiness to the 
little girl. She is afraid of her, she is drawn to her, 
and yet that thing called affection has not taken shape 
in her heart ; there is only a painful sense of dependence 
on this mother who is quietly fading out from the back- 
groimd of her life. The only act of that mother which 
the little girl remembers is when she finds herself sitting 
on the rather specially comfortable lap and the pale face 
with its silky lashes is lighted by the tender luster of the 
dark eyes while the woman dexterously plays with the 
little girl’s tiny hands and takes each finger and cuts 
the nails — ^rather low — for it hurts. But no howling is 
possible as long as that low voice, with, as it seems, some 
warm color caught from the eyes, murmurs, “There is a 

4 



THIS IS THE STORY OP A LITTLE GIRL 

little bird perched here” (this is said to the palm) ; “this 
one caught it” (this is to the thumb) ; “this one killed it; 
this ate it; and this little one came home from sdiool 
and cried, ‘Where is the bird? Where is the bird?’ ” 
Oh, the soft tickle of that touch and the hidden caress in 
that voice I 

Another incident, but this time it is one of unrelieved 
misery. That soft mother dressed in white, with those 
wonderful eyes, has a dreadful habit of playing on a 
queer musical instrument. The little girl hated it pas- 
sionately. She had not yet learned to bear ugly sounds 
and sights. A little girl from a poor neighbor’s had 
come in and begged to hear the musical box, and the 
mother, indulgently, sweetly, no doubt, had begun turn- 
ing the handle, producing the distorted music, where- 
upon the little one began to howl and kick and scream 
with all her might. She was really agonized by the 
horrible noise, and she had not yet realized that one is 
often alone in one’s likes and dislikes, and one has just 
to learn to tolerate other people’s false notes. But the 
little woman in white slapped her on her cheeks, locked 
the door so that she could not escape, and turned the 
handle of the hated thing on and on. How long it 
lasted before sheer exhaustion sent the little girl to sleep, 
she has no idea. 

The next thing that appears in her memory is a sedan- 
chair with yellow curtains, carried by two men. The 
fading woman, dressed as always in white, is sitting 

5 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

inside, and they are taking her to a house in Yildiz. 
The little girl walks by the side of the horrible thing, her 
hand held by her father’s tall groom. As they are going 
along she pulls open the yellow curtains and peeps in 
and sees there such a wan face with two such strange 
dark lights under their silky fringes that to this day she 
can see it clearly, painfully still. To this day too the 
little girl hates yellow. It gives her a sickly pain in her 
stomach. 

The new house in Yildiz was large, but only three 
servants and that fading woman inhabited it — the father 
appearing only of an evening and riding away on his 
horse the first thing in the morning. 

The light is once more turned down, and now there is 
no mother. The little girl stupidly wanders about, un- 
derstands nothing, knows nothing, feels lonely and 
abandoned. Every evening the father sits by a small 
round table. One single candle flickers, and his tears 
fall on the candle-tray, while the servants walk 
about on tiptoe and pull the little girl away by the 
hand. 

Ali is the man-servant who takes care of her; he is her 
lala, that indispensable personage in every old Turkish 
household, for which no English, no European, equiv- 
alent can exist, for it arose from roots wholly foreign 
to them, whoUy Oriental. The lala was the natural out- 
come of the marked separation between the indoor and 
outdoor life of that day and world. Indoors was the 
delicate, intimate rule of women; out of doors was the 

6 



THIS IS THE 8T0EY OF A LITTLE GIEL 

realm of men. They could play there their proper r61e 
of protector, and one felt happy and secure in their 
presence. As child, and as child only, one could share 
to the full the freedom of the two worlds, and one’s 
lala was one’s natural companion into all the open- 
air places of experience. Then too he brings with him 
into memory that je ne sais quoi of the old-world service 
— devotion, attachment, pride, possession even — ^which 
the modern Turkish world has forgotten but which made 
so much of the warmth and color of the old household 
life. In the tala’s strength one was secure ; on his devo- 
tion one could rely — tyrannously — and from his inno- 
cent familiarity one could learn the truths and fables 
which only fall from the lips of primitive affection. 
But to return. The little girl’s lala is Ali, a quiet big 
man with a great deal of affection if she could specify 
that strange feeling yet. He is kind and grave and 
buj’^s her colored sweets in the street, a thing which is 
strictly forbidden by her father. The woman who cooks 
and serves the meals is called Rassim, a dark and ugly 
creature with a face entirely covered by marks of small- 
pox. Rassim is in love with Ali, and Ali’s brother 
Mustafa is the other man-servant. After the mother 
disappears the little one is in the men’s sitting-room 
most of the time, and this is the way they must have 
talked, although she only realized the meaning of their 
words much later : 

Rassim: “The old lady is lost to everything in her 
mourning. She cannot move or think, so now I can do 
what I like with the child.” 


7 



MEMOIBS OF HALID:^ EDIB 

Ali: “Stop that talk. I will make thy mother cry, 
if thou touchest a single hair of her head.” 

Rassim: “But she’s telling tales about us all the 
time. Thou knowest how she goes and mimics every- 
thing thou or I do so that every one knows what we are 
doing.” 

Ali: “What does she know? Poor little mite! 
Thou liest, Rassim. 

Rassim: "Vallahi [by Allah], I don’t” — she grinds 
her teeth at the little girl — “if she lets out anything more 
about us two I will let the crabs loose on her.” 

Ali: “What are the crabs for?” 

Rassim: “They are good for consumption. We 
had them to grind and put on her back, but she died be- 
fore we could put them on.” 

Ali: “How is Bey Effendi [the master] ?” 

Rassim: “Still crying by the light of that single 
candle. It is the portrait of the other man that they 
found on her breast when she died which has done the 
mischief.” 

Ali: “Thou must have put it there, thou pig!” 

Rassim: “No, vallahi! If she had not had the por- 
trait how could I have put it anywhere? O Ali . . . 
his name was Ali too. All the Alis are tyrants.” 

Then she sings the old song: 

“Ali, my Ali, my rose, come thou to the rosebush; 
if thou comest not, give me a peach” (i. e., a kiss), “O 
Ali. 

‘My Ali is gone to market ; the evil eye will touch him ; 
he who wishes Ali dead, may he lie in the grave instead ” 

8 



THIS IS THE STOEY OF A LITTLE GIRL 

Then she puts her arms round All and kisses him, 
which action is always followed by shaking the little 
girl and looking into her wondering eyes : 

“Halide Hanim, thou art not to tell, never, never.” 

What is it that they do not want her to tell? When 
and how she has ever told anything she does not know, 
but she answers: 

“I will tell, Rassim Dadi; ^ I will tell.” 

Then follows the usual fighting between Ali and Ras- 
sim because of the little girl, and Mustafa looks on, 
with that disagreeable grin on his face. 

The next morning she runs down to the kitchen in 
her night-dress, her feet all bare. She has a queer 
quivering feeling down her back, and her mind is full 
of crabs, whatever they may be. 

“I will tell, Rassim Dadi,” she screams defiantly on 
the last step, and before she can run up-stairs again she 
is caught and set in the middle of the kitchen while a 
large basket full of something is poured out on the floor, 
and there the little creeping horrors are all round her 
feet. 

The helpless terror, the speechless agony of fear, the 
hair damp on her forehead, the staring eyes that hurt ! 
She has no remembrance of the end of this terrible event, 
but she knows well the stories her granny used to tell 
later about Rassim’s cruelty to herself. 

“I rescued the poor little creature,” granny would 


1 In Turkish such appellations as nurse, princess, etc., are put after the 
personal name, and for elderly servants politeness demands that some such 
title must be given. 



MEMOIRS OF HAlilDE EDIB 

say; “I was coming to the house that morning, and from 
the garden I heard the child screaming. I rang, and 
Rassim never thought it was I, so she opened the door, 
and I found the child laid on the mat, her mouth filled 
with black pepper, which Rassim had been stuffing her 
with, and struggling to get away. I could have beaten 
Rassim, the wretch! But the little one continued de- 
fiant to the last. ‘I mU tell, Rassim Dadi,’ she kept 
on screaming, while Rassim, wild with rage, kept on 
shouting, ‘Say thou wilt not tell.’ ” 

But all that is strangely forgotten, and the only thing 
that can be seen through the haze is a somehow connected 
vignette of the little Halide sitting on the lap of a won- 
derful old man, with burning eyes and a flowing white 
beard, who caresses her hair with a gentleness so queer 
from those rough hands. “Poor little mite!” grand- 
father keeps saying. 

Her next and last impression of the house in Yildiz is 
quite different. Rassini had been dismissed because of 
her cruelty, Ali and Mustafa had gone, and an old lady 
housekeeper and a young Circassian boy were living in 
the house, the housekeeper looking after her father and 
Halide herself. Her father was going regularly to the 
palace again as in the old days. His tall groom with 
that lovely big bay horse used to stand by the door in 
the mornings, and the little girl would ride the horse be- 
fore her father came out, her small feet dangling and the 
groom leading the horse by the bridle very gravely up 
and down the street. At last the father would come 

10 



THIS IS THE STORY OF A LITTLE OmL 

down-stairs and ride away followed by his groom on a 
white horse, while the little girl strained her eyes to get 
the last look of them as they disappeared round the turn- 
ing of the long, stately road to Yildiz Kiosk. 

She missed Ali badly, and even Rassim who had been 
so cruel she missed too. The atmosphere of excitement 
and disorder had gone. No one talked of a picture on 
a dead woman’s breast and a man’s tears. The father 
was mostly away in the palace, staying even at night, 
when it was his turn to be on duty. 

It was now that the event which is somewhat like a 
symbol of her lifelong temperament occurred. 

On the long divan, covered with white cloth, sat the 
old lady housekeeper, a kind and hard-working creature, 
leaning over her darning continually; the young Cir- 
cassian sat at the table, lost in his books, for he was get- 
ting ready for a school education. (Her father had a 
mania for taking poor young men under his protection 
and sending them to school.) She, the little girl, was 
left to herself. There was no one scolding her or filling 
her mouth with black pepper for telling about things she 
did not know. There was complete silence. The 
father was no longer shedding tears by the flicker of a 
single candle. Her loneliness seemed suddenly to have 
taken the form of a tangible hardness in her throat. 
The woman with the long coiling plaits and wonderful 
eyes was no more. What was this silence about? 
Why had she no one to cuddle close to and go to sleep 
with? There was no answer to her unspoken question- 
ing. Still only that dead silence. The next moment 

11 



MEMOntS OF HALIoi: EDIB 

she stood in the middle of the room and spoke her mind 
out: 

“I want my father!” 

“He is at the palace.” 

“I want my father!” 

“He will come back to-morrow.” 

“I want my father !” 

“He cannot come, dear. The gates of the palace are 
closed at night, and the whole place is kept by guards.” 

“I want my father!” 

Gradually the little voice rose and rose in hoarse and 
piercing howls of pain which she herself internally noted 
as strange. On and on it went, rising and howling till 
the Greek neighbors came in one by one -to help the old 
lady housekeeper to calm and soothe her, their voices 
making a still greater noise than the little girl. The 
place was a Christian quarter — Armenians and Greeks 
were the only neighbors — and the Greeks of Constan- 
tinople talk louder than anybody else, especially if they 
are women. But there were twenty wild beasts ranging 
in the little girl’s breast, making her howl and howl with 
pain till she caught sight of a pail of cold water brought 
by a Greek woman to stop her crying. 

“She may catch cold.” 

“But she will burst if she goes on like that.” 

“O Panngia” (Holy Mother), “pour it on her head.” 

And pour it they did, which gave the old housekeeper 
the extra trouble of changing her clothes, but for the rest 
caused a sudden catch in her breath which stopped her 
for an instant only to begin louder and louder, wilder 

12 



THIS IS THE STOEY OF A LITTLE GIEL 

and wilder, the next moment. ... It was the symbol of 
the force of her desires in later years, the same uncon- 
trollable passion for things, which she rarely wanted, 
but which, once desired, must be obtained at all costs; 
the same passionate longing although no longer ex- 
pressed by sobbing or howling. 

Finally the old lady housekeeper and the Greek 
women beg the young Circassian to take the child to the 
palace. 

It was almost midnight as the young man carried her 
in his arms through the guarded streets of Yildiz. He 
stopped at each tall soldier whose bayonet flashed un- 
der the street oil-lamps. 

“Who goes there?” 

And the young Circassian placed the little girl in the 
lamplight and showed her swollen face: 

“It is Edib Bey’s daughter. She would have died 
with crying if I had n’t promised to bring her to her 
father. Her mother died. . . .” 

And the soldier, who probably had seen the mother’s 
coffin pass not long ago, let them go on. 

The little girl began to watch cahnly and with pleas- 
ure the dimly lighted white road, the long shadows of 
the guards, while she heard the distant bark of the street 
dogs. She was not going to be knocked down by lone- 
liness and dead silence any longer. 

Before the gigantic portals which led immediately to 
the quarters where her father worked she and the Cir- 
cassian youth were stopped once more. No one was 
allowed to pass the palace gates after midnight. . . . 

13 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

But sometimes a little girl and her heart’s desire are 
stronger than the iron rules of a great despot. The 
guards are human and probably have little daughters of 
their own in their villages. There is a long wait. A 
man in black dress comes to the door. He looks at the 
little girl by the lamplight and lets her pass on. At 
last they reach the father’s apartment. He looks at her 
with astonishment and perhaps with pain. He has just 
jumped out of bed because there is a rumor of some 
little girl at the palace door crying for her father. . . . 
On a bed opposite the father’s lies a fat man with an 
enormous head who is blinking at the scene. (He is 
Hakki Bey, later on the famous grand vizir.) Every 
one no doubt expects her to jump into her father’s arms, 
but her attention is caught by the quilt on her father’s 
bed. It is bright yellow . . . and the night is closed in 
her memory with that bright patch of the hated color. 

Another short interval, and we are back in granny’s 
wisteria-covered house again now. She sleeps in the 
large room where she was born, looking over that lovely 
garden. Three large windows open over the long, nar- 
row divan, covered with the traditional clean white cloth 
of all Turkish divans. There is a red carpet on the floor 
and the curtains are white. Purple wisteria is in bloom, 
sunlight patches fall on the white cover under the open 
windows, a brilliant blue sky smiles over all, and the little 
girl is faint with color and beauty and the smell of it all. 
Before one window on a bright red cushion sits granny. 
She is in reality a very beautiful woman, but the little 

14 



THIS IS THE STOEY OF A LITTLE GIRL 

girl does not feel it. Her granny’s eyes do not trouble 
her. In her little head and heart she is unconsciously 
aware of those people whose eyes make her uneasy, make 
her think; and the rest of human beings she ignores. 
Her granny has a very large white face. Her silky red 
hair waves and curls over her dazzlingly white shoulders 
and neck. Her eyes are pale gray and subdued. So 
are her small pink lips. Over a white transparent 
chemise she wears a light brown loose dress, a large white 
muslin collar, and sleeves rolled back over her gown. 
A Persian shawl encircles her waist. A light muslin 
print, worked with delicate Turkish embroidery, covers 
her head. The little girl is quieter and less afraid of 
unknown things when she sleeps in her little bed by her 
granny. The beds are Turkish beds, laid out every eve- 
ning on the carpet and gathered up in the morning and 
put away. 

There is one person whose eyes she is rather conscious 
of. He is a tall old man, and his eyes are dark and 
strong and stern. But they can be soft and tender too, 
and the Anatolian accent with which he tells her about 
the Russian wars in eastern Turkey she remembers be- 
cause of those eyes. He is from Kemah and is illiterate 
but has been the chief of coffee-makers in the palace of 
Prince Reshad (the late Mohammed V). There are 
any amount of such chiefs in palace households — the 
chief of the tobacco-makers, the chief of the candle- 
bearers, the chief of the jug-holders, the chief of the 
royal dressers, the chief of the carpet-layers. And the 
chiefs do things which have nothing to do with their 

1.5 



MEMOISS OF HALIDAS KDIB 

titles. They are mostly rich men with summer resorts 
and winter residences. But her grandfather is not rich. 
He has been too honest to be that, and the great sums he 
had legitimately gained had oozed away between the 
fair fingers of the white-faced, gray-eyed, golden-haired 
Constantinopolitan lady, my granny. He still regards 
his beautiful wife with wonder. He had taken her from 
an old ecclesiastical and aristocratic family of the sacred 
city of Eyoub. She was related to the keepers of the 
Holy Tomb there, and she had brought with her a very 
rich dowry of both goods and slaves. But both hers and 
his had passed out of her hands by the very simple sys- 
tem of giving more than she received all her life. He is 
perhaps embittered by her extravagance, for he talks 
of debts and money difficulties, which makes her uneasy 
in an indefinite w'ay. It is like the love-affair of Rassim 
and Ali to the little Halide. She suffers from it and 
does not know why. 

In the old wooden house at this time too there is living 
a liberated “palace lady.” “ She is a small wizened Cir- 
cassian and occupies the upper apartments of the house. 
She calls granny “mother.” In former days granny 
had connections in the palace, and because of her hus- 
band’s position she used to be quite a habitue there. So 
this palace lady had come to her when her services had 
ended at the Kiosk. She has wonderful jewelry, Eu- 
ropean furniture, a white slave, and gorgeous dresses. 
Her official post had been that of teacher of the women 

2 That is. one of tho.se who formerly held u position in the sultan’s palace 
but who have been retired. 


16 





\.M1 I 


THIS IS THE STOEY OF A LITTLE GIRL 

in the palace, and she is really a woman of learning and 
has a library. Mysteriously too she was the head dancer 
of the rabbit-dance. What this rabbit-dance is the little 
girl does not know but she remembers in winter nights 
the short skirts with gold fringes and gold sequins which 
the owner lays out and from which she strips off the 
gold, with the little girl’s gay help, and sends it away to 
be sold. 

There is a young uncle now also, and a little boy, the 
orphan of another uncle who is dead. The old house- 
keeper, the ruddy Circassian slave, the man-servant who 
is always a native of grandfather’s country — Kemah — 
are the dramatis personas of this interval. But the 
little girl has not formed human connections yet. All 
these people move outside her sphere. She knows two 
classes of people and two ages: “Children” are all 
little girls and continue to live in child-dom till they 
take the veil. . . . That happens when they are ten 
years old, and they then join the gro^vn-ups forever 
after. All the grown-ups are the same and of the same 
age whether they are twelve or fifty. Boys are emphat- 
ically not children. They dress like men, or rather as 
they did at that time, and tliey are disagi’eeahle and 
noisy. If there is anything in the world to dislike, for 
her, it is boys. They are almost like the ugly, noisy 
musical box which her mother ])layed, still echoing in 
her hrain as a continual false note. If there is anjdhing 
in her heart that can be called a decided liking, it is for 
men, especially for those who have white beards and eyes 
that one feels and remembers. 

17 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

One day an elder sister appeared at granny’s. 
Wliere she had been and why she came all of a sudden 
the little girl did not know. They whisper round her 
that the sister’s father, an aide-de-camp of Abdul 
Hamid’s, had been exiled with all the rest of her fam- 
ily. Why her sister has another father and why she 
calls the little girl’s father “father” only came to be un- 
derstood much later. At present, there she simply is, 
a brilliant creature, with crimson cheeks, curly black 
hair, and burning e5'es. 

When she arrived she brought boxes of sweets for 
Halide and for her little boy cousin. She kissed them 
both but all the same treated them like inferiors and 
ordered them about very freely. She was the very 
scourge of Allah in the house, as the uncle expressed it. 
She broke the little girl’s toys, climbed trees like a little 
boy; she showed shocking disrespect to the palace 
lady and even made the poor &lt;{uiet granny weep some- 
times. 

This period in the big wisteria-covered house came to 
an end with the visit of the young Circassian who had 
carried her to the palace on that strange midnight in his 
arms. He was now a regular student at a very big 
school, and as he was now called jMehmed Klfendi by the 
household, the little girl realized that he was a personage 
to be respected and no longer a mere boy. 

W^hen the slave-girl f ikriyar one day called granny 
out to the .selamlik (the men’s side of the house) the 
little girl followed her, and standing by the door which 
shuts the women’s apartments, she listened to the talk. 

18 



THIS IS THE STOEY OF A LITTLE GIEL 

She could not make out the conversation clearly but she 
knew that the meaning is this : 

Her father has married again. His new wife is the 
young granddaughter of the old lady housekeeper who 
used to look after our home when Hassim’s rule ceased. 
Granny cried softly on hearing the news, and Mehmefl 
Effendi went on giving details. 

What is marriage? Why does granny cry'' 

The little girl and the sister were carefully dressed. 
The little girl was kissed tenderly by every one as if they 
were taking leave of her by an open grave. And the 
two little girls walked away with Mehmed Effendi, to 
visit, so she understood, the new wife. 

The house where her father was living was still in 
Yildiz but not in the old quarter. This was a smaller 
house, not so high up the hill and in rather a narrow 
street inhabited by Greeks and Armenians. The place 
was near the pine groves which are called Ihlamour, the 
Linden Grove. The large grove had a casino, and 
every Friday and Sunday there was music. JSIen and 
women went in crowds, the women sitting behind im- 
provised lattices, which looked queer in an open place. 
But the little girl loved to go there later on when she 
occasionallj" escaped from home, and played on the pine- 
needles, listened to the soft hissing of the pines, gath- 
ered pine-seeds, and looked longingly across to the house 
with wisteria on the other side of the hills where the 
Moslem population and her granny dwelt. 

But now the Circassian youth was leading them 
through the winding paths of the grove, holding both of 

19 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

them by the hand and telling the elder sister to behave 
and be polite. 

“Her grandmother was a housekeeper,” snapped she. 

“How dare you? She was a lady with a house of her 
own,” scolded the Circassian 5fouth. 

“She was a housekeeper.” 

“No, but anyhow nono she is the mother-in-law of the 
Bey Effcndi.” 

The little girl has heard this term “housekeeper” used 
by her own granny in disdainful tones when of late years 
the two houses had had a womanly feud, each accusing 
the other of witchcraft, backbiting, and plebeian origins. 

They arrived at last. The door was opened by the 
old lady, and the little girl found herself in an atmos- 
phere of the greatest tension. She became the central 
figure, and every one seemed to w'atch her with intense 
pity and curiosity. The house was in perfect order and 
very quiet. Up-stairs in the father’s room sat the new 
wife sewing, while he was walking nervously up and 
down. The new wife was a creature of very pretty 
coloring, a pink face, a small ])ink mouth, blue eyes, 
and a long rich plait of pale golden hair. She was 
dressed in a dark blue costume (English fashion, as they 
call it), and over her pretty hair was a bright green silk 
Turkish kerchief. The little girl’s first impression was 
that of sensuous pleasure in this pretty eombination of 
colors. She felt just as she feels when she sees an 
almond-tree in blossom, and she jumped into the lady’s 
lap and began to kiss her. The scene must have pro- 
duced a surprising effect, for the father and the old lady 

20 



THIS IS THE STOEY OF A LITTEE GIRL 
began to wipe their eyes. The little girl learned much 
later that the father had agonized over the thought of 
this meeting, although the little girl was hardly four 
years old. The father supposed her to have an extraor- 
dinary sensibility, but the truth is that her sensibility 
to persons and nature or to things in general were just 
the same. If she cried when she saw any human being 
cry, she sobhed when she saw a poor street dog stoned 
by boys. But she did not know yet the meaning of 
mother, death, or other serious things. To her every 
phenomenon was of the same order. After all this 
might be the true meaning of life, although for her from 
this time forward nature and man appeared from very 
different angles. 

In the evening when she saw that the sister was to go 
and she to stay she felt a painful pressure at her heart. 
She did not cry, but she felt heavy and shy in tlie new 
atmosphere. If she could liave analyzed the acute suf- 
fering which timidity causes she would have known her 
true state. 

Fortunately an old man with a white beard dropped 
on the scene and made things easier by the mere mild 
look of his blue and friendly eyes. lie was the new 
wife’s uncle, and he gave her nuts and pistachios — se- 
cretly, however, for she was allowed only milk in the 
evenings, lie took her on his knees, talked to her, 
caressed her hair, and showed neither curiosity nor pity, 
treating her all the time as an ccjual. But the wife’s 
mother and sisters, who arrived later to see the step- 
daughter of their relative, studied and criticized her 

•21 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

very freely. “What an unusual coloring! Would yov 
call her dark?” 

“No, stupid! Look what fair hair she has. It is 
yellow.” 

“Yellow! No indeed. Corn-colored I should say. 
Come here! What funny hair! It is almost white at 
the ends. Her nose is like a little potato; and what 
big lips she has!” 

“Look at me, little girl! Oh, what eyes! They are 
not like a little girl’s. They are quite uncanny.” 
(There is whispering and much mysterious talking at 
this point.) 

“They are too large! Oh, look away, little girl! I 
don’t like her to look at me,” 

The humiliation and tlie torture of it! She is aware 
of her bodily self for the first time, and tliat with in- 
finite distress. She feels that she must look like a toad, 
or an ugly bush with no pretty leaves, two things which 
have struck her as disagreeable. She realizes that her 
skin is not pink and her eyes not blue, and she begins to 
suffer from the presence of the pe()[)le who have blue 
ej’es and fair complexions. To this day she can feel tlie 
twinge and the stab in her heart which blue-eyed people 
with pink faces for years caused her. 

Yet life in her father’s home with the new wife is far 
from being disagreeable, for before long she has her 
first love-affair. 

This all-important love-affair is preceded by the de- 
velopment of some other imjwrtant likes and dislikes 
in her soul. The first of these is concerning her clothes. 

22 



THIS IS THE STORY OF A LITTLE GIRL 

Now her father £dib Bey, secretary of his Majesty 
Abdul Hamid, had a strong admiration for the English 
and their way of bringing up children. He believed 
that the secret of their greatness was due to this, and so 
his method of bringing up his first-born was strongly 
influenced by English ways as he had read of them in 
books. He occupied himself personally with her 
dresses, underclothing, shoes, and stockings — even 
handkerchiefs. Turkey having, however, not yet en- 
tered the road of reform and modernism by a slavish imi- 
tation of English outward apparel, he did not make her 
wear a hat. As a matter of fact it would never have 
done for him even to express a desire to do such a thing, 
for hats were the outward and visible sign of Christians,® 
yet he only covered her head in winter with a kalpak 
(that snug Caucasian head-dress which for some subtle 
reason ranks with fezzes and tarbooshes rather than with 
hats and bonnets) and let her go bareheaded in the 
summer. 

She wore .short, dark blue frocks in winter, all 
English-made, and white linen in the summer. Her 
arms and legs were bare after the manner of English 
children, which shocked her granny and made her anx- 
ious le.st she should catch cold. 

But the little girl’s objections were not as to the 
weather and its changes. She looked different from 
other children of her age and class. She attracted at- 
tention, and she was envious of the gorgeous-colored silk 
gowns, frills and ribbons, even jewels, with which other 

3 No good Moliamniedan could wear the accursed things. 

23 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

little girls were decked. To this day she feels occa- 
sional longings for gaudy colors and vulgar apparel al- 
though her true tastes are quite otherwise. 

Next it was her diet. The Turkish children of her 
class were allowed to eat anything. They bought deli- 
cious red sugar cocks perched on sticks, licked hard 
sweetmeats of all shapes, colors, and tastes, while the 
little girl had a strict diet — some meat and vegetables, 
a very little fruit at meal-times and only milk in the 
evening. How she hated milk and loved fruit of all 
kinds! She longed to stuff herself wuth those wonder- 
ful cherries, raw cucum!)ers, and boiled corn that other 
peojile had, till she should not be able to move for very 
repletion. This severe regime left her with a great 
weakness for fruit, and a great hatred for milk and for 
the English .system of bringing up children. Yes, if 
this diet, and the daily sponge-bath and the stuff they 
dropped into her eyes had been canceled, she would have 
been tolerably happy in her father’s home. 

If she were inferior to other human beings, and dif- 
ferent in a sense which made her have more in com- 
mon with a plant or a young aniu)al, she was at any 
rate superior to them in heart affairs. Although she 
was under the influence of all kinds of beauty and her 
five senses were wildly alive to colored objects and 
beautiful sounds and so on, she was above men in her 
love as a real dog is above human beings. 

Kyria Ellenie (Madame Ellen) was the head of the 
so-called kindergarten where little girls and .some very 
small boys of the neighborhood were sent. It was kej)t 

24 



THIS IS THE STORY OF A LITTLE GIRL 

by three Greek spinsters, Kyria Ellenie being the 
eldest. The children were mostly Greek and Arme- 
nian and the daughters of the Christian chiefs of Abdul 
Hamid, such as the chief of the bakers, the chief of the 
chemists, the chief of the booksellers, and so on. . . . 
The little girl was the only Turkish child there. She 
did not remember how she came to go first but she never 
forgot her intensest, sincerest, and perhaps longest love- 
affair. Its object was Kyria Ellenie. As the little 
girl was always laughed at because of the old lady’s 
looks and her own weakness for them it is best to de- 
scribe the old lady at once. Her large lips turned one 
up and the other down in a most unprepossessing way. 
Her small eyes were always running; her thin cheeks 
were all in lines and deep furrows. The limp gray 
hair hung on her temples; the wiry hard hands, with 
their toil-worn look, and her tall thin body in its loose 
black garments, completed the picture. Her outward 
ugliness was phenomenal but the little girl both with 
her natural and spiritual senses had perceived her in- 
ward beauty. No other human eyes had expressed 
that dog-like affection in its purest sense and beauty 
as did those blinking and watery ones. The cheeks 
must have got those deep marks through suffering for 
others, while that stooping posture of the body ex- 
pressed a solicitude and eagerness to serve the forlorn 
little girls. 

Till the little one came within the touch of that loving 
and humble old thing she was rather like a stranger in 
this funny world, like a dweller in Hades waiting to 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

be initiated. All her impressions and joys were so far 
outward. In her inner self she was entirely isolated. 
She had no heart communication, which is what per- 
haps gives the real significance to human happiness. 
So far she had been internally in a lonely and expectant 
attitude, or rather patiently enduring her surroundings 
with the dumb and helpless feeling of a dog thrown into 
a world of different animals or of uncongenial human 
beings. I have seen little street dogs sitting in the sun 
in old Turkish quarters and blinking with just that 
look which expressed to me the little girl’s state of 
heart. But that old teacher gave her the first life con- 
tact. She was no longer in Hades dozing in a sunless 
and stoange atmosphere. There was a new life in her. 
She was no longer morbid and quiet. For the first 
time she made joyous movements, played happily with 
gestures which were not merely physical demonstra- 
tions but something more .subjective and conscious. 
There was a wonderful security, a nameless delight in 
the old w'oman’s presence. The little girl spoke, .sang, 
and recited, happy to be able to give her.self in humble 
gratitude for the other woman’s warm heart. 

But in this affair as in all similar ones the pangs and 
the drawbacks of love began. Kyria Kllenie had to go 
out sometimes to buy such things as vegetables and 
meat for her household. Then a demoniac howling 
would begin. It was either a repetition of that night 
when the portals of the palace were opened for her or 
a dumb wandering all over the house like some one 
searching for the beloved in her belongings, or like a 

26 



THIS IS THE STORY OF A LITTLE GIRL 

little dog sniffing to discover the scent of its owner. 
The house was Turkish in its furnishings — the same 
immaculate white-covered divans and the large chest 
of drawers. The two traditional lamps and an old 
clock stood side by side in a row. The large quantity 
of dainty hand-made lace showed years of hand labor 
in the lonely life of the old spinster, while in a dim cor- 
ner stood a panagia (icon of the Virgin Mary), an old 
oil-lamp flickering in front of it. Whenever the elder 
sister came to visit the little girls in the school she 
stealthily went up-stairs and tried to put the light out, 
whispering secretly to the little girl: “It is Christian. 
It is sinful.” What did that all mean to the little girl? 
She had not entered yet that narrow human path where 
religion and language as well as racial differences make 
human beings devour each other. The little girl was 
still in a world where the joy of life is heart fusion and 
natural existence. 

Her next attachment was the white curly dog Hec- 
tor, who had running eyes like Kyria Ellenie. The 
dog licked her face and her hands twice daily, in the 
morning and in the evening. 

This hapj)y state of things went on for some time, 
she with her dolls and the dog and the joyous stimulus 
which her first taste of life had given her. 

The Cxreek funerals passed hy the door with priests 
in gorgeous garments and long trains held b}’ little 
hoys carrying candles in their free hands; the corpse on 
the coffin, decked in its best clothes, its face powdered 

27 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

and rouged, the low Byzantine chant hummed in cav- 
ernous tones “Kyrie Eleison.” She used to put her 
dog in a swing, clothe herself in Kyria Ellenie’s long 
black shawl, and march up and down the room singing 
in dead earnestness “Kyrie Eleison.” 

She is sometimes put on a table by Kyria Ellenie 
and asked to recite about the naughty cock that woke 
people in the morning. The little girl did not realize 
that she spoke two languages, one at school and one at 
home. Language to her was a mere gesture, and one 
used one or the other according to the person who un- 
derstood this or that way of expression. 

All this came to a rather sad end. She began to 
mope, to droop, and to feel desperately heavy; every- 
thing seeming to move round lier in a slow and sickly 
swing. Every morning quite unconsciously she made 
a pretense of looking bright, so that she might not be 
kept at home, but every evening slie walked home with 
a hammer beating in her brains. Every day she sat 
and gazed at Kyria Ellenie, but she did not imitate 
the Greek priests any more. AV'^hen Kyria Ellenie put 
her on the table she still tried to recite about the 
naughty cock, but her voice as it came out of her mouth 
seemed to burn her like a flame. 

One day as she painfully struggled u])on the table to 
recite about the cock the swinging around became too 
sickly, and although she still went on, her eyes probably 
had a queer look, for Kyria Ellenie caught her in her 
arms and carried her home. This incident she remem- 
bered clearly years after, when she was addressing a 

28 



THIS IS THE STOEY OF A LITTLE GIEL 

public meeting with a temperature of 102 degrees; 
but on the second occasion naturally no one caught her. 
Thus ended her first love and her happy life at school. 

She lay in bed for days with that dumb hot sickness 
and the nauseating swing of the furniture and the ceil- 
ing keeping tune with the hammering on her head. 

For how many days and nights she knows not — it 
was endless — Greek neighbors came in and brought her 
sweets and talked in those high and shrill tones peculiar 
to Greek women of Istamhoul. Men called doctors 
gathered round her bed and talked in low tones while 
the father openly cried and the new wife looked un- 
easy. Finally the doctors must have prescribed her 
a grandmother, for one morning this satisfactory rem- 
edy arrived in a closed carriage and took her away. 
Once more she was lifted in the arms of the Circassian 
youth; once more the wisteria-covered house entered 
her life vision. 


29 



