VI 


MASRIED LIFE AND THE WORLD 

M y life was confined within the walls of my 
apartment. I led the life of the old-fashioned 
Turkish woman. For the first few years I 
even ceased to see father’s old friends whom I had 
known as a child. I belonged to the new house and its 
master, and gave the best I had, to create a happy home 
and to help him in his great work. He had begun at this 
time his colossal work in Turkish — the “^lathematical 
Dictionary” — and I prepared for him from different 
English authorities the lives of the great English mathe- 
maticians and philosophers. 

It was at this time that the Sherlock Holmes series 
appeared in Engli.sli. I cannot describe with what 
childish interest both my father and Salih Zeki Bey 
listened as I read these stories out in Turkish. Father 
used to tell us that the interpreters in Yildiz were trans- 
lating them as fast as they could, for iVbdul Hamid had 
an extraordinary liking for criminal and police .stories, 
especially for those of Conan Doyle; the chief of the 
royal wardrobe, ismet Bey, read them all night behind 
a screen. Although I also found the stories curious and 
interesting, there were a yellow face and a man with a 
Wooden leg in the stories which frightened me constantly 
in my dreams. 


207 



MEMOmS OF HALIDE EDIB 

For my own satisfaction I took to reading French lit- 
erature and that with deep interest. At first I did this 
with a view to perfecting my F rench, but its mere form, 
so inimitably beautiful, impressed me as something al- 
most spiritual. Yet I did not linger long with the styl- 
ists. It was the F rench soul in its fastidious insistence 
upon beauty, and still more upon truth, which held me 
in subjection. Good old Daudet with his warm, loving, 
and tender soul I always adored, but Zola I did not ap- 
preciate at first when I was wading through his gigantic 
productions one after another. After having digested 
his more difficult material, got over his blinding, lurid, 
and often chaotic coloring, overcome my disgust at his 
too often ugly sexual and degrading descriptions I 
became gradually aware of Zola himself. Although lie 
was without a refined sensibility I could not deny his 
mastery of words, his powerful if clumsy application of 
light and color in human descriptions. I do not say this 
of his portraiture of individuals, for these he rarely cre- 
ated. But he lighted up portions of the human soul 
with his fastidious and very French idealism; he chas- 
tised men by making grotesque statues and pictures of 
their vileness. All this, however, ultimately effaced it- 
self from my mind, while Zola has remained as perhaps 
the most powerful educator of 10}”^ soul. To me he 
represented that rare idealist fight for truth in which he 
persisted, just as an ordinary man fights for breath if 
his mouth is closed by force. Zola’s soul sensed an in- 
visible oppression created by the lower powers which 
dominate man and make him eager to suppress truth. 

208 



MABEIED LIl'E AND THE WOKLD 

There is no other writer I know who stands up for truth 
with such temperamental passion. He wanted the 
whole of it ; his meticulous idealism would not allow him 
to temper it. The higher the standard he set before 
himself for man the harder he struck at his weaknesses. 
He attacked man’s vices, exaggerating into absolute 
folly the sexual ones. I do not know why he was so 
much haunted by man’s sexual weaknesses; there are 
plenty of other shortcomings. But Zola seems to have 
been aware of them also, though only in liis later works, 
as “I^es Quatres Evangiles.” Zola evidently thought 
that the sexual perversions were fundamental ones in 
man’s character and that uidcss he were made sane and 
normal in that respect he coidd not reach higher levels. 

I always identify Zola with a picture of Christ chasing 
the money-lenders from the Temple. I do not remem- 
ber whose the picture is, hut in it Christ has the unre- 
lenting eyes of a destroyer, full of a holy horror, such 
horror as Pasteur would have had in his eyes if he had 
seen a tube of microbes of some terrible sort getting 
]f)ose in a human dwelling. Zola has that same horror 
at the sight of vice let loose among human beings, and 
he attacks it with the relentlessness of a force of nature. 
He does not stop to see if there is anything to he said 
on the other side. His impetuous honesty to destroy 
not only the vices and ugliness of the human heart but 
man’s self-created illusions and shams nearly killed my 
mystical comfort from the Divine and the Unseen. If 
&gt;^ola had lived and seen the destitution and misery of 
to-day he would surely have encouraged men to hold fast 

209 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

to the elevating and purifying influence of the spiritual 
world in every sense. 

He made me put these questions to myself: Was it 
the eternal desire for inward support and comfort which 
kept me tied to the Unseen? Or was it the fear that I 
could not keep the needed strength of soul in my strug- 
gles for the highest? Could I stand and face the ugly 
truth of human realities without spiritual aid and still 
have the strength to serve my kind? 

The extraordinary greatness and inward power of 
Zola was this: seeing men, as he did see them, cut off 
from every spiritual belief, he still fought for their bet- 
terment in his own way. Zola’s test is the hardest test 
for sincere and piously inclined souls, but if they can 
come out of it whole nothing afterward can change their 
belief in the existence of a Divine Power. 

I had already been shocked by my first contact with 
the reality of life, and when I came to feel that one’s 
own eternally isolated and very ephemeral soul has to 
stand alone and struggle and bear as well as serve man- 
kind (a mankind as pre.sented in Zola’s coloring), it 
almost destroyed my mental equilibrium; and in the 
mental disturbance which followed I was much under 
his influence. 

In the autumn of the year 1902 I had a nervous 
breakdown. Such illne.s.se.s and mental affections are 
worth studying in oneself as well as in others, for if they 
are the source of degeneration and discord, even of an- 
archy in the masses, they are also in some instances land- 
marks in individual souls. 


210 



MARRIED LIFE AND THE WORLD 

My trouble seemed like simple insomnia at first. I 
ceased to sleep. Something in my head and in my inner 
conscience had awakened, and I had the feeling that I 
should never sleep again. 

Some light in my head was constantly burning, I 
could look and see the inside me clearly with a light 
that was never dimmed, never lessened. "When I 
closed my eyes in sheer exhaustion, still that intense con- 
sciousness glared on in me. 

At first the idea that I should never sleep again 
frightened me, but when the conviction became settled, 
I ceased to fear. My consciousness of the time seemed 
really to solidify; minutes, hours, nights were eternal. 
Even after nights through which I passed, sitting by the 
light of a succession of candles which burned up one 
after another, I had the feeling that time was there ; it 
was not moving, and it had never moved. Then I felt 
that immortality, an unceasing consciousness in a light 
which will never be extinguished and which will never 
liberate a mortal, is horrible. 

I was at last slowly and ironically settling down to 
bear my new condition patiently. Every warm color in 
me had somehow faded into a somber gray. Every 
desire in life had left me. There wms no sense of values, 
no sense of possible physical satisfaction. That won- 
derful garden and the coiling Bosphorus, that marvelous 
night of purple blue in which sharpest forms take fluid 
outlines and the stars glisten like drops of water, gave 
nie no more emotion. All nature was gray to me, and 
gray all the time. 


211 



MEMOIRS OF HALID]B EDIB 

I believed I was quietly fading away, and I waited for 
the end. I covered the looking-glasses in my room at 
night, for my face in its sharp lines and my eyes in their 
strange stare frighened me. 

Some other self of mine seemed to watch this queer 
stranger. I suddenly felt that I had fallen into a world 
among people who were strangers, and that I had 
nothing in common even with the most familiar and the 
dearest. Surelj- this girl I watched in the mirror was 
related to these people around, and she was an inhab- 
itant of this senseless place, hut the inside me had no 
relations or interests. And the inside me was after all 
the real me. I saw the values of life in glaring lucidity, 
as I have never seen them since. 

My life before this strange experience and my life 
after it are separated into two stages with this lucid but 
gray interval between them. 

Of course I had all the nerve experts, and they did 
everything to make me sleep and eat. They naturally 
thought I was a foolish young girl, and a stubborn one 
too, who had hypnotized herself into this stage. There 
was one of them who talked interniinahly and made me 
swallow eggs, trying hard to overcome the silent inward 
resistance of his disagreeable patient, till I heard his 
exasperated voice one day say, “Why are you crying 
Only then did I realize that the cheeks and the hands 
of this veiy foolish girl, which was my physical self, 
were wet with tears. 

In the end it was Mahmoure Abla who called me back 
to life from this gray mental monotony. She came 

212 



MARRIED LIFE AND THE WORLD 

often from Kadikeuy ; she kissed me and scolded me and 
handled me as if I were one of her many babies. It 
was after one of the numerous Turkish baths she gave 
me that I suddenly had my old sense of life. As I lay 
in niy towels I had a physical feeling' of comfort, and 
that flicker which awakened with her motherly touch 
repeated itself with the baths from that time onward. 

With sleep and the ordinary human feelings came a 
very serious illness. And that illness was a complete 
cure, for with it came also a new creation. I was to 
create a being. How mysterious and how unutterably 
divine is the act of creation! The greatest genius cre- 
ating the greatest human masterpiece is not the equal of 
a simple woman in whom a new soul is called to life with 
all its infinite complications of the vital mechanism. 
There is indeed an infinity of hard labor in all the cre- 
ative processes of nature, and if nature itself is con- 
scious, what infinite and inexplicable divine pain there 
must be too! But for me now this mental distiu’bance 
which bad seized me withered like a great natural catas- 
ti’ophe which comes and leaves behind only some peace- 
ful landscape. 

These years are dream years for me. but in the middle 
of the interminable night sufferings of the time I had 
a s^'inbolic dream. Some one said to me, “Here are the 
souls of men ; which will you choose ?” 

“I choose Ayetullab,” I said, and so loud that I woke 
up with my own voice. Ayetullab means the sign of 
Allah, but I do not know whether it was the meaning or 
the sound of it that made my say it in my dream. In 

213 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

the morning when I told my dream they told me that 
this was a sign that my baby would be a boy and that I 
must call him Ayetullah. 

I saw him in Mahmoure Abla’s lap, in a towel — the 
most astonishing piece of creation, as every baby is — 
and he was called Ali Ayetullah, the first name after my 
grandfather. He was a big fine creature with a face 
and head that looked three months old. The face was 
my own face repeated in a darker shade, the head cov- 
ered with very black hair, and eyes that had none of the 
bleared, miserable, sorry old looks of most babies when 
they realize that they have stepped into man’s den. 
Then came to me the strange bliss that never comes to 
any one except at this particular moment, every atom of 
one’s physical being, the farthest confines of one’s tor- 
menting inner self bathing and expanding in light and 
ecstasy. 

Everything was done in the old Turkish way. 
Xevres Badji was there to make the red ‘ slierbet for 
seven days, and an elderly Greek nurse with Mahmoure 
Abla took care of me and the child. Everything be- 
longing to him was j)ink, as simple and as sentimental as 
it could be. Above me, two onions tied in white muslin 
with pretty red bows were hung on the wall, 'fhe 
Greek nurse with that precious human bundle in her 
arms, its soft long pink shawl trailing on the floor, 
walked up and down on the thick carpet, singing in the 
softest and lowest murmurs, “Tolililicamou. . . 

1 Red in order to ward off the peris. 

214 



MARRIED LIFE AND THE WORLD 
meant nothing, but the simple melody also seemed to 
trail like the ends of the shawl, and my heart trailed and 
crawled after it in this first and highest realization of 
love. How often have I put my arms round that fat 
Greek woman’s neck and kissed her, and how often has 
she hugged me and called me foolish names and sung 
me to sleep as she did the pink bundle! Her attach- 
ment, which began at this supreme moment, lasted for 
years after. 

The old sheik of the Euzbeks, a dear and holy neigh- 
bor of ours, gave the baby its name. He sat by my bed 
and chanted the call to prayers in his grave tones into 
its ears, and three times he called, “Ali Ayetullah, Ali 
Ayetullah, Ali Ayetullah!” 

When the gray cloud of my mental misery was com- 
pletely lifted by this event I began to agree with the 
doctor who thought I was a foolish little girl self- 
hypnotized into neurasthenia; and after this I felt that 
nothing could shake the eciuilibrium of my soul, no mat- 
ter how hard the things might be which I might have to 
undergo. Ali Ayetullali undid the complicated knot of 
life’s dilemma; he cured me from my over-intellectual 
suffering and made me realize the beauty of the simple 
and common affections, which I shared with all the other 
Women of my kind. 

For three months I lived on wrapped in Ali Aye- 
tullah, though sharing him with his devoted nurse. 
Then I had a psychical experience in connection wdth 
him which is perhaps worth recording. 

It occurred in this way. Father did not come home 

215 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

as usual one evening. Salih Zeki Bey told me that he 
was going to have an operation in the German Hospital 
the next day, and he had not wanted Abla and me to 
know of it before it was over. 

I had a bad night ; my conscience smote me, for since 
Ali’s birth all my heart had gone out to him, and I 
seemed hardly aware of the existence of any one else. 
This lack of affection on my part toward my father dur- 
ing the recent months now troubled me very much, and 
early the next morning I went to the hospital and 
decided to stay a few nights at an English friend’s to be 
near my father in the hospital during the days of his con- 
valescence. 

The first night I had a dream. In the large grounds 
of Sultan Tepe there is a raised mound with thick clus- 
tering fig-trees, looking over the sea. There among tlic 
trees a tall and half-naked woman in white drapery, her 
black hair streaming and a torch in her hand, walked up 
and down. I woke with a strange anguish and feeling 
that something had happened to j\li Ayctullah. There 
was no reason why I should connect this dream with 
the ill omens of the old childish stories told by the ser- 
vants, but my depression and anxiety could not be put 
aside by any amount of reasoning or will-})ower. 

I tried to be natural and cheerful with father, hut 
before I left his room the man-servant aj)peared with a 
strange look on his face, telling me that Salih Zeki llcy 
asked me to go home that evening. He was not really 
ill, he said, but he was not feeling quite well. I Ji'"' 
ranged to go home at once. All the way there I could 

216 



MARRIED LIFE AND THE WORLD 

not bring myself to believe that the call was really for 
my husband. 

As soon as I reached our house, I ran straight up to 
my room, and before the door stood Salih Zeki Bey, 
leaning against it almost as though to prevent my go- 
ing in. 

In the middle of the room Mahmoure Abla was lean- 
ing over something laid on a floor-cushion. “The fit 
is over, Halide,” she said, as I went in. 

The baby was in a towel; the little face was still in 
the hard and painful purple stare of a convulsion; the 
little mouth was still pulled into the diabolical travesty 
of itself that convulsions give to babies. But he opened 
his eyes and gave me that melancholy smile which was 
peculiar to the heavy eyelids and the greenish depths of 
the eyes hidden under their long fringes. 

“I don’t want him to die, Mahmoure Abla.” 

There followed a long period of fighting against the 
convulsions. For months I sat up night after night 
with that bit of human flesh, which seemed so essential 
to my life. Very often the doctors gave him up, but 
we went on struggling, and 1 could not believe that he 
could die while I was still a dweller on the earth. Each 
time before a fresh fit I dreamed of the same woman. 
She usually appeared on the sea-shore, and smnetimes 
she wmuld be swimming. She was always half naked, 
but the color of her eyes, although often the color of 
dead seaweed, was at other times black and she stared at 
me hard. After each dream-meeting with her, I was 
sure that Ali Ayetullah would have fresh convulsions, 

217 



MKMOIBS OF HALIDE EDIB 

and he always did. The torture and tyranny of the 
dream are inexplicable. Salih Zeki Bey tried hard to 
influence me against believing in it, but to no effect. 
Once there was an interval of twenty days when I did 
not have the dream nor he the fit. Then I saw her 
again. But the baby looked well and I wanted to make 
myself believe that it was nervous imagination which I 
must overcome. So defying my superstitious fears I 
went out to shop, for the first time for months. But be- 
fore I entered the boat from Scutari the man-servant 
came running breathlessly after me. The baby was in a 
bad fit. 

It was the worst he had, and I was seriously alarmed. 
But he lived, and that was the last dream I had of her 
and the last of his fits. 

The dream woman appeared once more, when Ali 
Ayetullah was ten ; that is, ten years later. He had had 
a long attack of pleurisy, and although weak he seemed 
out of danger, and so I had taken him to my cottage on 
the little island of Antigone. This time she was dressed 
when she appeared and sat by me with a mocking smile 
in her eyes, the color of dead seaweed again. 

“You are some one I know; tell me your name,” 1 
said. 

She sat and smiled on. As I woke and felt the an- 
guish of the old days I jumped out of bed with sudden 
mental recognition, crying, “It is she.” Three days 
later Ali developed typhoid fever, an extraordinarily 
severe case, from which he was saved almost by a mira- 
cle. And that was the last of the fateful dream woman. 

218 



MARRIED LIFE AND THE WORLD 

In 1905, before Ali Ayetullah could walk, the great 
Japanese war came, and Hassan Hikmetullah Togo, 
named after the great Japanese naval hero, appeared 
with red tufts of feathery hair, bleared baby eyes, and 
a continual screech. At first he did not seem to be of 
iiiuch account, but in two months he shot out into the 
loveliest of small creatures, with a perfect golden com- 
plexion, golden curls, and golden eyes that had a lively 
language of their own. Ali Ayetullah had expressed 
the slow melancholy of my inner self, but when Hassan 
arrived he came with a temperament, life, and energy all 
his own. At eleven months I had (juite an uncanny 
feeling as 1 saw the tiny being running about and talk- 
ing Greek and Turkisli to the conversation point. 

In 1905 we left Sultan Tepe and went to live in the 
upper apartments of the observatory on the Grande Rue 
of Pera. Hassan was fifty days old at the time. 

The life in the Grande Rue of Pera was strange to 
me. I was already living a secluded life, but the noise, 
the vulgar amusement, and the bustle of the whole place 
threw me further into my inner shell. Fortunately 
there were rooms at the back of the house, and I pre- 
ferred to look out at the dull dirty courtyards full of 
ruhhish-heaps, and at the tall ugly apartments, over the 
smudgy lines of which the Golden Horn stretched out 
in a thin blue line amid the curve of its purple hills. 

I had a tiny study with my books and piano, and I 
spent all my leisure hours there alone. After Zola I had 
gone back to Shaksi)ere. 

Some of Shakspere had already been translated by 

219 



MEMOIKS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Sirry Bey and Abdullah Djevdet Bey, but it was done 
in over-literary Turkish. There is a wild harmony in 
the Anglo-Saxon diction of Shakspere the parallel of 
which I thought I could find in the simple but forcible 
Turkish of popular usage, the words and expressions of 
which belong more to Turkish than to Arabic or Persian 
sources. This was at the time an unheard-of and shock- 
ing thing, but as I had no intention of publishing I was 
not hindered by any considerations of what the public 
or press might say. Shakspere with his amazing genius 
had created much of his own English, expressing psy- 
chological and philosophical complications of the sub- 
tlest order with words never before so employed. Tlic 
popular Turkish genius in its language was a thing 
rather apart, although it had greater resemblance to 
the forcible Anglo-Saxon than the refined Persianized 
Turkish could be made to have. Still 1 had to do a 
great deal of twisting, especially as I had begun witli 
“Hamlet,” which is so full of abstract thought. But 
the task gave me great intellectual amusement. Salih 
Zeki Bey also became interested, and as he was not able 
to enjoy the masculine grandeur of Shakspere’s art as 
revealed in its original English it was the intellectual 
side of the work which interested him. He had read 
“Hamlet” in the French rendering, which is an ex- 
tremely poor one, and he was shocked at my vulgarizing 
Shakspere by the use of such simple Turkish as I bad 
chosen; so he used to go over my version scratching out 
with a red pencil here and ])utting in iVrabic words and 
the usual orthodox terms of higli literary Turkish there. 

220 



MARRIED LIFE AND THE WORLD 

As he always maintained an air of professional authority 
I was scolded a great deal, but I went on doing the work 
in my own way, he scratching out and writing in his own 
version. When 1 began the sonnets, however, even his 
niathematical accuracy and correctness in expression 
felt that there was some intangible lyrical vein which 
one could not always convey in strictest orthodox 
pliraseology. 

1 have often returned to Shakspere since that time, 
and later on I translated a great many of his works, 
but I believe that iny fullest realization of him was in 
this same year 1906. Shakspere, although more im- 
personal than any other human genius that I know, re- 
vealed the dominant personality of his mind to me then. 
He made me feel clearly that there is such a thing as a 
difference between man and woman in art, in religion, 
and in all forms of culture. I cannot say that one is 
higher than the other, but they are distinctly different. 
The highest art and the highest beauty may be revealed 
by persons of either sex indifferently. Genius is a di- 
vine gift which either a woman or a man may have; and 
sometimes indeed it is a woman who may exj)ress the 
man’s note in art while a man may express the woman’s. 
It does not depend on their sex ; it depends on the qual- 
ity of their souls. 

For me, both our poet Suleiman Dede and Jesus 
Thrist in their sublime note of love strike the supreme 
note of women in religion and art; while Mohammed 
and Shakspere sound the highe.st note of man. or rather 
the male note in the same realms. It is strange to 

2*21 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

admit that what Mohammed gave me in religion, 
Shakspere gave me in art. There is no Christian feel- 
ing in Shakspere. He is a man, clearly chanting the 
creative manliness of his barbaric ancestors, toning them 
down to harmony, indeed bringing into formal beauty 
the chaotic ideals of their dreams and struggles, 
and painting them in terms with which every human 
being in every decade of history may become famil- 
iar. 

Mohammed, though the last Semitic prophet, is not 
influenced in his soul to any great extent by the series 
of prophetic predecessors who left behind them their 
tradition and their prophetic art. Though somewhat 
impressed by the organizing pow'er and the manly capac- 
ity of Moses, he is otherwise but little touched by the 
Jewish art in the Old Testament, which not infre(juently 
reaches a strident note of complaint, sometimes very 
beautiful but usually very hysterical. The sublime 
but womanly gestures of Christ did not touch Mo- 
hammed either. In his love, in bis i)ity^, in his social or- 
ganization and his whole conce])tion of life both here 
and hereafter, IMohammed is essentially a man. The 
mystic and somewhat sickly tendencies f)f his own people 
had to find satisfaction by infiltrations from other 
sources into his clear and well balanced creed ; while the 
manly tone with which Christianity was tempered by 
means of its iron organization of later years all came 
from church organizers and personalities of somewhat 
Roman tendencies rather than from Christ’s own teach- 
ings. 

222 



MAEBIED LIFE AND THE WOELD 

In the spring we went back to Sultan Tepe and spent 
the summer there. This year my sister Neiliifer mar- 
ried a young sheik in Broussa. She was only fifteen 
years old. 

The second important event of this year was poor 
Mahmoure Abla’s trouble. She was the first victim of 
the old regime in our family 

It happened in this way. Ali Shamil Pasha with his 
new and constantly increasing power was brought into 
conflict with other influential men around Abdul 
Hamid. His nephew Abdurazzak, a young and im- 
petuous Kurdish aristocrat, had begun a quarrel with 
Ridvan Pasha, the prefect of Constantinople, a great 
personage in the immediate entourage of the sultan. 
The quarrel arose about the mending of a piece of road 
in front of Abdurazzak’s house. Ridvan Pasha had 
near him a man called .iVhmed Aga who had some un- 
official but very influential post in the road-mending de- 
partment. Ahmed iVga refused to give orders for the 
mending of the road before vVbdurazzak’s house. Ab- 
durazzak, having heard of this, kidnapped Ahmed Aga, 
imprisoned him in his liouse, and handled him in Kurd- 
ish fasliion, threatening to keep him in his house as a 
hostage till the bit of road was repaired. Ridvan Pasha, 
with wliom Ahmed Aga was a favorite, took the matter 
up and complained to his IMajesty. I believe an irade 
of the usual kiss-and-be-friends kind was issued, but 
Abdurazzak was in his fiercest Kurdish temper and by 
uo means in a kissing mood. Ridvan Pasha sent the 
road repairers under his command to release Alimed 

22.3 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDA; EDIB 

Aga, and they bore down upon Abdurazzak’s house with 
their spades and other road-making implements. A 
fight took place, and men were wounded on both sides. 
Another irade removed Ahmed Aga from the scene, and 
an apparent calm was established; but it was the un- 
natural calm that precedes a worse storm. 

One afternoon father came home earlier than usual 
looking distressed and pained. Serious events had 
taken place the night before. Ridvan Pasha, going to 
his summer residence in Erenkeuy, had been murdered 
in his carriage by four Kurds who attacked him on the 
bridge near Ali Pasha’s house in Haidar Pasha. They 
were arrested and brought to Ali Shamil Pasha as the 
governor of Scutari. lie imprisoned them for a few 
hours but released them the next morning, evidently at 
the instance of his nephew. This aroused the fears of 
the sultan, and that very night all the Bederhani family, 
of which Ali Shamil Pasha was the head, were arrested, 
packed into a boat, and sent off to Tripoli in chains. 
Ali Shamil Pasha’s house and the little houses opposite 
where my sister lived were under the strictest guard, 
and no contact with outsiders was allowed. JMy poor 
brother-in-law, who had done nothing all his life but 
humbly and conscientiously mix and prepare drugs as 
a chemist, was huddled into the boat with the others 
and put in chains also. Even boys of twelve were taken 
from school and exiled. No male Bederhani was to be 
left in Constantinople ; consequently a great number of 
Bederhanis who knew nothing whatever about tlie 
quarrel of Abdurazzak suffered with the rest. Po^’’ 

224 






MABBIED LIFE AND THE 'WOSLD 

Ali Shamil Pasha was the victim of his family pride, for 
he had not approved of the quarrel, but his nephew’s 
influence had n&amp;ade him release the hired murderers of 
Ridvan Pasha. 

It was impossible for any of us to get at ^Mahmoure' 
Abla. But the railway ran below the street where she 
lived, and so we used to take the train and casually ap- 
pear at the window of the car as it passed her house, 
trying to see if she were ever at the window or on the 
balcony. As Ali Shamil Pasha used to come to our 
house a good deal we expected father to be arrested also ; 
for the sultan did not like father on account of his well 
known liberal ideas. At such times of course the paid 
spy army were endlessly active, trying to deserve their 
salaries or to get new honors by new discoveries and re- 
ports, while a new set of men who were ambitious of 
joining the easy profession of the spy were even more 
active. To get into the favored set the worst passions 
and ambitions were aroused. God preserve any people 
from such a system; for apart from the great misfortune 
of the individual suffering, the more dangerous and deep 
the corruption becomes, the wider does the low habit of 
spying spread, men finding an easy Avay to success by 
merely reporting their neighbors, ^^^len such a class is 
once formed in a country it is like a hidden moral poison, 
and every succeeding era is poisoned by it. 

Mahmoure Abla had four children, the eldest at this 
time nine and the youngest eleven months ; and another 
was to arrive in five months. In my futile train rides 
I never got a glimpse of any one on her little balcony. 

225 



MEMOIRS OF HAIilDE EDIB 

Once only I saw her white veil, which she used at her 
prayers, hung up to dry, and so great was my pain that 
even this upset and excited me to a night of fever. 
Father went more frequently and mourned for her like 
a lost soul. He saw her once on the balcony, and then- 
eye or rather soul contact was described to me by her 
after her release. “When I saw him pass, forgetting 
the police guard under the window, I waved my hands; 
he was searching the house with his eyes. The moment 
he caught sight of me he sat down in the carriage and 
covered his face with his hands.” He was sobbing 
aloud, and that in a public train. After he came home 
that day he sat by a table and cried as he used to do after 
mother’s death. IVIeanwhile granny and Teize had 
taken a house in Sultan Tepe not far from ours, and 
during all these days of anxiety I went often to see 
granny and talk about IMahmoure Abla. She also 
cried bitterly and continually. After two months of 
this helpless suffering, she told me one day that she was 
going to try and get to IMahmoure Abla. Father went 
on trying hard in the palace tlirough influential friends 
of his to get some relief for my brother-in-law. Hu- 
manity, although so cowardly at times, is not entirely 
extinguishable even in the worst regime, so that he had 
some hopes. 

Granny .said a significant good-bye to me one day, and 
taking a humble one-horse carriage she drove away in 
her loose black charshaf. When she did not return in 
the evening, I felt that it was ominous ; but the next day 
early in the morning she was back with tears and smiles- 

226 



MABJRIED LIFE AND THE WORLD 

She had got in and had spent the night with Mahraoure 
Abla. We had of course to hear her adventures. She 
had left the carriage at a suitable place and walked to- 
ward the house. Fortunately the guard at the corner 
of the street was not there, so granny had only the one 
guard before the door to deal with. I can imagine her, 
her white wrinkled face still keeping its perfect oval, her 
toothless mouth small, pink, and fresh as a child’s, her 
gray eyes full of tears, her bearing calm and dignified, 
her face clean as only the face of an old ^loslem woman 
who prayed five times a day and washed five times a 
(lay could be, and her aristocratic voice saying: 

“She is my granddaughter; she has no one; she is shut 
up with four little ones, and I must find out when the 
fifth is coming. Let me in, my son, if you have a family 
and a heart.” 

She must have actually patted his back as she im- 
plored him, and she must hav^e trembled with fear lest 
Mahmoure Abla, who indicated her jiresence behind the 
lattices by excited coughs, should get into one of her 
usual tempers and scold the policeman or herself for 
comle.scending to beg for anything. But the man had 
looked up and down anxiously and had at last whispei’ed, 
“(k) in, granny, and to-morrow, early at dawn, when 
1 come to take my watch I will let you out; but don’t 
talk loud, for if the other guard know's I have let you in 
I shall lose mV bread; I may even be exiled; so don’t 
ruin nie.” 

“IMahmourc’s first word of greeting was, ‘Why did 
you beg a policeman so hard C ” said granny smiling 

227 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

through her tears. But Mahmoure Abla in spite of her 
pride had wept copiously and kissed her continually, 
asking about every one of us, and talking loudly about 
the rough way in which the house was searched and the 
difficulty she had in getting the guards to buy even medi- 
cine for her. Shut up for months in the state she was 
in, she had of course been suffering, but the guards 
looked upon the desire for medicine by a woman whose 
husband and father were in the bad graces of the sultan 
as luxurious whims. There were hardly three months 
more before her confinement, and if she were not re- 
leased she would be condemned to face the ordeal all 
alone. 

]\Iy old enemy Insomnia came back and stared at me 
thi’ough long nights, presenting iVIahmoure Abla’s im- 
age distorted in pain and with no one except babies and 
a verj’^ stupid little maid to help her. Why did women 
have babies any time and anywhere? ‘ 

The extraordinary court which was sent by the sultan 
to trj' the Bederhanis in Tripoli separated my brother- 
in-law from the Bederhanis, and he was exiled to .Teru- 
salem, which was heaven after the dungeons of Tripoli. 

2 During the first Greek revolution in the Greek provinees of the Turkish 
Empire, the Turkish people iji Istainbou! were unea.sy about tlie Greeks, 
who might rise in sympathy and start massacres, and so the Moslem youth 
kept guard in the Turkish quarters, ('henghel 'rahir Pasha, a strict and 
wonderfully able man, was appointed to govern Istamboul at the crisis. He 
issued an order that every one .should go to his home after night })raycrs 
and that no one was to he seen in the streets. The first niglit the guards 
arrested everybody wlio was found abroad. One of tiiem liad gone m 
search of a femme for his wife who was going to have a baby. “Edl 
your woman,” said Tahir Pasha, *\she must not have a bai)y at night «nd 
at such a time again.” 


228 



MARRIED LIFE AND THE WORLD 

Ali Pasha’s military grade was taken from him, and he 
was condemned to perpetual imprisomnent with the rest 
of his family in Tripoli. He died in the prison in 1907 
after a sad and lonely life. ISIahmoure Abla was re- 
leased after two more months, and she had her baby near 
us. She soon sailed for Jerusalem with her five chil- 
dren to join her husband. They came back with all the 
other exiles in 1908, and a great reception was given to 
all the passengers in the boat as having been the victims 
of the great tyrant. 

In the fall of 1906 before we could go back to our 
j)lace in Pera I had a dangerous internal operation 
which kept me in bed for six months. I was very near 
death, but despite very high fever I never lost con- 
sciousness. My head was full of strange whims and 
regrets. I was, as once before, immensely conscious of 
myself and distant in feeling from every one else. 
Something was hurting me in an unutterable way. I 
seemed a foolish child playing with words and as though 
I had missed the essence of life. What had I missed t 
I had made a love marriage. I had two babies who 
made me realize the full ecstasy of motherhood. 1 could 
not complain much of the details of my daily life, for 
they were more or less the same as the daily life of the 
great majority of other 'Furkish women. I did not 
envy the Inistle and the empty pleasures of the few more 
or less described by Pierre Loti. 1 never had “hat and 
hall” * longings. What I had missed and what I 
Wanted, I did not know. I remember repeating the 

* That is, to go out unveiled in a hut like Christian women, and to dance. 

229 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Turkish expression used for those who die with an un- 
fulfilled desire: “I will go to my grave with open 
eyes.” 

In the spring the anxious look on the faces around me 
relaxed and they talked of moving me to a warmer 
climate, probably to Beirut; and I also felt hope and 
desire for life returning. The first time that they car- 
ried me into the garden, on a warm day in April, the 
touch and smell of new gi’ass penetrated me with an ab- 
solute sense of contentment, and I seemed to lose all the 
vague regrets of the past months. The world was after 
all what it should be; its aspect could be changed ac- 
cording to the use we made of it ; its color depended on 
the lenses through which we looked at it; and its hard- 
ness or softness, its painfulness or soothing power, de- 
pended on our personal handling of it. 

As I could not go to Beirut without the permission 
of the sultan because of my father’s position in tlie 
palace, my desire turned to Antigone, the (juiet little 
island in the Marmora where I had stayed in f 901 after 
my graduation. I wanted a house, an old-fashioned 
one, with wisteria-covered windows and roses in the 
garden, big rooms and large halls like the ones in which 
I had been born but which had been s«)ld some years ago. 

There are queer coincidences in life; and a house was 
actually found in Antigone as like granny’s house as two 
houses could be. The garden was a })rofusion of rose- 
bushes; its double stairs had long windows over which 
wisteria and ivy coiled. It was on raised ground, and 
below it a steep hill covered with pines ran down to the 

230 



MARIHEU LIFE AND THE WORLD 

beach. I went to the place as an invalid and recovered 
fast both in body and mind. It was the final conquest 
of my mature self over the foolish whims and the pre- 
cocious mind of a rather ridiculous young girl. I have 
gone through great suffering since then, but nothing has 
ever been able to bring back the mental disorder and 
estrangement from my kind which I then experienced, 
and nothing has ever been able to keep me from the en- 
joyment of the humble things which Allah has put into 
the world. 

We lived in the pine- woods. Every morning we 
started from the house with the babies, their nurses, and 
the cook all on donkeys, and we did not return till eve- 
ning. Reshe had developed into a fine colored lady, 
dressed in the latest fashion, proud of the attention she 
attracted, and alw^ays taking care to wear a thick veil 
and gloves, which caused her to be taken for a white 
woman wdth a beautiful figure. She took charge of Ali 
Ayetullah, and Ilassan had his old Greek nurse. I lay 
in a hammock the whole day, body and heart and mind 
open to the salty warmth of the sea air and the pungent 
scent of the pines. I was convinced I should get well, 
for in spirit 1 felt back in my first childhood. In my 
new outlook on life the continual intellectual worry had 
abated. I somehow sensed the human heart better and 
reused to be impatient of its foolishness. 

As I grew stronger we enlarged our circle of friends, 
at first with reluctance on my part, but later with real 
enjoyment. There were some old pupils of Salih Zeki 
Joey’s, some college friends of mine, and some neighbors 

231 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

in Antigone, who included Hussein Jahid Bey and his 
family. With these we made excursions by boat or 
went on simple picnics and thus spent a summer of 
peaceful well-being, oblivious of the throes of the coun- 
try under its most tyrannical ruler. 

The winter of 1907 I passed quietly in Pera, I was 
deep in old Turkish books, especially the chronicles. I 
got to reading Xaima, the wonderful Turkish chronicler 
who reaches to the levels of Shaksperian psychological 
penetration in his very simple yet vivid description. 
Sometime previously in my nights of insomnia I had 
begun reading his almost incom{)rehensible and very 
formless old prose, and till I could penetrate the hard 
crust of his language, and till his critical and intensely 
living presentation of facts emerged upon me, he suc- 
ceeded in putting me to sleep. But the moment tlie 
difficulties of its external form disappeared and I lost 
consciousness of the form as something apart I had a 
wonderful vision of individual soids, large crowds, and 
revolutions in life and action. He was opening my eyes 
to the p.sychology of the old Turks, and I found the key 
which would interpret many moments of psychoh)gieal 
importance in our early history, in the bewilderingly 
fast changes which were now taking place before my 
eyes. 

In May, 1908, we went back to the old house in Antig- 
one, and till the actual Declaration of the Constitution 
on July 11 of that year we were perfectly unaware of 
the new life in Macedonia which was blossoming into 
such tremendous activity. 


232 



PART TWO 

NEW TtJRKEY IN THE MAKING 




