CHAPTER XXII.THE ENGLISH CHROMCI.KKS APPliAK TO HAVE ALL TAKliX THEAPOCRYPHAL BULL FROM GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS.The greater number of Eng-lish annalists make little useof Giraldus, and are content, as regards the affairs of Ire-land, to draw on the little information supplied by Rogerde Hoveden and William of Newbridge.However, Hig-dcn, in his History of Henry II., appears to have employedthe treatise De Instructione. Principis, and perhaps also theBrompton seems to have takenExpugnatio Hibernica.from Higden what he says on the same facts...the exact qualities the very reverse of what are needed to form animpartial historian. A man of marvellously elastic self-confidence thatnothing could put down, an overflowing self-conceit that would bedeemed a mere absurd caricature if any one but himself had depictedhimself, he looked down with sublime contempt upon everyone andeverything that did not agree with his own notions ; he bad not an ideathat anything he thought or said could by any chance be wrong.. He was the man of all others whose nature rendered it simply im-possible for him to write a fair history of any sort, and least of all ofIreland, and the Irish, and the English invaders, with so many of hisown near relations among the latter " (pp. Ijti. Ixiii.)Mr. Edward A. Freeman, in his continuation of the preface toVol. vii., says; "In estimating the historical value of any work ofGiraldus Cambrensis, we must remember the two-fold character of theman with whom we are dealing. We are dealing with one who was vain,garrulous, careless as to minute accuracy, even so far careless as totruth as to be, to say the least, ready to accept statements which toldagainst an enemy without carefully weighing the evidence for them.We are dealing with one who was not very scrupulous as to consistency,and who felt no special shame of contradicting himself "(p. liii.)Mr. George F. Warner, in his introduction to Vol. viii., says ofGiraldus: " His character was marred by grave defects.His egotism. He was passionate, prejudiced, and vindictive.was unbounded. .No one, king or subject, who crossed his schemes, or whom he choseto regard as his enemy, could hope for his good word" (p. xxi.).These volumes were brought out by the Lords Commissioners ofthe Treasury, at the expense of the State.In some respects, Giraldus was really a clever man. He had agreat command of the Latin language, both in prose and verse,Hisfrequent quotations show that he had read much and rememberedmuch. But everywhere throughout his works, it is apparent that therewas more than one screw loose. We are told in Rome and England, bythe Rev. Luke Rivington, M.A. (p. 76), that he was sometimes calledGeraldthe Savage.Trans.—A FRIEND Of IRELAND.—75(I., 300.)(likeIn 1876 Mr. Stubbs published a new edition of Raoul deThe Apocryphal Bull ofDiceto, Imagines Historiarum.As the annalist madeAdrian is found in the first volume.no observation on it, the editor adds a note to the follow,ing effect : — It is very possible that this copy of the BullLaudabiliter was taken from Giraldus Cambrensis, Expug.natio Hibernica, II., 5, which should have been publishedat the time when Raoul wrote.theAt the year 1171 Raoul relatesremaining'crowd of English annalists) that the Bishops of Ireland andthe Kings of Limerick and Cork submitted to Henry II.,but that Roderic, King of Connaught, did not. On thislast point, he contradicts Giraldus, who assures us thatRoderic submitted like the others.(Page 346.)Roger de Wendover, a monk oflikeMatthew Paris, gives a large portion of the Bull of Adrian,with a preamble saying that King Henry sent messengersto Rome with great solemnity, in order to ask authority toon theinvade Ireland.contrary, that Salisbury alone treated of the affair withAdrian IV., and Giraldus confirms this story.The Pseudo-Metalogicus says,Alban's,St.Above all, it was Matthew Paris who contributed to thediffusion of the Apocryphal Bull.It is to be regretted thatsome respectable -historians have thought themselves justi-fied in referring to an author so decried as the monk ofAlban's, who makes mistakes every moment, andSt.gives as historical facts a number of fables that have noauthenticity.!Luard, who published in 1874 the Chronica Majora ofMatthew Paris, refers to Raoul de Diceto in what con-cerns the false Bull of Adrian IV. He doubtless thoughtthat such was the source from which Matthew Paris tookthe document.In the preamble, Matthew draws thelong bow by1 " There is one witness whom I have learned profoundly to dis-trust, who has been a prolific source of misstatement in our Englishhistorical literature, and that is Matthew Paris. Long ago Dr. Lingardpointed out, and in certain cases proved, the untrustworthiness of thg. His summaries, where they can be comparedmonk of St. Alban's, .with originals, are quite untrustworthy; and his own comments arealmost worthless, except for those who prefer the ebullitions of spleento a statement of facts."Trans.Rome and England, Rivington, p. xxvii.,,—^76POPE ADRIAN IV.Iadditions that are not at all in the Apocryphal Bull." Per idem tempus rexItalicise these exaggerations :Anglorum Henricus nuncios solemnes Romam mittens,rogavit Papam Adrianum, ut sibi liceret Hibernise insulamatque homineshostiliter intrare, etillos bestiales ad fidem et viam reducere veritatis, extir-patis ibi plantariis vitiorum ; quod Papa regi gratanterannuens, hoc sequens ei privilegium destinavit. "(II-, 300.)The editor, by his own authority, has put in the margin.Anno 1 155. Now, the Apocryphal Bull is without date inGiraldus and others, as I have often remarked.terrain subjugare,asI have saidMatthew Paris says no more of Ireland till the year1171. He gives nothing new, or little known, unless thathe formally contradicts Giraldus in reference to the Kingof Connaught. We must deny that Henry penetratedhostiliter into Ireland ; for he thought only of providingfor his own personal security,above.Matthew does not refer to the Bull of Adrian again ; hetakes good care not to a.ssert that it was notified to theIrish, or that it determined the pretended submission ofbishops and chiefs. Here is all that the annalist writes of thejourney in 1171 : " Per idem tempus rex Anglorum Hen-ricus decimo quinto kalendas novembris hostiliter Hiber.niam intravit, ubi archiepiscopi et episcopi ipsum in regemet dominum receperunt,juraverunt.etRegulus de Limeric, et regulus de Chor, et regulus quiMonoculus dicebatur, ei homagium juraverunt.Roderi-cus autem regulus de Connat, quia regio quam inhabitabatpaludibus nimiis interjacentibus, ininaccessabilisquibus nee vada commoda, nee pontes pervii, nee navigatiotuta habetur, regi occurrere supersedit. "fidelitatem[Ibid., p. 284.)est,ei' It has been the interest of England during the last seven centuriesto disguise and misrepresent the origin of its dominion in Ireland.Ifone writer tells us that John of Salisbury obtained the grant fromAdrian ; another that Henry petitioned for it ; another that Adrianwell pleased with the English King, conferred it spontaneously ; anotherthat the Irish princes, anxious to end their quarrels, besought Henryto accept the crown of Ireland—we know what to think of them allWe may not always be able, in a confused heap of impostures todiscover the exact truth, but we do not go far from it,Trans.,77A FRIHND OF IRELAND.