CHAPTER XXIV.JOHN LACKLAND.King John, in 12 13, seeing himself almost lost withoutresource, on the brink of a precipice, placed his person andThehis kingdom under the sovereignty of the Pope.iGolden Bull, dated the 3rd of October, is in Rymer, vol. I.,p. 176.)" Neither determined by force, nor constrained by fear,but of our own good and spontaneous will, and with thecommon counsel of our barons, we offer and give freely toGod, to His Apostles Peter and Paul, to the Holy RomanChurch our Mother, and to our Lord Pope Innocent III.and his successors, the whole kingdom of England and the. We have publicly madewhole kingdom of Ireland. .liege-homage into the hands of the said Legate.".The prince promised to pay to the Pope a thousandmarks^ sterling every year, seven hundred for the kingdomof England and three hundred for Ireland, under pain offorfeiture, as well for himself as for his successors.SECTION I.The offering of his kingdom to the Holy See furnishedKing John with the happiest occasion in the world forrecalling the Bull of Adrian IV., who, seventy years be-fore, as was said, had made a donation of Ireland toHenry II.The prince was acquainted with the Bull.GiraldusCambrensis, four years previously, had dedicated to himthe third edition of the Expugnatio Hibernica, in which itwas recorded.The dedication alone would have drawnthe special attention of the prince to this pontifical act.' Whatever may be said of the jurisprudence of the Middle Ages,or the consent of nations, the Pope was supposed always to act withwisdom and prudence, according to reason and religion ; and if he foundhis authority abused, he had the remedy in his own hands. Romehowever, is proverbially slow in making a change. — Trans.The ancient piece of money called mark was equal to 13s. Ad.Trans.—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.79If, then, King John believed in the genuineness of theBull, could he have omitted to say anything of this oldOught he not rather to have shown that he wasgrant?already a feudatory of the Pope in Ireland, as successorand heir to his father, Henry II. ?Nevertheless, King John alleges no old title. He ex-presses himself as making a new concession, as offeringspontaneously his kingdom to the Roman Church.Hence it follows that the Bull of Adrian IV. had, in theeyes of this prince, no worth, no value. He thought pro-bably that silence was what suited him best, and that pru-dence imposed it.Neither does Innocent III., in his answer, say a singleword of the Bull of Adrian, or the briefs attributed bychroniclers to Pope Alexander HI., or to other Pontiffs.This circumspection is so much the more striking as theRoman Chancery delights in adducing old examples orprecedents, and saying that the Pontiff walks in the foot-steps of his predecessors, and that he continues what theyhave done : Prcedecessorum nostrum vestigiis inhcerentes,eoninique concessionem approbantes et confirmantes, &c.The occasion was unique for recalling the Bull of Adrian,It is evident that Pope Innocentand putting it in vigour.knew nothing about such a Bull.SECTION 2.Did Innocent accept the sovereignty of Ireland?I donot think so.On the 27th of October, the same year (12 13), the Pon-tiff addressed a letter to the Irish, which is in Rymer.l(Tome I, p. 179.)The Pope speaks of the kingdom of England, but heHe calls Johnnever mentions the kingdorn of Ireland.King of the English, without adding that he isalsoKing of the Irish. He says that the kingdom of England,by a donation of this prince, belongs to the Church, whichhas a special right over it.Will Ireland be henceforth in'Thomas Rymer, an English antiquary, became historiographerroyal in 1692. He made a large collection of treaties, public letters,etc., under the name " Fosdera,"It was published in London, inwenty volumes folio,Trans.8oPOPE ADRIAN IV.,like condition with England as regards feudal subjection?Innocent III. does not say so in any manner, explicit orimplicit. The pontifical letter may be found (No. 9) among-our justifying documents at the end.Thus Pope Innocent III. abstained from relating thatKing John had given to the Roman Church not only thekingdom of England, but also the kingdom of Ireland :Totum regnum AnglicB et tolum regnuni Hibernite, as theprince himself had said in the Golden Bull of the previous3rd of October.Fidelity and devotedness are all that the Pope recom-mends to the Irish ; he does not speak to them of submis-In other words, he exhorted the Irishsion and obedience.to show benevolence and friendship towards the King ofEngland.Could Innocent III., who must have been aware that thegreatest part of Ireland preserved its independence—couldhe have had the idea of imposing on the bishops, nobles,and people of the whole island the obligation of submittingpolitically to King John and his successors? The sup-Moreover, facts would belie it ; forposition is absurd.the national kings went on peacefully in their course, andthe districts unoccupied by the English retained their fullindependence.If one wishes to make out at all costs that the pontificalletter commanded submission to King John, this regardsonly the towns and counties along the coast which theEnglish held from the time of the coming of the adven-turers.If PopeInnocentIII. had acceptedpoliticalsovereignty of Ireland, he would have granted a solemndiploma to invest King John, a diploma provided with theinvestiture. Now, thisclausesdiploma never existed for Ireland.diplomasusual intheofBefore everything else, in the hypothesis made, the Popewould have raised Ireland to the rank of a kingdom. Now,it is beyond doubt that the Kings of England did not takethe title of King of Ireland, except at a much later period.I do not remark the least trace of it in the voluminouscollection of Rymer. Henry VIII. himself, three centuriesafter King John, dedicating his work against Luther toPope Leo X., entitled himself in his letter King of Eng-—A FRIEND OF IRELAND."01land and Lord of Ireland :" Sanctissimo domino nostrodomino Leoni X. Pontilici Maximo, Henricus Dei gratiarex Angliae, dominus Hiberniae, perpetuam felicitatem.All the world knows, moreover,that Pope Paul IV.erected Ireland into a kingdom in 1555, three hundred andforty-two years after Pope Innocent.Lastly,I observe that Pope Innocent III. abstainedfrom making known to the Irish the annual tribute ofthree hundred marks sterling which King John hadpromised. 1SECTION 3.The promise of an annualtributecriesoutloudlyagainst the Apocryphal Bull of Adrian IV.Giraldus Cambrensis, as I have said above, had repre-sented to King John, four years previously, that one of thecauses of the reverses experienced by the English in Ire-land was that they had neglected to establish Peter's Pencethere, contrary to a formal promise of Henry II., and con-trary to an express clause in theIV,Giraldus recommended his royal pupil to establish thePeter's Pence as soon as possible—which would serve asof AdrianBulla perpetual testimony of the indissoluble union of Irelandwith the Crown of England.Conformably to this solemn and advantageous counsel,King John should naturally propose and promise to PopeInnocent III. that he would establish Peter's Pence inHe might fear to see ill-received at Rome theIreland.promise of a tribute less than that of the Peter's Penceimposed on the houses of Ireland, in execution of theBull of Adrian.But King John learned, perhaps, that the Bull of Adrianwas regarded by the Romans as a mere fable. On thisaccount he would think it proper to avoid all mention ofPeter's Pence, and to promise a tribute of a thousandmarks sterling, of which seven hundred should be forEngland, and three hundred for Ireland.Rymer relates several receipts oftheaBut the Popes never made anytributeofthousand marks sterling.^ This is a very interesting analysis of the Pope's letter, which mightof itself be misunderstood.Trans.POPE ADRIAN IV.,distinction between a portion for England and a portionfor Ireland. We may say that the Holy See abstainedfrom acknowledging- explicitly that it received any tributefor Ireland.In 1235, the Cardinals wrote to the King- of England, toclaim a half of the tribute. The answer of King Henry III.It says that at the time of theis dated 25th of February.first concession of this tribute, it was stated in the charterof King John, his father, that the sum should be given tothe Roman Church in an undivided manner.The Kingpaid it into the hands of the Pope ; but whether it all re-mained with the Holy Father, or was divided, he neverknew ; accordingly he advised the Cardinals to have re-" Universitati vcstrEe^ signi-course to the Pope himself.ficamus quod in prima concessione illius census, insertumfuit in carta Joannis patris nostri inde confecta, quodsanctae Romanas Ecclesiae redderetur census memoratus. penitus ignorantes hucusque utrumproindiviso .domino Papae integre(Rymer,aut divise.remaneret,.t. 1., P- 337-)In 1276, Pope John XXI. claimed from Edward I. thearrears of the tribute for eight years. The letter is datedfrom Viterbo, the eleventh of the calends of January, thatis, the 22nd of December.(Rymer, II., 77.)SECTION 4.When King John offeredIreland to the Pope, he.followed the tactics of Henry II., who, at the beginningof his intervention, while as yet he had only a few townsor districts near the shore, boldly appointed a constable,seneschal, or justiciary for all Ireland. Thus did a Roman-Teuton Emperor call himself master of the whole world !Henry II., in 1177, giving judgment in an arbitrationcase between the King of Castile and the King of Leon,did not take the title of Lord of Ireland. He availed him-self, however, of it in some diplomas regarding the in-terior of the kingdom.Richard Coeur de Lion never used this title. We areassured of it in Rymer. (T. I., p. 63, 64, 65, 99.)1 The acred College of Cardinals.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.83John, from the time of his coming- to the Crown of Eng-land, added to his ordinary titles that of Doniinus Hiber-However, I do not remark that he took it in lettersnice.which he wrote to Pope Innocent III.Ill 1204, having; need of money for the war againstFrance, he wrote to the clergy of Ireland, begging thatthey would be so good as to help him in this grave neces-sity, promising to cherish an undying gratitude for theiraid, and never again in his life to ask anything of anybodywho should now refuse him.auxilium. Et certis-faciatis in hoc necessitatis nostrae articulo. .sime sciatis quod nunquam nobis ab illo auxilium fieripostulabimus qui nobis in hac tanta necessitate auxilium(Rymer, I., 136.)(noH ?) denegabit."" Efificax nobis.The national kings still preserved their power.KingJohn, in 1208, wrote to them collectively : " Rex Joanneset magnatibusregi Conacife, et omnibus aliis regibus,Hiberniae, salutem."(ibid., p. i8g.)By a diploma of the 23rd of August, 1214, John tookunder his protection Cathal, King of Connaught, and hisdominions. He wrote to the Archbishop of Dublin to buyescarletias, as much as he believed sufficient, in order tomake a feast for the Kings of Ireland and other clients ofthe King.[Ibid., p. 189.)In i2ig, the King of Man made a donation of his islandto the Pope, declaring that he possessed it by right of in-heritance, and owed service to no one. He wished that heand his heirs should become vassals of the Holy See, andoffered twelve marks sterling of annual tribute. The Pon-tifical Legate accepted the donation in the name of Pope" ActumHonorius. The act was signed even in London :London-, in dome militia; Templi kal.Octo' ris, 1219."(Rymer, t. I., p. 234.)A few years afterwards, Henry III.theKing of Man (pontifical feudatory), the guardianship of thecoast of England and of the King's dominions in Ireland,paying annually forty marks, a hundred measures of wheat,and five tuns of wine deliverable in terra nostra HibernicB.{Ibid., p. 341.)confidedtoBehold how the King was master and lord of all Ire-land !84POPE ADRIAN ly.SECTION 5.What surprises me very much is that, in the acts stipu-lated between Innocent III. and King^ John in 1213, allremembrance seems to have been lost of the oath thatHenry II. took in the cathedral of Avranches forty yearspreviously. What signifies therefore the donation of King-John, if the kingdom of England became a fief of the HolySee in 1172? Henry II. then engaged himself in the nameYet it does not appear that Richardof his successors.As for KingCceur de Lion asked pontifical investiture.If, at the beginning of hisJohn, the case seems clear.reign, he had obtained Roman investiture, there wouldhave been no need to renew the donation of the kingdomof England in 12 13.At all events, it is very strange thatthe submission of 12 13 should be regarded as a new con.cession, when in reality there was nothing new about it,except the annual tribute of a thousand marks sterling,and the promise of renewing investiture at every change ofreign.thethatserviceIt might be said that the Anglo-Norman princes criedout for the pontifical sovereignty when they saw themselvesalmost lost, but that very soon, the danger over, they for-the Pope had rendered them.gotHenry III., the son of John, took the oath of fealty andhomage to the Holy See.But Edward I. exempted him-self from it, and his son Edward II. followed this example.The Normans of Italy showed a more true and practicalDuring the two centuries of their sovereignty atfidelity.Sicily, they obtained more than twentyNaples and inThe princes of the house of AnjouBulls of investiture.had ten of them, for the 168 years of their sway.As re-gards the Kings of Aragon and Spain, from 1443 till 1700,the year of the death of Charles II., I count thirteen Bullsthe Twoof pontifical investiture for the kingdom ofSicilies.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.85