CHAPTER XXI.AUTHORITY OF GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS.It must be admitted that in these latter times, thanks tothe conscientious labours of Mr. Brewer and the Rev. Mr.Dimock, the authority of Giraldus, as a veracious historian,has fallen very much in the learned world.Mr. Brewer, whose first volume appeared in London in1861, is not afraid to reproach Giraldus with his credulity,and his continual references to old prophecies, as well asto his own visions ; again, with the discourses that thehistorian places on the lips of Norrnan and Welsh adven-turers, and of Irish chieftains, in which they make quota-tions from Greek and Latin authors—Julius Csesar, Virgil," They leave us to regret,"Horace, Ovid, and others.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.,73adds the editor, " that a quality of mind so valuable hadnot been strengthened and improved by a more sober andregulated judgment. "(Vol. I., p. xlvi.)According to the Rev. Mr. Dimock, Giraldus was toopassionate to be impartial. The picture that he draws ofForgetful of St. Malachy, he main-the Irish is unjvist.tains that since the days of St. Patrick, no Irish bishophas acquitted himself worthily of the pastoral charge.Little caring to find out the truth, he easily accepts the" I think,"Dimock,statements of others." I have said enough to justify me in refusing to acceptGiraldus's history of the Irish and of their English invadersas sober, truthful history."(Vol. v., p. Ixix.)saysMr.Truth was not the main object kept in view by Giraldus.He acknowledges that he took up his pen to glorify KingHenry II. : Topographiam Hibernicam .. in patris ves-tri laudem triennii Idbore digessi.[Ibid,, p. Ixx.).The history of the Conquest of Ireland is certainly, in agreat measure, a poetic fiction, rather thantrue andUnfortunately, it is not always possible tosober history.distinguish where the poetry ends and the prose begins.This is another remark made by the same editor.[Ibid.p. Ixxi.) Nor does he believe that anything can elsewherebe found so absurd as the orations which Giraldus putsinto the mouths of his heroes.It is the mountain bring-poem.iing forth the mouse.[Ibid., p. 'Ixx., note 4.)Giraldus made anepic^ The Rev. Mr. Dimock, in his preface to Vol. v., says : " Fromhis wide acquaintance with the first invaders of Ireland, and his closeconnexion with several of their principal leaders,— from the time also' that he spent there in his two visits,—we may be inclined to concludethat Giraldus's means of information about Ireland, and its people, andits conquest, as he much too grandly calls the English invasion, mustBut there are several circum-have been abundant and authentic.stances which render such a conclusion a very unsafe one ... As tohis history of the English invasion, it must have been wholly derivedfrom the English themselves, and in great measure, no doubt, from hisown near friends.If Giraldus had been the most cool, and fair, andunbiassed of writers, still a history so derived could not well have beenanything but one-sided ; it would be almost impossible that the Englishand their doings should not be more or less represented in colours toobright, and the Irish and their doings in too dark colours, and more-over, that the English, his own near friends, should not be undulyBut Giraldus was replete withexalted to the disparagement of others.—74POl'k ADRIAN IV.