CHAPTER XXXIII.THE FATE OF APOCRYPHAL DOCUMENTS.The Bull of Adrian has shared the common fate of apocry-Although the false decretals of Isidore Mer-phal works.cator and the famous donation of Constantine had a veryM—l62POPE ADRIAN IV.,tough life, it was not given them to prevail, by taking rankamong authentic title-deeds.The decretals of the False Isidore obtained such favourseven hundred years.with scholarslastedDivulged in the middle of the ninth century, the loss oftheir credit began in the sixteenth, itheythatBut we must carefully remark that the favour attachedto the work of Mercator continued with a very large num-As for what belongedber of documents that it contained.properly to the false decretals, they had no influence on thediscipline of the Church.In effect, the disciplinary falsifi-cation of the Pseudo-Isidore may be summed up under threeheads: — i. The pretended necessity of obtaining theprevious consent of the Pope for convoking a council,This did not pass into canonical dis-even a provincial one.cipline at any period. The Council of Trent commanded ain thetriennial assembly.Church that the presence of seventy-two bishops is neededto judge the criminal cause of a bishop, as Mercator3. Canonical procedure has remained whatwould have it.It was before the appearance of the false decretals. Noone has ever taken seriously in the Church the pretendedprohibition of letting laics bear witness against clerics, orThanks be to God ! theclerics themselves against laics.false decretals have had their day.It has never been held2.I admire how the Sovereign Pontiffs, by a wonderfulinstinct, have always shown prudence in holding out atarm's length, or with the tongs, the false Bull of Adrian,even on occasions when it might have seemed useful ornecessary to mention it.This has been the course, notonly with the Cardinals of Avranches, but with Inno-cent III., John XXII., Paul IV., St. Pius V. in his Bullagainst Elizabeth, Gregory XIIL, and Clement VIII., asI have shown above.^ The collection of decretals, &c., attributed to Isidore Mercatoris supposed to have appeared lirst in France, between the yearsg2q and 847. Who Isidore was, and wliether he really was theforger, is not certain. Many persons believed the work to befrom the pen of St. Isidore of Seville, who was a celebrated writerand they therefore gave implicit credit to it.It is said to containfalse decretals attributed to more than sixty Popes, and falsecanons attributed to many Councils.In the sixteenth centuryit began to be looked upon with suspicion.Since that time, ithas been known in its true light, as a mere forgery, though con-taining much that is true with much that is false.Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.163The great author of the misfortunes ofIreland, thecause chiefly responsible for its unexampled calamities,was Protestantism.The " Bull of Adrian" had no serious influence on theenslavement of the country.In point of fact, so long asthe Catholic reHgion prevailed in England as well as in Ire-land, the English, notwithstanding theiren.deavours, could hardly extend the limits fixed by the earlyadventurers.constantIn our days the Apocryphal Bull is passing through theFor a long period it hasseventh century of its existence.abused the credulity of the unlearned, and the leisure of thelearned, who found themselves obliged to discuss it.It istime that it should go down for ever into the grave inwhich lie buried the decretals of Isidore Mercator, and somany other forgeries that troubled the peace of our prede-cessors.God grant that my labour may not have the fate of de-laying for a single day the complete overthrow of the im-posture !—DOCUMENTS.No. I.(The Analecta here gives an article on Pope Adrian IV. from theIrish Ecclesiastical Record, of November, 1872, written by theMost Rev. Dr. Moran, then Bishop of Ossory— afterwardsCARDINAL MORAN, ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.This article was repitblished in the Australasian Catholic Record,for 1897, witli further remarks from his Eminence after twenty-That the reader may have the benefit offive years of reflection.these valuable remarks, it is from the Australian volume that wetake the whole_essay.Trans,)POPE ADRIAN THE FOURTH, AND THE SUPPOSED GRANTOF IRELAND TO KING HENRY THE SECOND.Though it is our special purpose in this paper to discuss the authen-ticity of the Papal Letter by which Adrian the Fourth is supposedto have made a gift of Ireland to Henry the Second, yet it will notbe uninteresting to briefly sketch some incidents in the life of thisFor many English readers the most remark-illustrious Pontiff.able fact connected with him is that he was the only EnglishmanUnderwho ever held the high dignity of Successor of St. Peter.many other respects, however, his career was truly singular, and hein a special manner won the admiration of contemporaries by hisunconquerable heroism in defending the rights of the Holy See.One of his biographers described him as " a man of mild and kindlybearing, esteemed for his high character and learning, famous asa preacher, and renowned for his fine voice " (Muratori, Vita, iii.,His pontificate was short, extending over less thanpart I, 441).But forfive years, from December, 1154, t° September, 11 59.those who take the trouble to examine the contemporary chronicles,not a few remarkable events will be found crowded into that briefperiod.Adrian the Fourth was known in early life as Nicholas Break-speare, and most English writers, judging from the surname,contend that he was of Norman and not of Anglo-Saxon descent.Mr. Tarleton, the latest writer of his life, in the elaborate workand Pope,Breahspear,just published,(Londpn, 1896), considers that "this surname may have beenattached to the family from its place of residence." He findsthat as early as the Doomsday Book there was a farm or hamletCalled Breakspears, situated on the edge of the table-land, orEnglishmanNicholasl6bDOCUMENTS.plateau, on which stands the ancient parish (church) of Harefield,and jast sheltered by the brow of the hill slopinjj down to thefertile valley of the Colne. He adds the shrewd remark : "Inthose days it is far more probable that a place should give a nameto a man than that a man should give a name to a place."Inaccorda.nce with this suggestion, it is not improbable that the familyof the future Pope migrated from the Breakspears district to theneighbourhood of Abbot's Langley, in Hertfordshire, and thushe may well have been of Anglo-Saxon descent.Nicholas was of humble parentage.His father, having becomea widower, entered the Benedictine Monastery of St. Alban's asa lay-brother, and for fifty years, till his death, continued to rankas such. He outlived his son Pope Adrian, and it presents a char-acteristic picture of those times that the father was permitted tohis son wasretain his lowly position at the monastery, whileelevated to the most exalted dignity in Christendom..At thehamlet of Abbot's Langley,' Nicholas was born about the yeaxIn his youthI too, a few years after the birth of St. Bernard,he appears to have been dependent on the monks of St. Alban'smonastery for his support no less than for his education. He gaveproof, however, of quick parts, and being desirous to embrace thereligious life, he petitioned to be admitted to the monastery.Hispetition was rejected, probably on account of his father beingalreadj' enrolled as a lay-brother, and Nicholas, with no provisionsave the meagre equipment of a " poor scholar," set out to seekhis fortune and to perfect himself in higher studies in the schools" After his final failure to enterof Paris.St. Alban's, he worked his way, probably through London anddown the high road through Kent, that historic route which hasbeen the main thoroughfare of so many travellers to and from themetropolis, past Rochester and Canterbury, to Dover, from whencehe obtained a passage over the narrow seas, possibly in the verysame year (ti20) when the Blanche Neuf was wrecked on thetreacherous rocks off Barfleur, and the brilliant company sur-rounding Prince William, together with that unfortunate son ofHere the career of Nicholas mayKing Henry, werefairlv be said to have commenced."Mr. Tarleton writes :drowned.It was probably at the halls of the Abbey of St. Denys at ParisFromthat Nicholas Breakspeare pursued his higher studies.Matthew Paris we learn that he became a most painstaking scholar,and betook himself so much in earnest to the acquisition of learn-ing that he excelled all his companions, and proving himself pos-sessed of rare qualities of temper, and endowed with a natural giftof eloquence, received much praise from all his instructors.He quitted Paris about the year 1125, crossed the Khone, andentered Aries, then a town of considerable importance in theHere he frequented the schools for whichterritory of Provence.the town was famous, and it was probably here that he had as his1 The hamlet belong^ed to the monastery of St. Alban's, and was called Abbot'sdistinguish it from a neighbouring hamlet which was called King'sLangley toLang^ley, a royal seat where Edmund, son of Edward III., and Duke of York, wasbprn.DOCUMENTS.1 67master the Irishman Marianns, for whom in after life he continuedto cherish the highest esteem.After a while, filled with the desireof embracing the reli2;ious life, he wended his way to Avignon tooffer himself as a subject in one of the numerous monasteries whichin those days were a distinguishing feature of this beautiful partof France, and the ruins of which may still be seen bv many apleasant stream, and on many a commanding hill.The Abbeyof St. Rufus of the Canons Regular of St. Augustine was one ofthe most famous of those religious institutions in the environsof Avignon.Thither Nicholas one evening bent his steps, andbegged to be admitted among the brethren. He was allowed toremain on trial.During the two years he spent in probation, heappears to have been engaged in teaching, and, as Williani ofNewburgh attests, " he strove by every means in his power to con-ciliate the brothers, and being a man of iixuch personal beauty,cheerful in spirit, cautious of speech, and always obedient to autho-rity, he succeeded in pleasing everyone." When his time of pro-Ijation expired, the Canons Regular were unanimous in admittinghim to their ranks, and thus Nicholas at length attained the greatpurpose of his life by taking the religious vows, and devotingBeing remarkable no less forhimselfthe observance of Rule than for his singular ability, he in a fewyears was appointed Prior, and on the death of Abbot William in1 37, he was further chosen his successor, and was installed in thatto the service of Christ.1high office with great solemnity.St. Bernard was at this time stirring up the fervour of religiousobservance in the communities of France, and Nicholas, now Abbotof St. Rufus, resolved to leave nothing undone that the CanonsRegular of St. Augustine, by strict discipline, might be quickenedwith the true spirit of their holy Rule. Some of the Religious,however, demurred to what they styled the Abbot's innovationsin their Rule, and appealed in person to Rome.This occasionedPopethe Abbot's first visit to Italy, in the springtime of 1145.Eugene the Third, a Cisterican according to St. Bernard's ownheart, had just then been advanced to the See of St. Peter, andthe reforming Abbot Nicholas was sure to find favour at his hands.Words of conciliation and exhortation were addressed by theSovereign Pontiff to the appellant Canons of St. Rufus, and theAbbot returned to Avignon to resume the work of reform whichThe spirit of disaffection, however, was not ex-he had begun.tinguished, and being gradually fanned into a flame, broke out inThe fact of thethe following year more violently than before.Abbot being a stranger intensified their discontent. A secondtime the appellants and the Abbot proceeded to Rome. The Popeere this had become fully acquainted with the merits of the AbbotNicholas, and admired his firmness and his zeal in restoring thevigour of religious discipline among those under his care. Hedismissed the appellant Canons with the words : "I know thepretext by which Satan has ensnared you into this quarrel. Returnto 3^our Abbey : choose a Superior with whom you can, or ratherwith whom you shall have the will to be at peace : the Abbot fromwhom you appeal shall henceforth be engaged in the immediateservice of the Holy See, and shall not be a further burden to you."1 68DOCUMENTS.Thus it was that Abbot Nicholas became attached to the PapalCourt, and there the highest dignities in the gift of the Pontiffsoon awaited him.The year 1 147 was in many respects eventful. The SecondAll Christendom was arousedCrusade was about to commence.by the eloquence of St. Bernard of Clairveaux, and Pope Eugenethe Third proceeded to Paris to present the pilgrim's staff to theNicholas Breakspeare appearsFrench King, Louis the Seventh.His knowledgeto have accompanied the Pontiff on this occasion.of the various languages stood him in good behest, and it is statedthat he greatly charmed all who came in contact with him.There is no recotd of the date of his elevation to the Cardinalate.It was certainly not later than December, ii;i, for his name asCardinal is attached to a Bull of Pope Eugene of that date.In 1 1 52, an arduous mission was assigned to him by PopeEugene the Third, which through his ability and zeal was attendedIt was nothing less than to proceed towith complete success.Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, with the authority of PapalLegate, to heal the religious dissensions that had arisen in thosecountries. The cause of these dissensions may be briefly stated.The Scandinavian kingdoms were all embraced in the MetropolitanSee of Hamburg till the year 1102, when at the request of theKing of Denmark the Danish city of Lund was erected into aMetropolitan See; and the churches in Sweden and Norway weremade subject to it.These kingdoms, though at one time unitedwith Denmark, had now proclaimed their independence, and thej'regarded it as an encroachment on their freedom that they shouldbe subject in spiritual matters to the Danish Metropolitan See.The northern kingdoms were further rent by civil dissensions, andall parlies looked to Rome for a healing remedy and for guidanceCardinal Breakspeare, as Papal Legatein their distracted state.received full powers to restore religious peace throughout Scandi-navia, and in his instructions he was admonished to " preach theGospel throughout that province and to use every endeavour togain the souls of the natives to the honour of Almighty God."confusion.The Legate passed through England, and sailed from the Englishcoast for Norway, where he landed on July the 19th, 1152. HeThe throne wasfound the country in the greatestoccupied by the three sons of the m^irdered King Harold, and allthe sad results of jealousy and ambition and civil war ensued.The first care of Cardinal Breakspeare was to set the civil discordat rest. He then proceeded to heal the religious wounds of thekingdom. He thoroughly reformed the Church, and swept awaythe abuses which had crept in amid the civil disorders.In theCathedral of Nidrosa, the modern Drontheira, reposed the relicsof the holy bishop, St. Olaf. He selected that city for the Metro-politan dignity, and subjected to its authoritj' not only the otherNorwegian Sees with the Orkneys, Hebrides, and Faroe Islands,but also Iceland and Greenland, theShetlands, and WesternIslands of Scotland, and the Isle of Man. The Church of Norwaythus obtained all that it was anxious for, and the name of theLegate was held everywhere in benediction.Tarleton writes :'' y^U honour -yvas ascribed [o him, and his character and firmnessDOCUMENTS.l6qbeing in such sharp contrast to their own rulers, he became thehero of the whole nation, and was certainly the most powerfulman in Norway at that date."The national historian, Snorrow,relates that no foreigner ever came to Norway who was so honoured,or whose memory is so cherished as that of Nicholas Breakspeare.To this day his name is mentioned in Norwegian history as one ofthe benefactors of the nation, and after his death a place wasassigned him among the national Saints.He next proceeded to Sweden, called a synod in the city ofLingkopin, and appointed a Bishop of Upsala.It was not so easyto reconcile Denmark to all these changes..Nevertheless in this,loo, his efforts were crowned with success. The See of Lund wasallowed a sort of primatial pre-eminence over all the ScandinavianChurches, and its Archbishop was honoured with the title of LegatusDuring the Cardinal's stay in Denmark,natus Apcstolices Sedis.the King, Sweno, to avenge some outrages, had declared warThe Cardinal used all his influence in vain toagainst Sweden.maintain peace, and he is reported to have said that " the Danescould expect nothing else but destruction to themselves in theirThe event justified his expectations. Drawnproposed campaign."by a feigned retreat far into Finland, the Danish army was sur-rounded, and almost entirely destroyed.Cardinal Breakspeare returned to Rome in the beginning ofNovember, 1154, and throughout his homeward journey as inRome itself, he was everywhere saluted as " the Apostle of theNorth."Many changes had taken place in the capital of the ChristianPope Eugene theworld during the two years of his absence.Third had been summoned to his reward, and had had for hissuccessor the Bishop of Sabina, aged ninety years, who ascendedthe Papal Chair under the name of Anastasius the Fourth. Onthe 3rd of December, 1154, only a few weeks after Cardinal Break-spcare's arrival in Rome, the Pontificate of Pope Anastasius wascut short by death. Rome being in a very disturbed state, theCardinals met inSt. Peter's without delay, and with one voicechose Nicholas Breakspeare as the successor of St. Peter to guidethe helm of Holy Church. He at first declined the onerous charge,but the clergy and laity took up the cry " Nicholas elected by God,"and at length he bent his shoulders to the burden. He took thetitle of Adrian the Fourth, and his coronation was celebrated withgreat pomp in St. Peter's, on the 24th December, 11 54.His pontificate of four years and eight months was full of stirringevents, and his saying, as reported by John of Salisbury, that" the Pope's tiara was splendid because it burned with fire," wasDr. Creighton,fully verified in his short but brilliant career.Protestant Bishop of London, in the Dictionary of National Bio-graphy, writing of Adrian the Fourth, says that his " pontificatewas a period of constant struggles mainly of his own seeking."Now nothing can be more false than this. He was engaged inconstant struggles, indeed, but they were forced upon him bythose who were jealous of the spiritual authority, or coveted thetemporalities of the Church, and he proved himself throughoutthese varied contests an unswerving champion of the rights inthose days attached to the Holy See.lyO"DOCUMENTS.itsThe first great difficulty that presented itself to the newly-elected Pope was the attitude of the Roman citizens. They hadbeen seized for some years with a frenzy of republican fanaticism,and now under the guidance of the popular tribune, Arnold ofBrescia, they resolved to brook no further delaj' in transferringtheir theories into facts. Rome was to become once more thecentre of the world's civil authority, her old-time grandeur wasto Ije renewed. The Church, however, was to be shorn of all itsdues ; andprivileges, its wealth, its land, its possessions,paganism, under another name, was to resume its sway on theCapitol.Immediately on the election of Pope Adrian, the Roman Senatesent him an imperious demand that he would recognise the RomanIn his reply the Pontiff commanded them on theirRepublic.peril to return to their allegiance, and to compel Arnold of Bresciato quit the city. The Republicans would listen to no such counsel,and to emphasise their determination they attacked the agedCardinal Guido as he was proceeding along the Via Sacra, andinflicted serious wounds of which he soon after died. The Pope,however, naade them realise that they had to do w^ith a man whomno terrors could turn aside froni the path of duty.For the firsttime in the history of the Christian world, Rome was subjectedto an Interdict, to commence on Palm Sunday {1155), the verytime when pilgrims from all parts of Christendom were accus-This terrible blow smotetomed to flock into the Eternal City.at the same time the earthly and the spiritual interests of thecitizens. The Senate, without delay, banished Arnold from thecity, and presented a humble petition to the Pope. The Interdictwas at once removed, and the Easter Feast was kept with morethan usual splendour and rejoicing.Another storm, however, was now threatening from the North.When Frederick Barbarossa succeeded to the imperial throne ofGermany the Roman Senate forwarded to him an invitation tocome to Rome to receive the Imperial Crown at their hands. Thereply of Barbarossa was to cross the Alps in November, 1 1 54, witha large army, with the avowed intent of asserting his imperial rightsin Italy, and punishing the insolence of the Republicans of Rome.The Emperor proceeded slowly on his course, securing the fealtyof the Italian cities through which he passed. The vicissitudesof these cities need not at present detain us.Suffice it to say thaton the loth of April, 1153, Barbarossa, as King of Italy, receivedthe Iron Crown in the Church of St. Michael at Pavia. He nowavowed his intention to receive, at the hands of the Pontiff, theImperial Crown in Rome, and sent deputies to convey his wishesto Pope Adrian. On the other hand, the Pope dispatched threeCardinals to meet the F.mperor, to acquaint him with the actualcondition of the city, and to learn what his intentions were inIn the meantime, the Pope proceededregard to its temporal rule.to Civita Castellana, on the borders of the Campagna, about mid-way between Viterbo and Rome.We must now revert to Arnold of Brescia. When he fled fromRome, he endeavoured to form a league of some of the Italiannobility to stir up the citizens of Rome against the Pope andnOClIMENTS.171As a preliminary to the Imperial conse-against the Ejnperor.cration, Adrian the Fourth required that the Emperor would putan end to this attempt at sedition.Arnold soon fell a captiveinto the hands of Barbarossa, and was consigned in chains toCastel Sant' Angelo, in Rome. On a former occasion when Arnoldwas a prisoner, the citizens had revolted and set him free.ThePope was now absent from the city, at Civita Castellana, and theprefect of the city, seeing no other escape from imminent risk,had the prisoner led out from the castle and secretly put to death.His remains were burned and his ashes were flung into the Tiber.Such is the narrative of the ancient chronicler.This, however,would not suffice for Dr. Creisrhton. He would place the e-xecutionof Arnold at a later period, when the Pope was in Rome, and whenthe Emperor, after his coronation at St. Peter's, had to repel anattack of the rebellious citizens. He writes ;" Adrian the Fourthused the opportunity of the Emperor's wrath to urge the executionof Arnold of Brescia, who was tried before the Papal officials, andFor such statements there is not a particle ofput to death."Sismondi, too, gives a dramatic account of thehistoric evidence.slow burning of Arnold fastened to a cross at Porta del Popolo.Even Dean Milman characterises such an argument as" purefiction " (Latin Christianity, iv., 412).The Pope's embassy to Barbarossa brought back the pleasantannouncement that the Emperor had no hostile intentions what-ever against the Pope, that he was ready to pay all honour toHoly Church and to the See of Rome, and prayed Adrian topublicly and with all solemnity crown him in St. Peter's.Bar-barossa, however, was a prince of very doubtful character, fromwhom Adrian had but little to expect. Tarleton describes him " asa man of boundless ambition, combined with great personal strengthand courage ; in physique he was an ideal hero ; but he was un-scrupulous, masterful, and imperious.His one object was to rulea united Germany combined with Italy, to be supreme on the Tiberas well as on the Danube. He proclaimed the loftiest notions ofthe absolute supremacy of the Emperor, and carried with him theenthusiastic support of all the great princes of Germany."Bar-barossa with his arm 5' had encamped at Sutri, the ancient Sutrium,a small stronghold known as the key of Etruria, which occupiedthe crest of one of the numerous rocky hills in that rich province ofItaly.Pope Adrian had advanced as far as the picturesque castle ofNepi, with his suite of Cardinals, and a few attendants. TheEmperor, having declared his intentions to be pacific, and ex-pressed his wish to meet the Pontiff, Adrian set out, as usual inthose days, on horseback, accompanied by a small retinue ofAs he approched the Imperial camp, aCardinals' and guards.brilliant group of German nobles, their armour flashing in thesunlight, galloped out to meet him, and, joining the procession,escorted him amid the shouts of the troops and the blare of trumpetsBarbarossa now came forth into the front of the Imperial tent.gorgeous armour, and around him were the rough chivalry ofThe etiquette of those days required the sovereign,Germany.when welcoming the Pope, in recognition of the higher spiritual172DOCUMENTS.authority, to hold the Papal stirrup whilst its owner dismounted.This part of the ceremony Barbarossa resolved not to fulfil. Headvanced to meet Adrian, and, bowing low, offered to assist himAdrian, however, waited, that the full ceremonialto dismount.Barbarossa' s pride would not brook thisshould be observed.His guards half drew their swords,threateninghumiliation.murmurs were heard in the ranks of the soldiers, the Pope's ownretinue turned their horses and fled. Though Adrian was thusalmost left alone, yet his courage never for a moment failed. Hedismounted without insisting, for the moment, on the prescribedhomage, and allowed the Emperor to lead him to the throne pre-pared for him, where Frederick knelt and kissed his feet.Afterthis ceremony the Emperor rose and approached for the kiss ofIn dignified words he refusedpeace.to grant it, and told the Emperor that until the usual homage waspaid in full he would withhold his blessing and refuse to crownWhatever may be our judgment regarding the ceremonialhim.details of those times, one cannot fail to be struck by the magni-The Emperor used every argumentficent courage of the Pontiff.that could be devised to change Adrian's resolution, but his wordsThreats ormight as well be addressed to the rocks of Sutri.entreaties were alike of no avail to move the steady resolution ofthe Pope, who next day quitted the camp and returned to Nepi.It was now Adrian's turn.Barbarossa, however, was determined to receive coronation atthe hands of Adrian, and resolved to submit to the humiliatingcondition of homage, for without it, he saw no prospect of attainingthe great object of his ambition. On June the nth, he set outfor Nepi, accompanied by a brilliant retinue. As he drew near,the Pope rode out to meet him. The Emperor dismounted, ad-vanced on foot, and, kneeling down, held the Pope's stirrup, andThis done, Adrian enfolded him in hisassisted him to dismount.arms and gave him the kiss of peace amid the ringing cheers ofboth parties of followers and spectators. As Tarleton remarks :" The splendid firmness of Adrian had gained for him a wonderfulsuccess."The Pope now returned to Rome, and on the morning of theiSth of June, with all solemnity, performed the ceremony of theEmperor's coronation in St. Peter's, How infuriated was the hostileferment of the citizens against the Germans appears from the factthat they organi-sed an armed band to attack the German armyencamped at the Neronian fields, near Ponte Molle, nor did theydesist till 200 of the assailants were made prisoners, and about 1000were slain by the Imperial troops, or were drowned in the Tiber.The prisoners were handed over to Adrian, by whom most of themAt the end of June the Emperorwere liberated in a few days.and his army quitted Rome and returned to Germany.During the next two years the Pope was mainly occupied inthe south of Italy, disputing with the Normans, who claimedSicily by right of conquest, and, togetlier with it, a considerableportion of territory on the mainland. The indomitable courageand firmness which had humbled the pride of Barbarossa was alsosuccessful in restoring peace in South Italy, and in securing theNorman power as an ally of Rome.In the meantime, the dealingsDOCUMENTS.I73of Barbarossa with the Church in Germany, and with the citiesof North Italy, led to repeated quarrels with the Pope, and em-bittered the closing days of his life. He was preparing to issue asolemn sentence of excommunication against the Emperor, whenhe was overtaken by death at Anagni, on the ist of September,His remains were interred at St. Peter's, in Rome, where1 159.the tomb of the only Englishman who ever wore the Tiara is to thepresent day an object of interest to countless tourists of the English-speaking world.*****The distinctive character of Pope AdrianFourth, assketched in the Australian Catholic Record for April, shouldto show that his supposed Bull, by which a grant ofsufficeIreland was made to King Henry the Second cannot be regardedas genuine. The main purpose of Adrian's policy was to defendthe Church's independence within her own sphere, and to repelIn the 2^0the ever-grasping pretensions of the secular power.genuine official letters of the Pontiff that have been preserved tous, we shall seek in vain for even the remotest trace of theflattery and subserviencj^ tothe royal authority which are sothe supposed Bull. We may now proceed toconspicuousinconsider in detail the arguments which are advanced in supportof the genuineness of this singular document.theTwentj'-five years a.go I inserted in the Irish EcclesiasticalRecord (Dublin, November, 1872),a short essay on this subject,which since then has been repeatedly republished or referred to inIt may not be in-the United States and the home countries.opportune to here reprint it in full, with a few verbal alterations.This will clear the way for setting forth as briefly as possible thefurther arguments which have been advanced to set this matterin its full light during the past years.There was a time when it would be little less than treason to(luestion the genuineness of the Bull by which Pope Adrian theFourth is supposed to have made a grant of Ireland to Henrythe Second ; and indeed, from the first half of the thirteenth tothroughthe close of the fifteenththis supposed grant of the Holy See that the English Govern-ment sought to justify their claim to hold dominion inthatHowever, opinions and times have changed, and at theisland.present day this Bull of Adrian has as little bearing on the con-nection between England and Ireland as it could possibly have onthe union of the Isle of Man with Great Britain.century, it was principallyOn the other hand, many writers in a spirit of hostility to theHolj' See, have said strange things whilst asserting the genuine-I need scarcely remark that it does notness of this famous Bull.seem to have been the love either of Ireland or of historic truthIt proceeded mainly from theirthat inspired their declamation.hatred to the Sovereign Pontiff, and from the vain hope that suchexaggerated statements might in some way weaken the devotedaffection of the Irish people for Rome.174DOCUMENTS.Laying aside such prejudiced opinions, the controversy as tothe genuineness of Adrian's Bull must be viewed in a purely his-torical light, and its decision must depend on the value and weightof the historical arguments which may be advanced in regard toit.The following is a literal translation of the old Latin text ofAdrian's Bull :—" Adrian, Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to our mostdear Son in Christ, the illustrious King of the English, greetingand the Apostolical Benediction." The thoughts of your Highness are laudably and profitablydirected to the greater glory of your name on earth and to theincrease of the reward of eternal happiness in heaven, when as aCatholic Prince you propose to yourself to extend the borders ofthe Church, to announce the truths of the Christian Faith to igno-rant and barbarous nations, and to root out the weeds of wicked-ness from the field of the Lord ; and the more effectuallytoaccomplish this, you implore the counsel and favour of the Holy See.In which matter we feel assured that the higher your aims are,and the more discreet your proceedings, the happier, with God'said, will be the result ; because those undertakings that proceedfrom the ardour of faith and the love of religion are sure alwaysto have a prosperous end and issue." It is beyond all doubt, as your highness also doth acknowledge,that Ireland, and all the islands upon which Christ the Sun ofJustice has shone, and which have received the knowledge ofChristian Faith, are subject to the authority of St. Peter and ofthe most holy Roman Church.Wherefore, we are the more de-sirous to sow in them an acceptable seed and a plantation pleasingunto God, because we know that a most rigorous account of themshall be required of us hereafter." Now, most dear Son in Christ, you have signified to us thatyou propose to enter the island of Ireland to establish the obser-vance of law among its people, and to eradicate the weeds of vice ;and that j'Ou are willing to pay from every house one penny as anannual tribute to St. Peter, and to preserve the rights of the churchesWe, therefore, receiving withof the land whole and inviolate.due favour your pious and laudable desires, and graciously grantingour consent to your petition, declare that it is pleasing and accept-able to us, that for the purpose of enlarging the limits of the Church,setting bounds to the torrent ofvice, reforming evil manners,planting the seeds of virtue, and increa-sing Christian Faith, youshould enter that island and carry into effect those things whichbelong to the service of God and to the salvation of that people ;and that the people of that laud should honourably receive andreverence you as Lord ; the rights of the churches being preservedantouched and entire, and reserving the annual tribute of onepenny from every house to St. Peter and the most Holy RomanChurch." If, therefore, you resolve to carry these designs into execution,let it be your study to form that people to good morals, and takesuch orders both by yourself and by those whom you shall findDOCIIMENIS.175qualified in faith, in words, and in conduct, that the Church theremay be adorned, and the practices of Christian faith be plantedand increased ; and let all that tends to the glory of God and thesalvation of souls be so ordered by you that you may deserve toobtain from God an increase of everlasting reward, and may secureon earth a glorious name throughout all time.Given at Rome,"&c..Before we proceed with the inquiry as to the genuineness o£this letter of Pope Adrian, I must detain the reader with a fewbrief preliminary remarks.First : Some passages of this important document have beenvery unfairly dealt with by modern writers while purporting toThus, for instance. Professor Ilichey, in hisdiscuss its merits.Lectures on Irish History, presenting a translation of the Latintext to the lady pupils of the Alexandra College, makes the Pontiffto write : " You have signified to us, our well-beloved son in Christ,that you propose to enter the island of Ireland in order to subdue. We, therefore, regarding your pious and laud-the people, etc. .able design with due favour, etc., do hereby declare our v.'ill andpleasure, that for the purpose of enlarging the borders of the ChuLCh,Such anetc., you do enter and take possession of that island." 'erroneous translation must be the more blamed in the presentinstance, as it was scarcely to be expected that the ladies whom thelearned lecturer addressed would have leisure to consult the originalLatin text of the document which he professed to translate.This,however, is not the only error into which Professor Richey has beenbetrayed regarding the Bull of Adrian the Fourth. Having mentionedin a note the statement of Roger de Wendover, that the Bull wasobtained from Pope Adrian in the year 11 55, he adds his ownopinion that " the grant appears to have been made in 1172."-The learned lecturer seems to have forgotten that, at that date.Pope Adrian had been for about thirteen years freed from thecares of his Pontificate, having passed to the better world in theyear 11 59.Second : Anyone who attentively weighs the words of theabove document will see at once that it prescinds from all title ofconquest, whilst at the same time it makes no gift or transfer to HenryAs far as this letter of Adrian is concerned, the visitthe Second.of Henry to our island might be the enterprise of a friendly monarch,who, at the invitation of a distracted commonwealth, would seek byhis presence to restore peace, and to uphold the observance of theThus, all the foolish theories must at once be set aside,laws.which rest on the groundless supposition that Pope .Adrian autho-rised the invasion and plunder of the Irish people by the Anglo-Norman adventurers.Third : There is another serious error which is sufficiently refutedI mean that opinionby the simple perusal of the above document.which would fain set forth the letter of Pope Adrian as a dog-matical definition of the Holy See, as if the Sovereign Pontiff then1 Lectures on the History of Ireland, by A. G. Richey, Esq., delivered to theDublin,Pupils of Alexandra College during; the Hilary and Easter Terms of .869.18^, pagfes la:, I23."^ [hid., page 121.176DOCUMENTS.spoke ex cathedra, i.e., solemnly propounded some doctrine to bebelieved by the Universal Church ; it proposes no matter of faithto be held' by all the children of Christ ; in fact, it presents nodoctrine whatever to be believed by the faithful, and it is nothingmore than a commendatory letter addressed to Henry, resting onthe good intentions set forth by that monarch himself.There isone maxim, indeed, which awakens the suspicions of the old Gallicanschool, viz. : that " all the islands are subject to the authoritv ofis no doctrinal teachine; that is thusSt. Peter."propounded : it is a matter of fact admitted by Henry himself,a principle recognised by the international law of Europe in themiddle ages, a maxim set down by the various states themselves,the better to maintain peace and concord among the princes ofChristendom. To admit, however, or to call in question the teach-ing of the civil law of Europe, as embodied in that maxim, hasnothing whatever to say to the great prerogative of St. Peter'ssuccessors, whilst they solemnly propound to the faithful, in unerringaccents, the doctrines of Divine faith.However, itFoi;rth : To many it will seem a paradox, and yet it is a fact,that the supposed Bull of Pope Adrian had no part whatever in thesiibmission of the Irish chieftains to Henry the Second. Even accord-ing to those who maintain its genuineness, tliis Bull wasnotpublishedtill the year 1175, and certainly no mention of it was made inTheIreland until long after the submission of the Irish princes.success of the Anglo-Normans was mainly due to a different cause,viz., to the superior military skill and equipment of the invaders.Among the Anglo-Norman leaders were some of the bravest knightsof the kingdom, who had won their laurels in the wars of FranceTheir weapons and armour rendered it almost impos-and Wales.sible for the Irish troops to meet them in the open field. The crossbowwhich was made use of for the first time in this invasion, producedas great a change in military tactics as the rifled cannon in ourown days. When Henry came in person to Ireland his numerousarmy hushed all opposition.There were 400 vessels in his fleet,and if a minimum of twenty-five armed men be allowed for eachvessel, we shall have an army of at least 10,000 men fully equippedlanding unopposed on the southern shores of our island."It is tothis imposing force, and the armour of the Anglo-Norman knights,that we must in great part refer whatever success attended thisinvasion of the English monarch.To proceed now with the immediate matter of our presenthistorical inquiry. The following is the summary of the argumentsin favour of the authenticity of Pope Adrian's letter, drawn up byauthor of many valuable works on Irish history :— " We have,J. C. O'Callaghan, Esq., editor of the MacaricB Excidium, andfirst, the testimony of John of Salisbury, secretary to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and one of the ablest writers of his day,who relates his having been the envoy from Henry to Adrian, in1155, to ask for a grant of Ireland, and such a grant having thenbeen obtained, accompanied by a gold ring, containing a fine'' The authorities for the statements made in the text may be seen in MacariceExcidium, edited by Mr. O'Callaghan for the Irish ArchEeolog:ical Society in 18^0.nncuMF.NTS.177emerald, as a token of investiture, with which grant and ring thesaid John returned to Henry. We have, secondly, the grant orBull of Adrian in extsnso in the works of Giraldus Cambrensisand his contemporary, Ridnlfus de Diceto, Dean of London, as wellas in those of Roger de Wendover and Matthew Paris. We have,thirdly, several Bulls of Adrian's successor, Pope Alexander III,,still further to the purport of Adrian's, or in Henry's favour. Wehave, fourthly, the recorded public reading of the Bulls of Adrianand Alexander at a meeting of Bishops at Waterford in 1175. Wehave, fifthly, after the liberation of Scotland from England atBannockburn, and the consequent invitation of Bruce's brother,Edward, to be King of Ireland, the Bull of Adrian prefixed to theeloquent lay remonstrance, which the Irish presented to PopeJohn XXII., against the English ; the same Bull, moreover, referredto in the remoirstrance itself, as so ruinous to Ireland ; and a copyof that Bull accordingly sent back by the Pope to Edward II. ofEngland, for his use under those circumstances. We have, sixthly,from Cardinal Baronius, in his great work, the A nnales Ecdesiastici,under Adrian IV., his grant of Ireland to his countrymen in full,or, as is said, ' ex codice Vaticano, diploma datum ad Henricum,Anglorum Regem.' We have, seventhly, the Bull in the BullariumRomanum, as printed at Rome, in 1739.The citations and refer-ences in support of all the foregoing statements will be found inthe ' Notes and Illustrations ' of my edition of Maoarice Exoidium,for the Irish Arch^ological Society in 1850, given in such a manneras must satisfy the most sceptical."Examining these arguments in detail, I will follow the orderthus marked out by Mr. O'Callaghan.I. We meet, in the first place, the testimony of John of Salis-bury, who in his Metalogicits (lib. iv., cap. 42), writes, that beingin an official capacity at the Papal Court, in 1155, Pope Adrian IV.then granted the investiture of Ireland to the illustrious King HenrvII. of England.'I do not wish in any way to detract from the praise due toJohn of Salisbury, who was at that time one of the ablest courtiersHowever, the words here imputed to him must beof Henry II.Inserted as they are in the last chaptertaken with great reserve.of his work, the5r are not at all required by the context ; by can-celling them the whole passage runs smoother, and is more con-This is more striking, as in another worknected in every way.of the same writer, which is entitled Pnlycraticus, we meet witha detailed account of the various incidents of his embassy to PopeAdrian, yet he there makes no mention of the Bull in Henry'sfavour, or of the gold ring and its fine emerald, or of the grant ofIreland, all of which would have been so important for his narrative.We must also hold in mind the time when the Metalogicus waswritten. The author himself fixes its date ; for, immediately before' " Ad preces meas illustri regi ang^Ionim Henrico Secundo (Adrianus) concessit etdedit Hiberniam jure hiereditario possidendam ;ipsius testantur inhodiernum diem- Nam omnes insulae, de jure antiquo,_ ex donationeConstantini quiearn fundavit et dotavit, dicuntur ad Romanam Ecclesiam pertinere, annulum (juoqueper me transmisit aureum, smaraffdo optima decoratum, quo fieret investitura luris incuriali archivo publico custodir!ferenda Hibernia : idemque adhuc annulus injussus est."liter^esicut1^78DOCUMENTS.asking the prayers of " those who read his book, and those who hearit read," he tells us that the news of Pope Adrian's death hadreached him a little time before, and he adds that his own patron,,still living, wasTheobald, Archbishop of Canterbury, thoughweighed down by many infirmities. i Now, Pope Adrian departedthis life in 1159, and the death of Archbishop Theobald happenedHence, Gale and the other editors of John of Salisbury'sin 1 161.works, without a dissentient voice, refer Metalogicus to the)year 1 159.Now, it is a matter beyond the reach of controversy, that ifHenry II. obtained the investiture of Ireland from Adrian IV.,he kept this grant a strict secret till at least the year 1175.Fortwentv years, i.e., from 11 55 to 1175, no mention was made of theHenry did not refer to it when authorising hisgift of Adrian.vassals to join Diarmaid in 1167, when Adrian's Bull would havebeen so opportune to justifv his intervention ; he,_did not mentionit when he himself set out for Ireland to solicit and receive thehomage of the Irish princes ; he did not even refer to it when heassunied his new title and accomplished the purpose of his expedi-11 72, was the first episcopaltion. The Council of Cashel, inassembly after Henry's arrival in Ireland ; the Papal Legate waspresent there, and did Adrian's Bull exist it should necessarilyhave engaged the attention of the assembled Fathers.Never-theless, not a whisper as to Adrian's grant was to be heard at thatEven the learned editor of Cambrensis Eversus,,famous Councd.whilst warmly asserting the genuineness of Adriari's Bull, admits." there is not any, even the slightest authority, for asserting thatits existence was' known in Ireland before the year 1172, or forthree years later " (vol. ii., p. 440, note z).It is extremely dilScult,in any hypothesis, to explain in a satisfactory way this mysterioussilence of Henry 1 1., nor is it easy to understand how a fact soimportant, so vital to the interests of Ireland, could remain somany years concealed from those who ruled the destinies of theFor, we must hold in mind, that throughout thatIrish Church.interval Ireland numbered among its Bishops one who held theimportant office of Legate of the Holy See ; the Irish Church hadconstant intercourse with England and the Continent, and throughSt. Laurence O'Toole and a himdred other distinguished prelatesenjoj'ed in the fullest manner the confidence of Rome.If Adrian granted this Bull to Henry at the solicitation ofJolm of Salisbury in US'!, there is but one explanation for thesilence of this courtier in his diary, as set forth in the Polyoraiicus,and for the concealment of this Bull itself from the Irish Bishopsand people, viz., that this secrecy was required by the state policyAnd, if it be so, how then can we beof the English monarch.asked to addiit as geuuine this passage of the Mstalvgicus in whichthe astute agent of Henry, still continuing to discharge ctfices ofthe highest trust in the Court, would proclaim to the world asearly as the year 1159, that Pope Adrian had made this grantof Ireland to his royal master, and that the solemn record of theinvestiture of this high dignity was preserved in the public archivesof the kingdom ?' ifetalogicus, lib. iv. cap. ult.DOCUMENTS.lygIt must be added that there are some phrases in this passageof the Metalogicus wliich manifestly betray the hand of the im-Thus, the words usque in hodiernum diem imply that apostor.long interval had elapsed since the concession was made by PopeAdrian ; and surely they could not have been penned by John ofSalisbury in 1159. Much less can we suppose that this writeremployed the words jure haredHario possidendam. No suchhereditarj'- right is granted in the Bull of Adrian.It was notdreamt of even during the first years of the Anglo-Norman invasion,and it was only at a later period, when the Irish chieftains scornfullyrejected the Anglo-Norman law of hereditary succession, that thisexpedient was thought of for allaying the fierce opposition of theIrish people.Thus we are forced to regard the supposed testimony of Johnof Salisbury? as nothing more than a clumsy interpolation, whichprobably was not inserted in his work till manv years after the firstAnglo-Norman invasion of Ireland.2. I now come to the second ^nd main argument of those whoseek to defend the authenticity of Pope Adrian's Bull. We haveGiraldus Cambreusis, they say, a contemporary witness, whosetestimony is unquestionable. He inserts in fullthis letter ofAdrian IV., and he nowhere betrays the slightest doubt as to itsgenuineness.Some years ago we might perhaps have been tempted to acceptthis flattering character of Giraldus Cambrensis, but at the presentday, and since the publication of an accurate edition of his his-torical works, it is impossible for us to do so.It was not till many years after the death of Pope Adrian thatGerald de Barry, better known as Giraldus Cambrensis, entered onTwice he visited Ireland after the yearthe stage of Irish history.1 1 83, and on both occasions he discharged those duties whicti,at the present da3^ would merit for hiiu the title of special courtThe Expugnatin Hibernica,correspondent with the invading army.in which he inserts Adrian's Bull, may justly be said to have beenHence, as a matter of course, Giraldus adoptedwritten to order.as genuine every document set forth as such by his royal master,and any statements that strengthened the claim or promoted theinterests of his brother Welsh adventurers were surely not likelj'to be too nicely weighed in the scales of criticism by such an his-torian. The editors of the works of Giraldus, published under thedirection of the Master of the Rolls, have fully recognised thisspecial feature of the historical works of Giraldus. The officialcatalogue describing the Expu^natio Hibernica, of which we treat,expressly says : "It may be regarded rather as a great epic, than asober relation of facts occurring in his own days. No one canperuse it without coming to the conclusion that it is rather a poeticalfiction than a prosaic truthful history."In the preface to the fifth volume of the Historical Treatises ofGiraldus, the learned editor. Rev. James F. Dimock, enters atconsiderable length into the inquiry, whether the ExpugnatioHibernica was to be accepted as genuine and authentic history.I need do no more than state the conclusions which he enunciates :-j-" I think I have said enough to justify me in refusing to acceptl8onOCIlMFNTS.Giraldus's history of the Irish and ol their Enghsh invaders as" My good friendsober, truthful history." ' And again he writes :and pre-labourer in editing these volumes of Giraldus's Avorks(Mr. Brewer) says of the Expugnatio, that Giraldus would seemto have regarded his subject rather as a great epic, which it un-doubtedly was, than a sober relation of facts occurring in his own. This is a most true and characteristic description oldays. .Giraldus's treatment of his subject ; the treatise certainly is, ingreat measure, rather a poetical liction than a prosaic truthfulhistory." ^.I must further remark, as another result from Rev. Mr. Dimock'sresearches, that the old text of Giraldus in reference to Pope Adrian'sBull, from which Mr. O'Callaghan's citations are made, is nowproved to be singularly defective.I shall give the pithy words ofthat learned editor, wfiich are stronger than any I should wish touse : " No more absurd nonsensical a muddle was ever blunderedIt is of course from theinto by the most stupid of abbreviators." ^ancient MSS. of the work that this corruption of the old text ismainly proved ; but it should indeed be apparent from an attentivestudy of the very printed text itself, for, as Mr. Dimock remarks,being accurately translated, its words " marvellously contrive tomake Henry, in 1172, apply for and procure this privilege fromPope Adrian, who died in 11 59, and with eqiially marvellous con-fusion they represent John of Salisbury, who had been Henry'sagent in procuring this privilege in 1155, as sent, not to Ireland,but to Home, for the purpose of publishing the Bull at Waterfordin 11,74 or 1 175."I shall only add, regarding the testimony of Giraldus Cam-brensis, that in the genuine text of the Expugnatio Hibernica heplaces on the same level the Bull of Adrian IV. and that of Alex-Nevertheless, as we shall just now see, he elsewhereander III.admits that there were many and grave suspicions that the sup-posed Bull of Alexander had never been granted by the Holy See.The other names mentioned together with that of Giralduswill not detain us long. They are all writers who only incidentallymake reference to Irish matters, and in these they naturally enoughtake Giraldus for their guide.Ralph de Diceto wrote about 1210, and like Giraldus receivedhis honours at the hands of Henry II.Irish historians have notyet accepted him as a guide in reference to matters connected withFor instance, the Synod of Cashel of 11 72, whichtheir country.was one of the most important events of that period of Ireland'sliistory, is described by him as held in Ijsinore.Roger de Wendover was a monk of St. Albans, who died 6th ofMay, 1237.His Flore.s Historiarum begin with the creation ofthe world, and end two years before his death in 1235. He merelycompendiates other sources down to the beginning of the thirteenthIt is only the subsequent portion of his work which iscehtviry.held in esteem by English annalists.^'• Giraldl Cambrensis Opera," under the direction of the Master of the Rolls,vol. v., London, I867. Preface, p. Ixix.'^ /did. p. Ixx,S/4W. p. xliii./iiJ.—DOCUMENTS.l8lilattliew Paris was a brother religious of Roger de WendoverMr. Coxe, who edited aill St. Albaus, where he died in 1259.portion of the Flores Historiarum for the EngUsli Historical Society(1841-1844), has proved that down to the year 1335 MatthewParis only compendiates the work of Wendover, At all events hisHistoria Maior is of very little weight. A distinguished Germanhistorian of the present day, ScrhOdl, thus conveys his strictureson its merits :" Se trompe a chaque instant, et, entraine par son aveuglerage de critique, donne pour des faits historiques des anecdotespiquantes qni n'ont aucnne authenticity, des Ifgendes d6raisonnables,et toutes sortes de details suspects, exageres et calomnicux."To the testimony of such writers we may well oppose thesilence of Peter de Blois, secretary of Henry II., though chroniclingthe chief events of Henry's reign ; and to this we may add thesilence of all our native annalists, not one of whom ever mentionsthe Bull of Adrian.3. But it is time to pass on to the third argument which isadvanced by those who maintain the authenticity of the Bull.It is quite true that we have some letters or Bulls of Pope Alex.andsrIII. connected with the Irish invasion.Three of these, written in1 172, are certainly authentic. They are preserved in the LiberNiger Scaccarii, from which they were edited by Hearne, and inlater times they have been accurately printed by Mr. O'Callaghanand Rev. Mr. Kelly. They are addressed respectively to the Irishbishops, King Henry, and the Irish princes.So far, however, arethese letters from corroborating the genuineness of Pope Adrian'sBull, that they furnish an unanswerable argument for whollysetting it aside as groundless and unauthentic. They are entirelydevoted to the circumstances of the invasion of our island and itsresults, and yet the only title that they recognise in Henry is " thatmonarch's power and the submission of the Irish chieftains." Theysimply ignore any Bull of Adrian, and any investiture from theHoly See.There is, however, we are told another Bull of Alexander III.,preserved by Giraldus Cambrensis, which is supposed to have beengranted at the request of King Henry in 11 72, confirmatory of thegift and investiture made by Pope Adrian ; and Mr. O'Callaghanholds that this Bull of Alexander HI. sets at rest for ever all doubtas to the genuineness of the grant made by Adrian IV.iThe question at once suggests itself :— Is this Bull of AlexanderIf its ownIII. to be itself admitted as genuine and authentic ?authority be doubtful, surely it cannot suffice to prop up the totter-Now, its style is entirely different froming cause of Adrian's Bull.that of the three authentic letters of which we have just spoken.Quite in opposition to these authentic letters, " the only authorityalleged in it for Ilenrji-'s right to Ireland is the Bull of Adrian,"as Dr. Lanigan allows.2 The genuine letters are dated from Tus-culum, where, as we know from other sources, Alexander actuallyresidecl in 11 72. On the other hand, this confirmator}' Bull, though^ Maca-rlce Excidiittn-, p. 247,Eccles Hist, iv., 224.182DOCUMENTS.supposed to have been obtained in 1172, is dated from Rome, thusSuch was the dis-clearly betraying the hand o£ the impostor.turbed condition ot Rome at that period that it was impossiblefor iriis Holiness to reside there ; and hence we find hirn sometimesholding his Court in Tusculum, at other times in Segni, Anagni,It was only when these disturbances were quelledor Ferrara.that Alexander III. was able, in 1178, to return in triumph to hiscapital.'But there is still another reason why we must doubt of theauthority of this confirmatory Bull. The researches of Rev. Mr.Dimock have proved what Ussher long ago remarked, that theBull of Alexander originally formed part of the work of GiraldusCambrensis,^ although later copyists, and the first editors, includ-ing the learned Camden, recognising its spuriousness, excluded itfrom Giraldus's text. The matter is now set at rest, for the ancientMSS. clearly prove that it originally formed part of the ExpugnatioThanks, however, to the zeal and industry of Mr.Hibernica.Brewer, we are at present acquainted with another work of Giraldus,written at a later period than his Historical Tracts on Ireland.It is entitled De Pyincipis I ns'trucHone , and was edited in 1846for the Anglia Christiana Society. Now in this treatise Giraldushimself refers to the Bull of Alexander III., of which we treat,: " Somebut he prefaces it with the following remarkable words 'assert or imagine that this Bull was obtained from the Pope ; but" Sicut aothers deny that it was ever obtained from the Pontiff.''quibusdam impetratum asseritur aiit confingitur ; ab aliis autemunquam impetratum fuisse negatur."Surely these words shouldsuffice to convince the most sceptical that contemporary writersquestioned the authenticitv of this confirmatory Bull of AlexanderIII.4. As regards the Synod of Waterford in 1175, and the state-ment that the Bulls of Adrian and Alexander were publishedtherein for the first time, all these matters rest on the very doubt-ful authority of Giraldus Cambrensis. We have no record in theIrish Annals that any general meeting of the Irish Bishops was11 75. The circumstances of the countryheld in Waterford inrendered such a Synod impossible ; for war and dissensions ragedIt was in thatthroughout the length and breadth of the land.year, however, that the first Bishop was appointed by King Henryto the See of Waterford, as Ware informs us; and, perhaps, weshould not err were we to suppose that the Synod so pompouslyset forth by Giraldus was a convention of the A-nglo-Normanclergy of Waterford under their newly-appointed Prelate, all ofwhom would, no doubt, joyfully accept the official documentspresented in the name of the King by Nicholas of Wallingford.Leland supposes that this Synod of Waterford was not heldtill 1177. The disturbed state of the kingdom, however, rendereda Synod equally impossible in that year, and all our ancient autho-rities utterly ignore such a Synod.Mozzoni, Tavole Cronologiche. Rome, 18^7, ad an, 1179,'^ Opcya Giraldi vol. v., p. 3r8.De Frincip. Ittstruct,, p. 53.DOCUMENTS.1835. In the Remonstrance addressed by the Irish princes andpeople to John XXII., about the year 1315, repeated mention ismade of the Bull of Adrian.Bnt then it is only cited there as aconclusive argument ad hominem against the English traducers" lest the bitter and venomous calumnies ofof the Irish nation :the English, and their unjust and unfounded attacks upon us andall who support our rights, may in an5r degree influence the mindof your Holiness."The Bull of Adrian IV. was published by theEnglish, and set forth by them as the charter-deed of their rule inIreland, yet they violated in a most flagrant manner all the con-The Irish princes and people in self-ditions of that Papal grant.defence had now made o\';r the sovereignty of the island to EdwardBruce, brother of the Scottish King ; they style him their adoptedmonarch, and they pray the Pope to give a formal sanction to theirThus, throughout the whole Remonstrance the Bullproceedings.of Adrian is used as a telling argument against the injustice of theinvaders, and as a precedent which John XXII. might justlyfollow in sanctioning the transfer of the Irish crown to EdwardIf it was lawful for Adrian IV. to grant the kingdom toBruce.Henry II. under certain conditions, the King of England shouldnot complain if another Pontiff were to transfer such a grant tothe Prince of Ireland's choice, the conditions of the former pre-tended grant not having been fuliilled.But in all this the his-torian will find no grounds for asserting the genuineness of thesupposed Bulls of Adrian or Alexander. We shall just now seethat at this very time the Irish people generally regarded theseBulls as spurious and mere inventions of their English enemies.6. Baronius, the eminent ecclesiastical historian, inserts in hisinvaluable Annats the Bull of Adrian IV., " from a Vatican Manu-This is the sixth argument advanced by Mr. O'Callaghau.script."It is not my intention to question in any way the servicesrendered by Cardinal Baronius to the cause of our Church History ;but at the same tims no one will deny that considerable progresshas been made in historical research during the past three hundredand fifty years, and many documents are now set aside whichwere then accepted as unquestioned on the supposed reliableauthority of preceding chroniclers.In the present instance we are not left in doubt as to the sourcewhence Baronius derived his information regarding Adrian's sup-During my stay in Rome I took occasion to inquireposed Bull.whether the MSS. of the eminent annalist, which are happilypreserved, indicated the special " Vatican Manuscript " referred toin his printed text, and I was informed by the then learned archivistof the Vatican, Monsignor Theiner, that the Codex Vaticaiiusreferred to is a MS. copy of the history of Matthew Paris, which isis the testimony ofpreserved in the Vatican Library.Matthew Paris alone that here confronts us in the pages of Baronius,and no new argument can be taken from tlic words of the eminentRelying on the same high authority, I am happy to stateannalist.that nowhere in the private archives or among the private papersof the Vatican, or in the Regesta, which Jaffe's researches have madeso famous, or in the various indices of the Pontifical Letters, canThus it184DOCUMENTS.a single trace be found of the supposed Bulls of Adrian IV. andAlexander III.7. The last argument advanced by Mr. O'.Callaghan will not detainus long. The insertion or omission of such ancient records in theBiillarium is a matter that depends wholly on the critical skill ofCurious enough, in one edition of the BuUarium, asthe editor.may be seen in the references of Dr. Lanigan, Adrian's Bull isinserted, while no mention is made of that of Alexander ; in anotheredition, however, the Bull of Alexander is given in full, whilst theBull of Adrian is omitted. We may well leave our opponents tosettle this matter with the conflicting editors of the BuUarium.They, probably like Baronius, merely copied the Bull of Adrianfrom Matthew Paris, and erred in doing so.LabbS, in hismagnificent edition of the Councils, also publishes Adrian's Bull,but then he expressly tells us that it is copied from the work ofMatthew Paris.We have thus examined in detail the various arguments whichsupport the genuineness of the supposed Bull, and now it onlyremains for us to conclude that there are no sufficient groundsfor accepting that document as the genuine work of Pope Adrian.Indeed the Irish nation at all times, as if instinctively, shrankfrom accepting it as genuine, and unhesitatingly pronounced it anAnglo-Norman forgery. We have already seen how even GiraldusCambrensis refers to the doubts which had arisen concerning theBull of Pope Alexander ; but we have at hand still more conclusiveevidence that Adrian's Bull was rejected by the Irish people.There is, happily, preserved in the Barbcrini archives, Rome, aMS. of the fourteenth century, containing a series of official papersconnected with the Pontificate of John XXII., and amongst themis a letter from the Lord Justiciary and the Royal Council ofIreland, forwarded to Rome under the Royal Seal, and presentedto His Holiness by William of Nottingham, Canon and Precentor'of St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, about the year 1325.In thisimportant, but hitherto unnoticed document, the Irish are accusedof very many crimes, among which is insidiously introduced therejection of the supposed Bulls : " Moreover, they assert that theRing of England under false pretences and hy false Bulls obtainedthe dominion of Ireland, and this opinion is commonly held by them."" Asserentes etiam Dominum Regem Angliae ex falsa suggestioneet ex falsis BuUis terram Iliberniae in dominium impetrasse acThis national tradition was pre-communiter hoc teneutes."served unbroken throughout the turmoil of the fifteenth andsixteenth centuries, and on the revival of Ireland's historical litera-ture in the beginning of the seventeenth century, was registeredin the pages of Lynch, Stephen White, and other writers.It will be well also whilst forming our judgment regarding this sup-posed Bull of Adrian, to hold in mind the disturbed state of society,especially in Italy, at the time to which it refers.At the presentday it would be 110 easy matter indeed for such a forgery to sur-vive more than a few weeks.But at the close ofthe twelfthOwing to the constant revolutionscentury it was far otherwise.^Cotton, in Fasti Ecc. Hid. gives his name as Prerentbr in 1323 to I337,DOCUMENTS.—l85and disturbances that then prevailed, tlic Pontiff was oftentimesobliged to flee from city to city ; frequently his papers were seizedand burned, and he hiinseU detained as a hostage or a prisonerby his enemies.Hence it is that several forged Bulls, examplesof which are given in Cambrensis Everfits, date from these times.More than one of the grants made to the Norman families are nowbelieved to rest on such forgeries ; and that the Anglo-Normanad^'enturers in Ireland were not strangers to such deeds of dark-ness appears from the fact that a matrix for forging the PapalSeal of such Bulls, now preserved in the Royal Irish Academy,was found a few years ago in the ruins of one of the earliest Anglo-Norman monasteries founded by De Courcy.The circumstances of the publication of the Bull by HenryOur opponentswere surely not calculated to disarm suspicion.do not pretend even that it was made known in Ireland till theyear 1175, and hence, though publicly granted with solemn investi-ture, as John of Salisbury's testimony would imply, and thoughits record was deposited in the public archives of the kingdom,this Bull, so vital to the interests of the Irish Church, should haveremained dormant for twenty years, unnoticed in Rome, unnoticedby Henry's courtiers, still more, unnoticed by the Irish Bishops,and I will add, unnoticed by the Continental Sovereigns, so jealousForof the power and preponderance of the English monarch.such suppositions there is indeed no parallel in the whole historyof investitures.It is seldom, too, that the hand of the impostor may not be'detected in some at least of the minor details of the spurious docu-In the present instance more than one ancient MS. pre-ment.serves the concluding formula of the Bull : " Datum Romae "Now, this simple formula would suffice of itselfdated from Rome.Before the news of theto prove the whole Bull to be a forgery.election of Pope Adrian to the Chair of St. Peter could reach England,that Pontiff was obliged to seek for safety in ilight from his capital.Rome was in revolt, and Arnold of Brescia sought to renew thereJohn of SaUsbury, in hisa spectre of the old Pagan Republic.Pnlycralicus, faithfully attests that on his arrival in Italy, the PapalCourt was held not in Rome, but in Beneventum ; it was in thiscity he presented to Pope Adrian the congratulations of Henry II.,and he mentions his sojourn there during the three months that heThis is further confirmed by the Italian chron-remained in Italy.Baronius saw the inconsistency of tne formula. Datumicles.Romae, with the date 1155, and hence", in his annals, he enteredAdrian's Bull under the year 11 59; but if this date be correct,surely then that Bull could not have been brought to Henry byJohn of Salisbury, and the passage of the Melalogicus referring toOther historians haveit must at once" be admitted a forgery.Forbeen equally puzzled to find a year for this supposed Bull.instance, O'Halloran, in his History of Ireland, whilst admittingthat the Irish people .always regarded the Bull as a forgery, refersits date to the year 1167, that is, eight years after the death ofPope Adrian TV.There is one other reflection which forces itself on us whenreading Adrian's S'upposed Bull. The condition of Ireland, andl86DOCUMENTS.the relations between Ireland and the English King, which are setforth in the supposed Bull, are precisolj' those of the year 1172 ;but it would have required more than a prophetic vision to haveIn 11 55 Ireland was not in a state ofanticipated them in 11 55.turmoil, or verging towards barbarism ; on the contrary, it wasrapidly progrtssing, and renewing its claim to religious and moralI will add, that Pope Adrian, who had studiedpre-eminence.under Marianus, an Irish master, kenw well this iiourishing con-In 1172, however, a sad change had comedition of Ireland.Four years of continual warfare, and the ravagesover the island.of the Anglo-Norman filibusters, since their first landing in 116.S,Ireland to a state of barbarism, and thehad well nigh reducedauthentic letters of Alexander III, in 1172, faithfully describeits most deplorable condition.Moreover, an expedition of Henry to Ireland, which wouldnot be an invasion, and yet would merit the homage of the IrishBut owing to theprinces, was simply an impossibility in 1155.special circumstances of the kingdoin, such in reality was the ex-pedition of Henry in 1 1 72. He set out for Ireland not avowedlyto invade and conquer it, but to curb the insolence and to punishthe deeds of pillage of his own Norman freebooters.Hence duringhis stay in Ireland he fought no battle and made no conquest ; hisfirst measures of severity were directed against some of the mostlawless of the early Norman adventurers, and this more thanany thing else reconciled the native princes to his military display.In return he received from a majority of the Irish chieftains theempty title of Ard-righ, or " Head Sovereign," which did notsuppose any conquest on his part, and did not involve any sur-render of their own hereditary rights.Such a state of thingscould not have been imagined in ii5t ; and yet it is one which isimplied in the spurious Bull of the much maligned Pontiff, Adrianthe Fourth.Since the publication of the above essay ifl November, 1872,several interesting papers have appeared treating of the subjectin the fullest detail, some rejecting the Bull as a mere forgery,others presenting it as genuine and authentic.Among the most determined opponents of the Bull I maymention the French writer. Rev. Louis Chaillot, in the AnalectaJuris Pontificii (Rome, May and June, i?82) ; Father Gasquet,O.S.B., in the Dublin Review (July, 1883) ; Stephen T. M'Cormick,in The Pope and Ireland (San Francisco, 1889) ; Canon Bellesheim,of Aix-la-Chapelle, in The History of the Catholic Church in Ireland(German edition, 1890) ; and Father W. B. Morris, of the LondonOratory, in his interesting work, Ireland and St. Patrick (1891).The genuineness of the Bull has been, on the other hand, stoutlj'maintained by the Rev. Sylvester Malone, in the Dtd)lin Review(April, 1884) ; by j\Iiss Norgate, in the English Historical Review(January, 1S93) ; and by Alfred Tarleton, in his Life of NikolasBreakspeare (London, 1896).Looking back upon the whole discussion, it appears to me thathe arguments as set forth in my former essay remain unshaken.bOCUMENTS.187Add to this that considerable light has been thrown on the circum-stances of the times and other details which brin^ those argumentsinto bolder relief, and thus it becomes more and more evident thatthe supposed Bull was a mere clumsy forgery of the English monarchI shall endeavour to compendiate in a few para-or his courtiers.graphs the additional information which has been gleaned regard-ing this subject during the past twenty-five years.of government.(a) It is now very generally admitted that during the turmoilof the twelfth century, when there was question of local or personalinterests, ambitious men did not shrink from the crime of forgery.The disturbed condition of Italy, and in particular of Rome, lentspecial facilities for falsifying the Papal documents, and made theRepeatedly thedetection of forgery proportionately difficult.Popes were compelled to flee from Rome, whilst Arnoldo of Bresciaor his disciples assumed the reinsProfessor" It is well known from history that everywhereJungman writes :towards the close of the twelth century forged or corrupted PapalLetters or Diplomas were not uncommon. That such was thecase in England is susceptible of proof from the Letters of Johnof Salisbury and of others.Richard, Archbishop of Canterbury,successor of St. Thomas a Beckett, instructed all the Bishops ofEngland to promulgate in all their churches the severe sentence ofexcommunication against the public pest of forgery, so commonhad this crime become in the twelfth century.In the time ofPope InnocentIII. also, various statutes were enacted againsithis abominable crime, which was becoming daily more widespre-idJohn of Salisbury's testimony sets this matterand dangerous."beyond all doubt. He expressly attests that the forger had beenbusy with the Letters of Pope Alexander III., and writing to that" Nobis si placet rescribite qua ani-Pontifi (Epis. 129), he asks :vestrarum."madversioneliterarumcorruptoresGervase, in his chronicle, at the year 1181, makes reference to" several rare and suspicious documents," which were producedabout this time.ferendisuntThe question may now be asked, "was Henry's character such asto free himself and his courtiers from all suspicion of having recourseThe career of butto such forgeries, the better to attain his ends ?few of the kings of England has been sketched for us in darkercolours than that of Henry II. And the account comes to usnot from later writers, but from contemporaries best acciuaintedSt. Thomas of Canterburywith his perverseness and duplicity.did not hesitate to write that " from the first day of his accessionto power, he has stretched out his hand against the liberties of theChurch, as if they were his own hereditary right."CardinalVivian, Papal Legate in England and Ireland, speaking of the King,said, " Never did I witness this man's equal in lying."Louis ofFrance declared to Henry's ambassadors that " their njasterwasso full of fraud and deceit that it was impossible to keep faith withhim " (Lingard, Hist, of Eng., ii., p. 106, n.).This prepares us forthe entry in the very accurate continuation of the Chronicle of" Henry, King of England, puffedSigebert, under the year 1171 :up with pride, and usurping things not conceded, striving for thingshe had no business to do, prepared ships and called together thej88UOCUMfiNTS.soldiers of his kingdom to conquer Ireland " (Migne, Patrol., cix.,307). The supposed Bull of Adrian would have been of no littlevalue to Henry in his dealings with the Irish Bishops soon afterIt gave some colour of justice to the course whichthe invasion.he pursued, and afforded a plausible pretext to the courtiers toquell the opposition of those who on religious grounds might beunwilling to accept Henry's rule in Ireland.(b) Father Morris of the London Oratory, in his interestingwork, Ireland and St. Patrick (1S91), dwells at considerable lengthon the unenviable character of the English King, which indeed isnow unquestioned among the students of history, and he drawsthence the conclusion that it is quite inconsistent with the wholecareer of Pope Adrian to suppose that such a Pontiff would assignto such a king the guardianship of the rights and liberties of theIn reply to Father Morris's line of argument. MissIrish Church.Norgate triumphantly appeals to the high opinion entertainedby the English people of the character of their young AngevinKing in the bright morning of his reign, the English Chronicleattesting that " all folk loved him, for he did good justice andmade peace."This however, is not a sufficient reply to the argu-It is quite true that in the first monthsment of Father Morris.of his reign in 11 54, he left nothing undone to ingratiate himselfwith the English people, and hence he was for a time idolized bythem, but this did not prevent him from ambitioning at the veryoutset of his reign to grasp the rich domains of the Church andto crush her liberties, and from the letters of the Archbishop ofCanterbury it is more than probable that those designs of Henrywere well known at the Roman Court in the very first days ofAdrian's Pontificate. The contemporary, Roger of Pontigny,under the year 1154, says that, when Henry succeeded to his an-cestral kingdom, a great thirst for novelties arose in England.And no slight fear took hold of the Church of that country, as wellbecause of the suspicious age of the king, as from the notoriousmalignity of his family in their dealings with the rights of eccles-William of Canterbury writes in the same style,iastical liberty."and describes this " malice of the king's designs " at the veryoutset of his reign, as well as the boldness of his ministers in " con-spiring to strip the Church of her possessions."(c) As the matter at present stands Giraldus Cambrensis isthe sole witness on whose testimony we have to rely, whilst weIt is now admittedaccept as genuine the Bull of Pope Adrian.that Matthew Paris and other chroniclers merely copied the Bullfrom his pages. The question, therefore, may be asked : Is Giraldusa writer to whose testimony implicit credence can be given, par-ticularly in matters relating to Irish history, or, on the other hand,may it be supposed that without much investigation or minuteinquiry he accepted on the word of Henry's^courtiers the supposedBull as authentic and genuine ? The sketch of the character ofGiraldus in the pruceding essay will enable the reader to form anaccurate opinion as to the answer which should be given to suchThe writer in the English Historical Review, on thea question.other hand, contends that the testimony of Giraldus is unim-peachable, and criticises with noilittle severity the statement ofnOCUMTiNTR.t8qFather Morris, that Giraldus should be regarded as "the venalcourt historian of Henry II."In proof of her contention Miss Norgate appeals to the unbend-ing opposition of the King at the time when Giraldus apphed forprornotion to some rich benefices in Wales, and to the bitter enmityof Giraldus, as shown in many of his writings, towards Henry.However, tlie old ma-^cim, distingue tcmpora ct conciliahis jura,may here be very well applied.In the earlier years of Giraldus'scareer, when promotion to rich benefices in his native Wales wasrefused him, he wrote in a spirit of bitterest hostility to the King.And again towards the close of his life, when he sought to be pro-moted to the See of St. David's, and ambitioned other high Churchpreferment, the old bitterness of hostility to the royal court wasBut at the period to which Giraldus's writings on Irelandrevived.must be referred, all this was changed. No one was more readythan he to alter liis views according to the measure of royal patron-age extended to him. At the time of which we treat Giraldusenjoyed the favour of Henry, and repaid with abject flattery thepatronage of the King.In the Dictionary of National Biography,now in the course of publication, we read : "In 1184 Giraldus wasmade one of Henry II. 's chaplains, and was sent by the King toaccompany his son John in his expedition to Ireland. He wasoffered whilst in Ireland the bishopricks of Wexford and Leighlin,and apparently at a little later time, the bishoprick of Ossoryand the archbishoprick of Cashel, but declined them all.It is tothis journey we owe the treatise Topographia Hibernica, dedicatedto Henry ll., which appeared in 1188.It gives an account of thegeneral features of the country, its productions, climate,&c.,mixed up with many marvellous stories. The E.rpitgnatio Hibernica,which probably appeared the same year, dedicated to Richard(Strongbow), though containing much that is interesting andvaluable, can scarcely be considered as sober, truthful history."(Vol. xxi., 390). The lack of critical acumen is seen in all Giraldus'sThe history and antiquities of Wales were the favouritewritings.Nevertheless, of his chief work, De Juresubjects of his studies.Menevensis Ecclesiae, Mr. Brewer remarks that it exhibits " astrange mixture of antiquarian research with a total absence of allTopographia tohistoricalHenry can hardly find words sufficient for the king's eulogy. Hestyles him the " Alexander of the West," the " Invincible," the" Solomon of his age," " the most pious of princes."Of Giraldus'ssuffice. Heslanderous attacks on Ireland one specimen willdeliberately sets forth that from the days of St. Patrick the Bishopsof Ireland, without a solitary exception, had utterly neglectedThe Anglican editor of his works. Rev. Mr.their sacred duties." Giraldus was replete with the exactDimock, remarks on this :qualities the very reverse of what was needed to form an accuratehistorian. He asserts that from the time of St. Patrick therehad never been a single Irish bishop who had manfully striven toinstruct and correct the people, and this he asserts, though St.Malachy's fame could not possibly be unknown to him.St.Malachy had been dead only about forty years ; and few, if any,more earnest and laborious instructors and reformers can perhapsGiraldus dedicating hiscriticism."igODOCUMENTS.be named, among the bishops of all Christendoiu of all times, andhe had contemporaries and followers not unworthy of him. Andthis, too, he asserts of the Isle of Saints, for ages after Patrick'stime the great nursery of missionary Bishops, Apostles of thefaith, throughout the wide district of the Continent of Europe,where the name of many an Irish saint and martyr is still held inreverence ; to whom also was due the conversion of Scotland andof a large part of Saxon England." Dimock might have addedthat at the very time of the English invasion St. Laurence O'Toolewas Archbishop of Dublin, whilst St. Gelasius ruled in Armagh,The learned Ware wasand St. Christian was Bishop of Lismore.in many ways prejudiced against Ireland ; nevertheless, in hisAntiquities of Ireland (ch. xxiii.) he does not hesitate to write :" I cannot but express my surprise how men nowadays, other-wise grave and learned, have obtruded on the world the fictionsof Giraldus for truths." '(d) In the preceding essay it is mentioned incidentally thatAdrian's Bull was not allowed a place in Jaffe's Regesta..Since thepublication of that essay a new edition of the Rp.gesta has appearedin Germany, with the addition of Adrian's Bull.Interrogated onthis matter, the editors have replied that this addition was madeon the authority of a newly discovered manuscript exemplar ofThrough the kindness of a verythe Bull in the Vatican archives.distinguished friend further inquiries were made at the Vatican,which elicited from Very Rev. Father Denifle, the present illus-trious Vatican archivist, an attestation to the effect that whenthe papers formerly preserved in the Castle of San Angelo wereexamined a few years ago, a copy of the famous Bull was found ;it was nothing more, however, than a transcript made in the four-teenth century, and was manifestly copiedfrom the work ofMatthew Paris.Such an addition, therefore, adds no evidencein favour of the authenticity of Adrian's Bull.[e) In the lithographed edition of the Leabhar Breac (fifteenthcentury MS.), published by Royal Irish Academy, Adrian's Bullappears, as if it had originally formed part of that valuable collec-tion of early records, and the reader would be led to suppose thatits text was written by the same hand as the remainder of theMS.In the original MS., however, it is seen to be written byquite a different and more recent hand, on a vacant column, betweentwo old Celtic tracts of the original compilation. When I collatedthe text, in the original venerable MS. in Trinity College, Dublin,Library, many years ago, the letters Gir, though partly effaced,were still legible at the loot of Adrian's Bull.This, I need scarcelyremark, indicated Giraldus as the source whence the Bull had beenderived.(/) Some modern Protestant scribes in Ireland, following in thesteps of Rev. Robert King (in Primer of the Church History ofIreland), have appealed to another passage in Leabhar Breac, in1 In regard to John of Salisbury, it may be remarked tliat after the death of PopeNevertheless, in his many subsequentAdrian he fell into disgrace at Henry's Court,letters setting forth his merits, and defending? himself ajraiiist the displeasure of theKing, he never thought of pleading the service he had rendered in obtaining the gift ofIreland-DOCUMENTS.191proof that Adrian IV. sold Ireland to 'the English King. The pas-sage referred to is as follows : " O'Annoc and O'Chalchin, of Kilmore,O'Sluaisi of Cooloslushty,' and O'Glesain : these were they whostole the horses, and the mules, and the asses of the Cardinal whocame from Rome to the Land of Erin to instruct in the timeof Domhnall More O'Brien, King of Munster ; and it was on thataccount the successor of Peter sold the rent and right of Erin tothe Saxons : and that is the right and title which the Saxons holdon the Gaedhil at this day ; for it was to the successor of Peter,to Rome, used to go the rent and tribute of Erin till then."This, however, is nothing more than a gossiping sentence, intro-duced by the scribe, having no historical weight, and having noconnection whatever with the ancient tracts copied into the LeabharCardinal Vivian was the first Cardinal who visited IrelandBre.ac.during the reign of the famous Domnhall More O'Brien (whose deathCardinal Vivian, however, did not visitis recorded inIreland till the year 1177, when the invasion of Ireland was anaccomplished fact, and when more than twenty years had elapsedsince the supposed grant of the kingdom was made by Adrian'sDomhnall More O'Brien did not succeed to the throne tillBull.long after the death of Pope Adrian IV.1194).William of Newbury further relates :(g) It is not easy, however, to reconcile the course pursued inIreland by Cardinal Vivian, Legate of Pope Alexander III., withthe supposition that that Pontiff and his predecessor, Adrian,had by solemn Bull assigned the lordship of Ireland to King HenrvII. He arrived in Ireland, as I have said, in 1177, and Roger deHoveden tells of the King's rage because he knew him to ^behostile to him. The chronicler adds that De Courcy made him" Johnprisoner in Ulster.De Courcy, having collected a powerful body of knights and footsoldiers, determined to invade Ulster, that province of Irelandwhich is separated from Scotland by a narrow strait.It happenedthat Vivian, the Legate of the Holy See, a man remarkable for hiseloquence, had just then arrived in these parts from Scotland.He had been honourably received by the King of Ulster and theBishops of the Province, and at the time was residing in the cityof Down, near the sea. When the news arrived of the approachof the enemy, the Irish consulted the Legate on the course to bepursued in this emergency ; he answered that it was their dutj'to fight for their fatherland and their liberty, at the same timeThus encouraged,offering up public prayers for their successthey sallied forth impetuously " (Gcsta Angl., iii., 9). How differentis this narrative from the account of Vivian's proceedings given in" Vivian, Cardinal of the titlethe Anglo-Irish Annals by Dowling :of St. Stephen in Monte Caelio, came into Ireland as Legate of theApostolic See, with a commission from Pope Alexander to pro-claim to the people the title and interests of their Lord the Kingof England in the Island of Ireland, with reservation of Peter'sPence, and also to denounce as excommunicated and accursed allthat would) resist the soldiers and agents of their lord the Kipg,or that would refuse to supply them with victuals and food at aIt is manifest that the same evil genius that die-reasonable price."ig2nOCIIMENTS.—tated the spurious Bull inspired also this Anglo-Norman record ofCardinal Vivian's mission.(h) We may now advance a step further to search out someat least of the materials made use of by the King or courtier whoconcocted the pretended Bull of Pope Adrian.There is a genuine Brief ot the Pontiff, addressed to King LouisVII. of France, and dated the I2th of the Kalends of May, 1159.It has been published by Duchesne, Remm Franc. Scriptores ;Bouquet, Recueil des Historiens ; Bongar's Gesta Dei per Francos ;Migne, Patrologia, vol. 188, and other writers.Towards the close of the year 11 58, the Bishop of Evreux, inNormand}', was dispatched to Rome by the French King to solicitthe Pontiff's sanction for a joint expedition of French and Englishtroops into the Spanish territory, to restore religion in those parts,and to free the faithful there from their worse than pagan oppressors.The Bishop of Evreux was born in England, and had been mainlyinstrumental- in effecting, at this very period the reconciliation ofthe English and French monarchs, who in 11 58, in token of theirfriendship, made a joint pilgrimage to the sanctuary of MountSt. Michael's, in Normandy. The friend of both monarchs, he re-presented both in his embassy to Rome, and pledged the heartyco-operation of Henry's army in the military crusade on whichKing Louis had set his heart. The Pontiff, however, refused his1 59, whilst commending the motivessanction, and in the Brief of 1which swayed the French monarch in devising this expedition,sets forth in detail the reasons why he felt constrained to refusehis sanction to it. From the nature of this correspondence theBrief referred to must have been unknown to the public at theperiod to which we refer, but on the other hand it must have beenin due course communicated to the English King and his courtiers.Now the preamble of this Brief supplied abundant material for theforger for embodying in his Bull the Pontiff's ideas. We will herepresent in parallel columns a few phrases from both documents :FORGED BULL.etetsatisterris,Laudabiliterfruc-tuose de glorioso nomine propa-gando inaeternaefelicitatis praemio cumulando incoelis, tua inagnificentia cogitatdum ad dilatandos Ecclesiae ter-. sicut Catho-minos, &c., &c. .et adlicus princeps intendis,id convenientius exequendumconsilium Apostolicae Sedis ex-igis et favorem ... ad bonumexitum et finem solent attingerequae de ardore fidei et religionisamore principiumhabuerunt,&c..AUTHENTIC BRIEF OF I 1 59.Satis laudabiliter et fructuoseChristiano nomine propa-degando in terris, et aeternae beati-tudinis praemio tibi cumulandoin coelis, tua videtur magnifi-centia cogitare, dum ad dilatan-dos terminos populi Christiani,&c. ... inproperareintendis, &c., atque ad id con-venientius exequendum, matristuae sacrosanctae Romanae Ec-clesiae consilium exigis et favo-rem, &c., ac de majori ardofefidei et religionis amore propo-si turn et desiderium tuum prin-cipium habuerunt, &c.H.Now, one thing at least ia imqucstionable in the matter of theDOCUMENTS.193the Brief ofPontifical Briefs, that the writers were masters of the Latin tongue,and most felicitous in varying the form of expression even whenthe same ideas had to be conveyed ; and at no time was the Latinstyle of the Papal correspondence more classic or more jealouslyattended to than at the very period to which these Briefs refer.If we suppose that Adrian's Bull of the year ::55 be genuine, weshall have to admit in11.19, such a copyingof formulas and phrases as is without parallel in the authenticregisters of the Papal Letters. And the anomaly becomes the greaterwhen we consider that this copying of former documents would befound in a Brief addressed to the most powerful sovereign inEurope when treating of a matter of the greatest delicacy andimportance, and conjointly with him to the very king to whomthe former Biill had been addressed.As it is impossible to supposethat the Pontifical Secretary, in drawing up such a royal Brief of1 1 59, would hsve copied from a royal Bull of 1 1 5 5 ; and as the Brief1 59 is unquestionably genuine it follows that the Bull of 11 55of 1must be set aside as spurious and of no authority.'(j) In tlje essay publishedtwenty-five years ago I gave oneinstance in connection with Pope Adrian's Bull to illustrate thecharacter of the " Lectures on Irish History," delivered by theI may be allowedProtestant professors in Ireland in those days.to cite another instance from a more recent work, in proof thatthe old methods of falsifying history still rule supreme in the Pro-In i88q, Rev. Dr. Stokes, Professortesta.nt University of Ireland.of Ecclesiastical History in Trinity College, Dublin, published avolume of his lectures on " Ireland and the Anglo-Norman Church."The second lecture is devoted to Giraldus Canibrensis and the Bullof Adrian IV. He eulogises Giraldus as quite a model historian,and it is quite apparent that Dr. Stokes in his lectures, whilstdecrying everything connected with the Catholic Church in Ireland,Ashas taken Giraldus for his guide, philosopher, and friend.regards the Bull of Pope Adrian, he assures his readers that the onlyargument advanced against it is " that no copy of the Bull has beenfound, or now exists in the Vatican archives." He exults in de-molishing this visionary argument, which, however, none but him-I need scarcely remark that even the negativeself has built up.argument for rejecting the supposed Bull is far different from thatTt is simply this : No Pontifical Bull orsuggested by Dr. Stokes.Brief can be accepted unless it be presented by some crediblewitness, whose authority may be sufficient to attest its genuineness.Now we have no such witness for Adrian's Bull.Here, however.Dr. Stokes declares the testimony of Gh-aldus in regard to Adrian's" Giraldus had abundant means toBull to be quite irrefragable :satisfy himself (he says) as to the authenticity of the document.He lived for years at Rome, he had continual access to the Papal. Giraldus had noRegisters, which he carefully investigated. ..' I do not deem it necessary to make special reference to ttie ingenious theory devisedby Chaillot, to tlie effect that the Pontifical Brief of 1159 had reference not to SpainThe only apparent argument in favour of this theory is that in thebut to Irelandproper names HiOernia and Ilispania, the initial capital letter is th e s.ame. Few, how-ever, Tvill be convinced by such an argument, the more so as the whole context of theBrief has manifest reference to the condition of Spain ia those days.194DOCUMENTS.conceivable motive for forging this Bull in favour of a king he hated,and who had mortally injured him." The onlv proof for Giraldus'sacquaintance with the Roman Registers is the Rev. Professor'sIt is not at all necessary to suppose that thevivid imagination.Bull was forged by Giraldus. Any other courtier may be respons-His uncritical frame of mind made itible for that serious crime.particularly easy to impose such frandulent documents on him. Hetells us himself that he made four journeys to Rome, but it wasbetween the years 1199 and 1203.His one ambition in thesejourneys was to obtain the See of St. David's, and the forged Bullshad already been many years published. He presented to theCourt in Rome several of his works which he names, but in thatlist we search in vain for the E.rpusnatio Hibernica, which containedAs regards Giraldus's hatred of the King atthe forged Bulls.the period of which we treat it is a mere dream of Rev. ProfessorI have already given sufficient proof of the abject flatteryStokes.of the English King, which characterises Giraldus's writings onIt may be added that Giraldus dedicated the Topogra-Ireland.phia Hzbeynica to King Henry, and when a second edition wasbrought out after the King's death, he prefixed a letter addressedto John, the Lord of Ireland, in which he declares that his objectin writing those works on Ireland was to sound King Henry'spraises, in laudem regis.(h) It may now be asked was the Church of Ireland at the timeof the accession of Pope Adrian IV. in that desolate condition ofdecay and barbarism wliich is set forth in the supposed Bull. Theone witness to the decay of religion and morality in Ireland in thebeginning of the twelfth century to whom the' champions of theBut thisauthenticity of Adrian's Bull appeal is St. Bernard.same venerable witness attests that, through the exertions of St.Malachy, the weeds of vice had been plucked out and Christiancivilization restored, religious faith had been revived throughoutthe length and breadth of the land, and Christian virtues werepreached, so that at the time of the saint's death in 114S the IrishChurch was arrayed in its pristine splendour.Spealcing of St.Malachy, St. Berriard says that when he visited Pope Eugene III.in Rorne, " the Sovereign Pontiff on many occasions, and withgreat care, made inquiries concerning the state of the Church inhis country, and when he was preparing to depart, authorised himto act for him throughout the whole of Ireland ; and taking themitre from his head, he placed it on that of Malachy, giving himalso the stole and maniple, which he used in offering the HolySt. Bernard adds that Malachy was not slow in carry-Sacrifice."" It is not the receiving of honouring out the wishes of the Pontiff :that engages his attention, but rather the execution of the dutiesIn various places various conven-belonging to his Legateship.tions are held, so that no district, or part of a district, should beleft without the fruits and advantages of his legatine office. Theseed is sown upon all waters ; there is no one able to hide himselfNot sex, not age, notfrom the influence of his anxious care.Among allcondition, not profession enters into his calculations.the health-giving seed is scattered ; among all alike thealikeheavenly trumpet sends forth its note. .. Religion is planted,.DOCUMENTS.I95In the Councils, whichpropagated, cherished in every quarter.are celebrated in all parts of the land, traditions of ancient dateai"e revived ; new ones are also devised. And all appointmentspromulgated by him, like decrees issued from heaven itself, areadopted, enforced, and secured ia written, records, in order toThis, however, is a theme ontheir preservation for posterity."which it is not necessary to dwell at any length.Suffice it to saythat the Bishops of Ireland throughout the period were men accord-ing to St. Malachy's own heart, and enjoyed in the fullest measurethe confidence of the Holy See.In token of perfect order beingrestored in the Irish Church, and of the confidence placed in theIrish Bishops by Rome, Cardinal John Paparo was sent to Ireland1 52, only two years before Pope Adrian's accession, and in thein 1National Synod, held at Kelts, in the presence of the Irish Bishopsand of 300 priests, and of very many of the princes and chieftainsof Erin, he solemnly granted to the four archbishops the BlessedPallium for which St. Malachy had so earnestly pleaded. Fromthe letters of Adrian the Fourth and his immediate successors itIS manifest that the conferring of the Pallium in those days wasregarded as the highest honour and most distinctive proof of sin-gular esteem and favour that the Holy See could confer upon anySuch an estimate of the Irish Church in RomeNational Church.is quite inconsistent with the picture of its deformity which thesupposed Bull of Adrian presents.^ PATRICK F. CARD. MORAN.No. 2.LETTER OF POPE ADRIAN IV. TO KING LOUIS VII.,DISSUADING HIM FROM THE IRISH EXPEDITION.Adrianus episcouus, servus servorum Dei, charissimo in Christofilio Ludovico illustri Francorum Regi, salutem et apostohcambenedictionem.Satis laudabiliter et tructuose de Christiano nomine propagandoin terris, et aeternae beatitudinis prasmio tibi cumulando in ccelis,tua videtur magnificentia cogitare, dum ad dilatandos terminospopuli Christiani, ad paganorum barbariem debellandam, et adgentes apostatrices, et quae catholica; fidei refugiunt nee recipiuntveritatem, christianorum jugo et ditioni subdendas, simul cumcharissimo filio nostro Henrico illustri Anglorum rege, in H: pro-perare disponis, et studes assidue (ut opus hoc telicem exitumsortiatur) exercituni et quae sunt itineri necessaria congregare.Atque ad id convenientius exsequendum, matris tu:e sacrosancta;Romanae Ecclesia» consihum exigis et favorem. Quod quidempropositum tanto magis gratum acceptumque tenemus, et ampliussicut commendandum est commendamus, quanto de sincerioricharitatis radice talem intentionem et votum tam laudabile proces-196DOCUMENtS.sisse credimus, ac de majori ardore fidei et religionis amore pro-positum et desiderium tuum principium acceperunt.Verurn cum excellentia tiia et consilii maturitate sit provida, etluce illustrata, in ordine ipsius facti videtur plurimum esse festina.Unde et multos attonitos reddidit, et suspenses, cum omne bonumquod suo tempore et competenti ordine exercet.ur, aeterno Conditoripiacitum habeatur modis omnibus et acceptuni, aliter autein nonQuod utique ut magispotest gratum ejus existere voluntati.appareat, et ut sit quod proponimus paulo amplius maniiestum,aliquid exempli gratia duximus, non inutiliter supponendum.Corpus qnideni Christi conficere, et in ara IJominica ho^tiain immo-late, rectum, imo et salutiierum esse, nemo qui recte sapit ignorat,Casterum si tempore suo et horis immol^tum non luerit consti-tutis, jam illud reservatur ad posnam quod exspectebatur ad gloriam;et qui extra tempus immolat constitutum, inde sibi damnationemsi constituto tempore immolasset, meritumdolebit infligi : unde,sibi gauderet et pr<Emium augmentari.Accedit ad hoc quod alienam terram intrare nee providumvidetur esse, nee tutum, nisi a principibus et a populo terrae priusconsilium requiratur. Tu vero, sicut accepimus, inconsuUa Ec-clesia, et principibus terr^e illius, accedere illuc et festinare disponis,cum hoc deberes nulla ratione tentare, nisi cognita per principesUndeterraj necessitate, et ab eis prius esses exinde requisitus.quia nos honorem et incrementum tuum tota mentis intentionediligimus, et nihil tale te aggredi, nisi rationabili causa exigente,vellemus, sublimitati tuLE pruisentibus litteris suadcmus ut priusnecessitatera terrae per principes illius regni inspicias, ct consideres,et tam illius Ecclesias quam principum et populi voluntatem dili-genter inquiras, et ab eis consi-li-u-ra, sicut decct, accipias. Quofacto, si et necessitatem terra? videris imminere et Ecclesia; consiliumfuerit, ipsi ctiam terrjE principes tua; sublimitatis auxilium postu-laverint, et consilium dederint, juxta postulationem et consultumeorum poteris postea in facto ipso procedere, et laudabile votumtuum, divino comitante pra;sidio, adimplere.Aliter tamen timen-dum esset, nc iter tuum infructuosum existeret, et ne ad desideratumnon posset exitum pcrvcnire.Ipsi vero principes et populus intanto apparatu tuo, si forte non necessitas iiicumberet, gravarentur,et nos ipsi leves in hoc facto possomus multipliciter apparere.Debet enim scrcnitatis tua: celsitudo recolere, et ad memoriamrevocare, qualiter alio tempore, cum tam Conradus bona; memoriaequondam rex Romanorum, quam tu ipse, inconsulto populo terras,Hierosolymitanum iter minus caute aggressi estis, speratum fruc-tum et optatum cornmodum non perceperitis, et quantum Ecclesia;Dei et universo fere populo Christiano detrimcutum exinde pro-Sane quoque Romanae Ecclesia;, quia vobisvenerif et jactura.super hoc consilium prjestiterat et favorern, in ipso facto fuit nonmodicum derogatum ; et omnes adversus ipsam ex niulta indig-natione clamabant, dicentcs, earn auctriceni tantipericuli exstitisse.Cum igitiir ha?c omnia sollicite cogitantibus occurrerent formi-danda. nos admonitionem et exhortationem apostolicam ad popu-lum regni tui, secundum quod venerabilis frater R. Ebroicensisepiscopus nobis ex tua parte proposuit, duximus differendam.Attendentes quoniam quod difiertur ad tempus, peuitus non anfer-DOCUMENTS.197Sed tunc tandem exhortatorias et commonitorias litterastur.in peccatorum remissionem juxta desiderium gloriajtuie, auctoreDomino, transmittemus, cum de consilioet postulatione tarnprincipnm quam populi terrac illius, sicat superius dictum est,volueris iter arripere, et conceptum in animo votuni necessitatistempore, cum forte niodo aliqua necessitas non immineat, dis-crete ac laudabiliter disponeris adimplere.Litteras autein, in quibus regnmn tuuni sui:> beati Petri etnostra protectione susciperemus, his qui regnum ipsum usque adreditum tuum prsesunierent impugnare, iraniet indignationemapostoUcam proponentes, secundum petitionem regite <lignitatiste etiam re-nee ad priesens du.ximus concedendas.ticente, et a nobis nullatenus exigente, pro illius fervore diiectionisquam erga tuam sublimitatem habemus, quidquid honoris et ex-tibi et regno tuo exhibere possemus, prompto animoaltatioiiisSane discretio tua etcuraremus efficere, et operibus adimplere.nostram dissuasionem, quam rationabiliter credimus nosfecisse,provida deliberatione consideret, atque alia per quae ad illud iterEt illud tandemtam festinanter aspiras, inspiciat et atteiidat.tibi consilium super negotio ipso eligas, quod magis de judiciorationis cognoveris eligendum.Nos etiain,De castero, ea qu^e mem^oratus frater noster episcopus ex nostraparte regiae proposuerit dignitati, velut si ab ore uostro procederent,absque uUa hesitatione suscipias, et ipsius verbis, tanquam sicontingeret nos ea proferre, fidem non dubites adhibere.lUenamque injunctam sibi legationem ita prudenter tuit et soUiciteexsecutus, quod omne illud a nobis studio suas probitatis et dis-cretionis obtinuit, quidquid per soUicitam et providam vigilantiamdebuerit quilibet alius obtinere,-_-,Datum Laterani XII Kalen. Martii.(Bongars, Gesta Dei per Francos, p. 1174; Andre Duchesne,iv., p. 557 ; Dom Bouquet,lierum Francicarum Scripto}cs,Recueil des Hisioriens de France, t. 15 ; Migne, Patrolngie, t. 188,col. 161;.)t.No. 3.FROM 