CHAPTER XVIII.EXAMINATION OF THE APOCRYPHAL BULL.Was Henry II. incapable of forging a Bull? Would hehave shrunk back with horror at a crime of falsehood?He feared excommunication very much, it is true.Hisflight into Ireland in 1171 showed the terror with whichthe thunders of the Church had filled him.But in histime, the Bull In coena Domini notthefalsifiers of acts of the Holy See did not incur excommu-nication by the very fact.existing,yetUnder a deceitful exterior, Henry concealed a heartcapable of descending to the vilest artifices, and of sport,ing with his own honour and veracity. No one could be-lieve his assertions or .trust his promises. He justified hishabits of duplicity by the maxim that "it is better to re-pent of words than of facts, to be guilty of falsehood thanto fail in a favourite pursuit."(Lingard.)Giraldus Cambrensis, on the subjectduplicity, says : —" Naturali quadam inconstantia, verbiof theKing'sspontaneus plerumque transgressor.inarctum res devenerat, do dicto malens quam facto poeni-Nam quoties^ It is likely that John of Salisbury was one of the greatest letter-Although more than 320 of his letters are preservedwriters of his day.in the Migne collection, they are said to be only a few. The Rev. W.B. Morris, of the Oratory, London, thinking that if Salisbury hadreally obtained a grant of Ireland for Henry II., as related in ChapterXLII, of the Metaiogicus, he roust have alluded to it in some of theseletters, examined them all. He found twenty-seven letters addressedto Pope Adrian IV., eleven to King Henry II., and twenty-three toPope Alexander III—but in none of them a single word about a dona-tion of Ireland, or anything bearing on such a subject.Is it nottherefore morally certain that Salisbury is not the author of ChapterAgain, as Cardinal Moran remarks, Salisbury, after the deathXLII ?of Adrian IV., having fallen into disgrace at Henry's court, wrotemany letters setting forth his merits, and defending himself against thedispleasure of the King, but in none of them did he refer to a signalservice that he had rendered in obtaining a grant of Ireland.Is it notthus evident that he had never rendered any such service, and thatChapter XLII. is a mere forgery ?Trans.——^52POPE ADRIAN IV.,tere, verbumque facilius quam factum irritum habere."(Vol. v., p. 304.)Cardinal Vivian, after a long conversation with theKing-, remarked that he had never seen a man tell lies withsuch a brazen face.(Epist. S. Thorn., 3, 6.)His angfer was that of a madman ; his fury, that of aEst leo, aut leone truculentior, dum vehemen-(Peter of Blois, Epist. 66, 75.)A page having presented a letter to him, the King triedto pull out his eyes, and it was only with wounds that the{Epist. S. Thom., i, 45.)youth escaped.Pride and anger, cunning and duplicity, were the chiefwild beast.tius excandescit.traits in his character.The falsity of the letter attributed to Pope Adrian hasalready been proved by extrinsic arguments, set forth atA document that islength in the preceding chapters.produced only thirty years or so after the date given it,while one had the greatest interest in using it if it existed,necessarily falls to the ground by a presumption so over,whelming against it.It is time to examine the ApocryphalBull in itself—in its intrinsic characteristics.SECTION I.Above all I remark that the document, such as GiraldusCambrensis gives it and most chroniclers repeat it, doesnot express the name of the princeisaddressed : Adrianus episcopus, servus servorum Dei,carissimo in Christo filio illustri Anglorum regi, salutemet apostoUcam benedictionem.to whom itI search in vam for the initial H. at the very least. 2Ought we to suppose that the forger took care not tomention the name because he could not foresee the timewhen somebody would be in a position to utilise the Bull?SECTION 2.The preamble is copied almost word for word from thetrue letter of Adrian IV., that whichtoLouis VII., King of France, in 1159, in order to pointwrotehe1 For a full translation of the apocryphal Bull, see DocumentNo. I at the end of the book.' To denote Henry.Trans,Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.;53out to him the injustice and the danger of an expeditionto Ireland. A comparison of the two preambles sufficesIt happens moreto demonstrate the falsity of the Bull.than once that Pontifical Letters begin with three or fourwords identically the same, as in other diplomas, especi.ally if they are of different years ; but that ten or fifteenlines, substantially the same, should appear in two dis-tinct letters— I do not think that an example of it can befound in the whole Roman Bullarium.inintuarege,coelis,CatholicseThe true letter of Adrian IV.thus :—Satis laudabiliterbeginset fructuose de christiano nominepropagando in terris, et aeternsebeatitudinis prsemio tibi cumu-landovideturmagnificentia cogitare, dum addilatandos termiaos populi chris-tiani, ad paganorum barbariemdebellandam, et ad gentes aposta-trices, et quaefideirefugiunt nee recipiunt veritatem,christianorum jugo et ditioni sub-dendas, simul cum charissimofilio nostro Henrico illustri Ang-lorumproperareintendis, et studes assidue (ut opushoc felicem exitum sortiatur) exer-citum et quae sunt itineri neces-saria congregare. Atque ad id con-venientius exsequendum, matristuae sacrosanctae Romanse Eccle-siae consilium exigis et favorem.Quod quidem propositum tantomagis gratum acceptumque tene-mus, et amplius sicut commen-commendamus,dandumquanto desinceriore charitatisradice talem intentionem et votumtam laudabile processum credi-mus, ac de majori ardore fidei etreligionis amore propositum ettuumprincipiumdesideriumhabuerunt.H.est,te,bullThe apocryphalbeginsthus: — Laudabiliter satis et fruc-tuose de glorioso nomine propa-gando in terris, et Eeternae felicita-tis praemio cumulando in coelis,tua magnificentia cogitat ; dumad dilatandos Ecclesiae terminos,ad declarandam indoctis et rudi-bus populis christianae fidei veri-et vitiorum plantaria detatem,agro Dominico extirpanda, sicutcatholicus princeps intendis; etad id convenientius exsequendumconsilium Apostolicae sedis exigis,In quo facto, quantoet favorem.altiori consilio et majori discre-tione procedis, tanto in eo felicio-rem progressumpraestanteDomino, confidimus habiturumeo quod ad bonum exitum semperet finem solent attingere quaa deet religionis amoreardore fideiprincipium acceperunt .Sig-nificasti siquidem nobis,inChristocarissime, te Hiberniaeinsulam, ad subdendumiliumpopulumvitiorumplantaria inde extirpanda, velle. Nos itaque, pium etintrare .laudabile desiderium tuum cumfavore congruo prosequentes, etpetition! bonae benignum impen-dentes assensum, gratum et accep-tum habemus, ut pro dilatandisEcclesias terminis, pro vitiorumrestringendo decursu, pro corri-gendisvirtutibusinserendis, pro christians religio-illamnisingrediaris,augmento,moribus.insulamlegibus,'filletet...' Addend, forsantuts vel christianii.,54POPE ADRIAN IV.The counterfeiting is so close that it is amazing howit has not awakened the suspicions of historians.Itmight be said that not one of them had gone to thetrouble of comparing the two documents, or of readingOther passages imitated fromthem over with attention.the true letter may be seen in the Apocryphal Bull.. velle intrare .The true letter says : In H. properare intendis.^ OnSignifi-the contrary, we read in the Apocryphal Bull :casti nobis te Hihernim insulam .ingrediaris.Gratum habemus ut .These expressions seem to mean that there is question ofpenetrating into the interior of Ireland, and suppose thatthe King of England occupies a few points along theIt was only a dozen years after the death of Popecoast.Adrian that the adventurers and the King took Dublin andIt is therefore impossible that the Bull shouldWaterford.be from Pope Adrian.. insulamillam...... exercitum, et qucBIt is said in the true letter that Louis VII. was prepar-ing an army, and such things as were necessary for thesuntvoyage : Studes assidue .itineri necessaria, congregare. An expedition on the con-This goestinent requires little more than a good army.to prove that the expedition on which Louis VII. andHenry II. consulted Pope Adrian related to Ireland, andnot to Spain, as I have shown (in Chapters VI. and Vll.).How surprising that Pope Adrian should raise no objec-tion against the conquest of Ireland—he who, in his letterto Louis VII., weighed with so much wisdom and circum-spection the difificulties of the enterprise, and the injusticeof an intervention that was not asked for by the Church,the princes, or the people of the land !section 3.The forger makes Pope Adrian IV. say that Ireland,and in general all islands enlightened by Christ, the Sunof Justice, that is to say, those which have received theteachings of Faith, belong to thePeterand to the Roman Church : Sane Hiherniam, et omnesinsulas, quibus sol justitim Christus illuxit, et qucB docu-menta fidei christiance ceperunt, ad jus beati Petri etsacrosanctcB RomancB Ecclesioe, quod tua etiam nobilitasApostle SaintA FRIEND OF IRELAND.55. recognoscit, non est duhiuni pertinere.Thus, the King ofEngland, writing to the Pope in order to ask Ireland,would have admitted that all islands belong to the HolySee.1. The power of Constantine, from a political point ofview, was the same in pagan islands as in those which hadI see no reason for limiting theembraced Christianity.concession to Christian countries. Had Ireland receivedChristianity at the beginning of the fourth century?2. At the most, Constantine couldonly have givenNow, the Romans, farislands dependent on the empire.from conquering Ireland, always left it outside their fron.Constantine could not be unaware of this fact-^he.tiers.who spent a great part of his life in insular Great Britain.3. The Popes did not avail themselves of a donationfrom Constantine for Rome, nor for the Italian continent,Consult the letters of Codex Caroli-nor even for islands.nus, whose authenticity cannot be doubted ; examine theregister of St. Gregory the Great ; study the imperialdiplomas from the ninth to the fifteenth century : you willalways see that, if Constantine gave some territorial pos-sessions or patrimonies, political authority had an originquite different, which was nothing but the piety of Pepin,Charlemange, and other emperors, who established theNow, these solemn, authentic,Pontifical Sovereignty.and official diplomas never make any allusion to a dona-tion of Constantine.4. Among the notes that Mr. O'Callaghan has added tothe MacaricB Excidium, I remark one (p. 246) relating tothe donation of Constantine, and in it I find, to my greatregret, some unjustifiable prepossessions, which cannotbe reconciled with the truth of history. He speaks thus ;" Upon the famous apocryphal donation of Constantine,on which the request of Henry the Second's envoy for agrant of Ireland from Adrian IV. was based. Gibbon, whothe eightii century, says : — ' This memorable donationassigns the elate oi that fabrication to the latter end ofWas introduced to the world by an epistle of Adrian theFirst, who exhorts Charlemange to imitate the liberalityand revive the name of the great Constantine.Accord-ing to the legend, the first of the Christian emperors, .healed of the leprosy ... by St. Sylvester, .. declared...,56POPE ADRIAN IV.his resolution of founding a new capital in the East, andresigned to the Popes the free and perpetual sovereigntyof Rome, Italy, and the provinces of the West. ... Sodeep was the ignorance and credulity of the times, thatthe most absurd of fables was received, with equal rever-ence, in Greece and France, and is still enrolled amongthe decrees of the canon law.In the revival of lettersand liberty, this fictitious deed was transpierced by thepen of Laurentius Valla, the pen of an eloquent critic, anda Roman patriot.His contemporaries of the fifteenthcentury were astonished at his sacrilegious boldness ; yetsuch is the silent and irresistible progress of reason that. the fable was rejected by the contempt of historians..and poets."I am going to show that these assertions contain asmany errors as words.(a) Gibbon is mistaken.The supposition of a grantfrom Constantine reaches back much farther than theeighth century ; but it is right to add that the Popes didDid St. Gregory the Greatnot avail themselves of it.pretend to be the sovereign of Rome or of Italy? WhenBelisarius and Narses reconquered the peninsula from theGoths, I do not see that the Popes of the time cried out inthe name of Constantine's donation. On the contrary, theimperial exarchs, during several centuries, governed, inthe name of the emperor, not only Rome and Ravenna,but even the islands.toand not(b) If Pope Adrian I. advised Charlemagne to imitatethe generosity of Constantine, he referred to territorialpossessions, to fruitful domains,politicalsovereignty, which this emperor never conferred on theFor the rest, what more could Adrian I. askHoly See.of Charlemagne, who had already, with his father, Pepin,either bestowed on the Holy See or restored to it the exar-chate of Ravenna, from Spezia and Plaisance as far asRimini and Ancona, and then Rome and its provinces ;besides a great part of central and southern Italy, andmany islands lying near Italy, Corsica among the num-ber? Could the Popes have desired more?(c) It matters little if some writers are mistakeh abouta grant of Constantine—^believing it to be authentic andtrue. The essential point is that the Popes did not availA FRIEND OF IRELAND.57themselves of this apocryphal title-deed.In point offact, they derived their political sovereignty from the resti-tutions, donations, and confirmations of Pepin, Charle-magne, and their successors.St. Gregory VII. nevermade use of the donation of Constantine, although St.Peter Damian employs it in his arguments against theTeutons, followers of the anti-Pope Cadolaus. The dona-tion was also cited in a letter of Leo IX. to MichaelCerolarius.(Patrologie, tome 143, p. 752.)(d) O'Callaghan insists on a pretended diploma of PopeUrban II., grounded on a donation of Constantine, to dis-" This non-pose of Corsica in favour of the Pisans.sense," says the writer, " of the Pope's being the headowner ofpartiallyannounced to the world in a Bull of Urban II., datedA.D. 1091, in which, on disposing of the island of Corsica,he said that the Emperor Constantine had given theislands to St. Peter and his vicars."(See Fleury, lib. 64,sec. 8.)ChristianislandsbeenhadallI answer that the diploma attributed to Urban II.isapocryphal.It is not in the Roman Bullarium.Urban II. could not be unaware that Corsica was in-cluded in the donation of Charlemagne, and that the con-firmatory diplomas of all the emperors expressly desig-nated it as belonging to the Holy See : what need thenof relying on a title so uncertain as a donation of Con-stantine ?In reality, the Roman archives possessed from thattime, and preserve to this day, those imperial diplomas ofthe ninth an^ tenth centuries which attest the donation ofCorsica by Kings Pepin and Charlemagne—notably Manu-The celebrated diploma inscript 1964 of the Vatican,gold letters, on an azure ground, of the Emperor Otho,A.D. 962, kept in the same archives, mentions Corsicaamong the pontifical dominions.Likewise, a diploma ofthe Emperor Henry II. in the year 1014.fifteenyearsScarcelyPopeGregory VII., preparing for a crusade, had the strongcastles of Corsica surrendered to him, and appointed agt)vern6r of the island, as representative of the RomanChurch.beforeUrbanII.,Could Urban II. be unaware of these public and recent,58POPE ADRIAN IV.Moreover, prudence forbade the substitution offacts?feudal investiture for an immediate governor, at a timewhen the strategic position ol Corsica was of supreme im-portance for the security of the " grand army " of theCrusaders, and for the freedom of maritime communica-Urban II. consequently took caretions with the East.not to partially alienate Corsica, by yielding it to investi.It is a real mockery to place a donation of Constan-ture.tino on the lips or on the pen of the Pope in such circum.Therefore, the diploma of 1091 is apocryphal.stances.It has been known only to the annalists of Pisa, interestedin making us believe that the Pope gave to their peopleDal Borgo^ andthe investiture of Corsica.Tronci,2 Such are the sources of the diploma !saySo(e) O'Callaghan objects, with Gibbon, that the falsedonation of Constantine was inserted in the canonical col-lection : "Is still enrolled among the decrees of the canonlaw." Now the famous donation is found, certainly notin official codes or in pontifical decretals, but only in thecompilation of the monk Gratian, which is a work in allrespects private, which the Popes have always taken carenot to authorise or to authenticate, and- whose contentshave no other value than what they carry per se.^EveryIt is surprising that menstudent of theology knows this.so studious as Gibbon and O'Callaghan should be ignorantof a fact so elementary.(/) Considering that the Popes abstained from makinguse of a donation of Constantine, and that the example ofUrban II., the only one adduced to the contrary, is forgedand false, it is not possible that Pope Adrian IV. took, asthe foundation of a grant of Ireland to the King of Eng-land, the said donation of Constantine.It follows thatthe Bull Laudabiliter satis, attributed to Pope Adrian IV.,is apocryphal.1 Raccolia di diplomi Pisam, p. 31.' Memorie di Pisa, p. 31' Gratian was a Benedictine monk at Bologna in the twelfthHis work was not simply a collection of canons, but aIn spite of his good intentions, it containedcentury.treatise^on canon law.many mistakes.— Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.59SECTION 4.After the oath of Avranches, which recognised the feudalsove.reignty of the Pope over the kingdom of England,Henry II. could naturally say that islands belonged to theBut in the case of the Apocryphal Bull, which,Holy See.as is pretended, was written seventeen years previously,the King could not without inconvenience acknowledgeislands, because he wouldth^ right of the Pope overthereby have engaged and conpromised the independenceof the kingdom of England itself.Hence, it follows, thatthe Apocryphal Bull was drawn up aftertheofAvranches, which was taken in 1172—consequently a longtime after Adrian IV., who died in 11 59.argument against the genuineness of the Bull.This is anotheroathO'Callaghan quotes approvingly a conjecture from Dr.Lanigan, who thinks that Pope Adrian hinted to the Kingthat the kingdom of England, being in an island, belongedto the Holy See, like other islands." ThetheandDoctorfollowingcitescriticisespassage in the Bull : —Sane Hiherniam et omnes insulasquibus sol justiticB illuxit, et qua documenta fidei Chris-tiance ceperunt, ad jus heati Petri et sacrosantcB Romanceecclesia [quod tua etiani nobilitas recognoscit) non estdiihium pertinere." By the words in the parenthesis, re-marks the Doctor, the Pope probably meant to hint toHenry that also his kingdom of England, as being in anisland, belonged to the Holy See ; and we find that, in theyear 1173, Henry declared himself a vassal of Pope Alex-ander III.tohisBut since the King recognised inletter (whichthe Pope over allnobody has ever seen) the right ofislands, what need had Pope Adriansuggestthismaxim to a prince who was the first to formulate it? Onthe other hand, if the Pope intended an allusion to Eng-land, we must admit that he expressedaIn fact, Henry allowedmanner not to be understood.seventeen years to roll by before acquitting himself inregard to feudal subjection., It is natural to suppose that the King put the maximinto the Apocryphal Bull, with a view to availing himselfof it against Ireland, and perhaps against Scotland, thehimselfin,60POPE ADRIAN IV.At theIsle of Man, and other islands that he coveted.time of the fabrication of the Bull, Henry had nothing tofear for England, seeing the engagements that he hadtaken by the oath of Avranches.The forger tells us that the King promised to establishSECTION 5....Peter's Pence through all Ireland : Significasti nobis .. velle intrare ; et de singulis domi-te Hibernice insulam .bus annuam unius denarii heato Petro velle solvere pen-Adrian IV., on his side, authorises the King tosioiiem.penetrate into the country, and orders the people to wel-come him with respect, on condition that the rights ofthe churches will be safeguarded, and that Peter's Pennywill be paid annually from every house :Salva beatoPetro, et sacrosanctcB Romanes ecclesicB, de singulis domi.So we read in thebus annua unius denarii pensione.Apocryphal Bull.I.If all this is true, the Pope and the King made anunworthy bargain. Henry bought Ireland, and Adrian IV.,to gain a pecuniary pension, sacrificed the independenceof a nation.of3. Diplomasusuallyinvestitureprescribedanannual payment, in recognition of sovereign dominion ;but this payment was exceedingly small, one ortwocrowns a year.Here, on the contrary. Pope Adrian re-quired an enormous contribution ; for the Anglo-Normanpenny was worth four or fiveof our presentThanks to these data, we can approximatelymoney. 1calculate the annual income.It would have a'mounted toa sum truly unexampled in the history of pontifical inves-titures.shillings3. The Kings of Naples paid a pretty high tribute, be-cause it included the revenues of some ancient patrl-1 That is, a penny in former times would purchase as much asthree or four shillings in our day.England has often used debased coin in Ireland, by which theThis method of cheating is much the samepeople suffered heavy loss.as to take good silver from a mah and give him its weight in pewter.It is not very long since two values were given to money in theseislands. Thus up to 1825 the English shilling passed in Ireland forthirteen pence, and the English guinea for £1 2s. gd.—Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.—6lmonies which Constantine gave to the Roman Church,and which were wasted by the Saracens.4. In Eng-Iand, the Peter's Pence came from ancientusage, from the spontaneous offering that princes andpeople had formerly made of the tribute.5. Peter's Pence were not established in Ireland : noPope claimed them. The clause of the Apocryphal Bull isGiraldus Cambrensis, who be-therefore false and forged.lieved bona fide in the genuineness of the Bull, attributedthe misfortunes of the English Kings in Ireland to theviolation of their promise regarding Peter's Pence, as Ishall say further on.6. Henry II.really possessed some towns along theIrish coast, and his barons subjected some adjacent coun-ties. How is it that he did not establish Peter's Pence atIn the treaty of Wind-least in these towns and counties ?sor, of which I have spoken above, supposing the factto be authentic, Henry II., required of the King of Con-nacht to promise an annual tribute of one cowhide orsheepskin on every ten beasts ; but there was not a word ofPeter's Pence promised to Pope Adrian.7. Henry II. had the clause inserted in the ApocryphalBull, probably to furnish a pretext for penetrating intoIreland, and exacting tributes for himself, not for theInnocent III. claimed Peter's Pence from thePope.lEnglish bishops ; but, I repeat it, no Pope ever askedPeter's Pence from the Irish bishops, or from the Irishpeople.SECTION 6.St. Stephen of Hungary received from Rome a kindof apostolic legateship for the propagation and advance-ment of religion in his kingdom, as we see in the RomanBreviary, at the date September 2nd : Vere propter ingensdilatandm fidei studium, illius gentis Apostolus nuncu-paius, facta a Romano Pontifice ipsi posterisque regibusIt is an analogous missionprmferenda crucis potestate.' The flaunting of Peter's Pence would seem to have been a kindNeitherof hypocritical bribe, employed to gain credence for the Bull.Henry nor his successors ever established Peter's Pence in Ireland.Trans.62POPE ADRIAN IV.,that the false Bull attributes to Henry II. ; but this kindof moral delegation has no connection with political in-vestiture. Having treated of this point in a previous chap-ter, when I examined an addition to the Metalogicus, Ineed not return to it.Henry 11. simply wished to penetrate into Ireland, andAs forto see himself welcomed there without distrust.the rest, he took it on himself, hoping very much thatonce he had entered the sheep-fold, he would never comeout again.This is the reason why the Apocryphal Bull allows anentrance into Ireland, and recommends the people to re-ceive the King with respectful and submissive behaviour.it does not extend toThis mission is purely personal :the successors of the King of England.The most surprising thing of all is that the Bishops ofFor theIreland are never mentioned in the false Bull.King alone the pre-eminently religious mission of propa-gating the faith, repressing vices, and planting virtues !We might suppose that Ireland at the time had not oneBishop, or one clergyman !The pseudo-Adrian concludes by giving the King fullpower to regulate by himself, or by his agents, whateveris of a nature to procure the glory of God, an increase ofWhat other secularfaith, and the salvation of souls.prince has ever received ecclesiasticalin amanner so complete?jurisdiction" Let it be your study to form that people to goodmorals, and take such orders both by yourself and bythose whom you shall find qualified in faith, in words,and in conduct, that the Church there may be adorned,and the practices of the Christian faith be planted andincreased ; and let all that tends to the glorv of God andthe salvation of souls be so ordered by you that you maydeserve to obtain from God an increase of everlasting re-ward, and may secure on earth a glorious name through-out all time."If Henry had succeeded in causing his false Bull to beaccepted, he would have recovered in Ireland that supre-macy which the labours and the martrydom ofSaintThomas of Canterbury had compelled him to abandon inEngland,—2A FRIEND OF IRELAND.63SECTION 7.The forger contented himself with writing an ordinaryletter in the name of Pope Adrian IV. He did not go tothe trouble of fabricating a solemn diploma, a Bull pro-perly so called, with thetheRoman Chancery.Yet the transaction deserved a Bull.Adrian answered Louis VII. with an ordinary letter, be-cause he granted nothing, and was satisfied to point outthe dangers of an Irish expedition ; but the case is verydifferent for an act of the kind here considered.formalities employed byThe Bulls of the grant of investiture^ were consistorialacts, which should be furnished with the signatures ofcardinals. The forger, fearing perhaps that some one ofthe signatories might still be in the world and raise a pro-test, judged it prudent to name no other person than PopeAdrian, who had died about thirty years before.What must be my conclusion ?I shall not formulate it.I prefer to leave it to the judgment of the reader.' The following will show the manner in which the Pope andIt is taken fromCardinals usually added their names to documents.Pope Adrian's letter No. 98.Ego Adrianus catholicse Ecclesia; episcopus.Ego Guide presb. card, tit, Sancti Chrysogoni.Ego Julius presb. card. tit. Sancti Marcelli.Ego Octavianus presb. card. tit. S. Ceciliae.Ego Gerardus presb. card. tit. S. Stephani in Coelio Monte.Datum Beneventi per manum Rolandi, sanctae RomanaeEcclesiae presbyteri cardinalis et cancellarii, Kal. Junii, indict. IV.,Incarnationis Dominicas anno 1156, pontificatus vero domniAdriani papae IV. anno secundo.The Cardinal Roland here mentioned as Chancellor became PopeAlexander III. in 11 59, after the death of Adrian IV., and reigned till1 181. He had doubtless learned from Pope Adrian what to think ofHenry II.Trans.^ In Migne's collection there are 258 letters (including bulls,privileges, &c.) attributed to Pope Adrian IV., and all appear to beGenerally found withoutgenuine except No. 76 Laudabiliter satis.any clear mention, at the beginning, of the person to whom it isaddressed, or, at the end, of the place or the date at which it wasIf we had no otherwritten, it is said to be "without head or tail."evidence in regard to the qualifications of Pope Adrian IV., any one,examining this collection, will readily see that he was a man of realmerit, great wisdom, and calm moderation—not at all likely to——;64POPE ADRIAN IV.