CHAPTER XX.APPEARANCE OF THE APOCRYPHAL BULL INENGLISHCHRONICLES.It seems to me certain, and I shall prove it in the courseof the following- chapters, that the English chroniclerstook the Apocryphal Bull from Giraldus Cambrensis, who,first of all,i published it, in his history of the Conquest ofIreland.Hibernica, which contained theGiraldus composed a great many works. Being in Rome,he presented copies of them to the Pope, and to other per-sonages ; but he took care not to let them see the Expug-natioofThus, having gone to Rome in 1199, heAdrian IV.2presented six of his works to Pope Innocent III.—amongothers, the Gemma Sacerdotalis : the conquest of Ireland(Works of Giraldus, new edition.does not figure there.Brewer, 1861, vol. i, p. Ixx.)falseBullIn the Sym,bolum Electorum we sec a letter written byGiraldus to the Dean or Chancellor of the Roman Court.He sent him the Topography of Ireland and the Descrip-tion of Cambria, but no History of the Conquest.(Ibid.,As Giraldus, revising his Expugnatio, made of it, during' Itis likely that Giraldus, being a courtier, accepted withoutany question any document supplied to him by Henry, and gladlyinserted it m his book.It is likely also that the King regarded thepublication of the book as a golden opportunity for the introduction ofa forgery, and considered himself fortunate in meeting with such acredulous author as Giraldus, who always thought himself twice theman he was, and expected everybody to believe him.Trans.' This would seem to imply that Giraldus himself had somesuspicions regarding the Bull, and was afraid to bring it under thenotice of the authorities at Rome, lest some more scrutinising glanceBut then he would no longer be inshould reveal its true character.bona fide. We may therefore suppose that his motive was not to drawany attention to the doings of trie English in Ireland, which were socontrary to the intentions of the Pope, and which, if known, mightlead to a revocation of the supposed Bull.Trans.68POPE ADRIAN IV.,his lifetime, two or three different editions, of which thelast, dedicated to King John, seems to have been in i2og,I cannot dispense myself from a notice of the author's lifeThis task is now easy, thanks to the laboriousand works.studies of Mr. Brewer and the Rev. Mr. Dimock, whohave published the most recent edition.Born about 1150, Giraldus went to study in Paris, andreturned to England at twenty-two years of age.In 1175,the Archbishop of Canterbury confided to him a missionin Wales, and appointed him Archdeacon of Brecknock.It seems certain that Giraldus returned to Paris about theend of 1176.It was only in 1184 that King Henry II. brought him toGiraldus rendered him allCourt, in quality of chaplain.the services he could, in Ireland and in Wales, by his actsNevertheless, Henry bestowed noand by his writings.favours on him, because he was related to some of thechief families among the Welsh.Giraldus complainedbitterly of this neglect, especially in his biography (Derebus a se gestis), written about 1204 : " Cum ergo pluri-bus annis curiam sequendo fideliter servasset, et ad Wal-liam pacificandam et in pace tenendam profecisset ; tamenpropter parentelam qua Resum filiumaliosWallise principes contingebat, nihil a rege (Henrico) quitot ditabat et promovebat indignos, prseter vacua verispromissa suscepit. "GriiSni(Vol. 1., 57.)etSent into Ireland in 1185, as tutor and counsellor ofKmg John, he there found materials for his Topography,and for the History of the Conquest, which he wrote in thetwo or three years following.In I i8g he was in France.After the death of Henry II.,Richard Coeur de Lion sent Giraldus to put Wales into aThe same year Giraldus was namedstate of defence.assistant to the supreme justiciary of England, the Bishopof Ely.The fixed idea of Giraldus, that which filled his life, wasto withdraw his country, Cambria, from the metropolitanjurisdiction of Canterbury, and to erect an archbishopricWith this view, he hadin the Cathedral of St. David.placed himself at the service of the Court. From the samemotive, he constantly refused the bishoprics that were—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.69offered to him : Bangor, in 1190 ; Landaf, in 1191 ; andso of others.Having abandoned the Court in 1192, he retired to Lin-coln, and remained there seven years,withstudies, and with the writing of various works : such asthe Life of Galfridus, Archbishop of York, written in 1193.and the Gemma Sacerdotalis, about 1 197.occupiedThe next year saw the beginning of the troubles of Gir-aldus, as a candidate for the Bishopric of St. David's.Postulated by the Chapter, with three other subjects, in1 198, he was the only one at the commencement of thefollowing year. On the 29th of June, he obtained, noHavinglonger simple postulation, but canonical election.set out for Rome to pursue the matter, he arrived thereabout the feast of St. Andrew, 1199, and found PopeInnocent III. disposed to restore the metropolitan right ofSt. David's. The Pontiff, however, asked for the vouchersGiraldus could not present them, andof ancient erection.after a suit of four years, he had to yield before the im-placable opposition of the King of England and the Arch-bishop of Canterbury.Discouraged and embittered, he returned to England,and resigned his archdeaconship to his nephew William.During the years 1204 and 1205, he wrote a Description ofCambria, Symholum Electurum, Speculum, Duorum,, In-vectiones, the Life of St. Regimus, and his own Auto-About 1209, he prepared the last edition ofbiography.Hibernia Expugnata, with a dedication to King John.About 12 18, he wrote the Dialogues De jure MenevensisEcclasicB. About 1220, he completed De Principis Instruc-Alex-tione,ander III. ; afterwards the Speculum Ecclesice, andasecond edition of the Dialogues. The year of his death isnot known.in which he disclaimeddiploma oftheThe first edition of the Conquest, dedicated to RichardCceur de Lion, Earl of Poitiers, could hardly have beenfinished before 1188I—previously to the death of Henry II.As regards the last edition, the time is fixed by its dedica-' If it contained Adrian's Bull, this would be thirty-three years afterthesupposed date (1155) of the Bull. Pope Adrian IV,, King Louis VII.,and John of Salisbury, being long dead, Henry might now have theBull spoken of, in public as well as in private, with little fear,Trans,70POPE ADRIAN IV.,tion to King John, about 1209.Therefore, between thesetwo dates we must place the divulghig of the Bull attri-is not easy to be morebuted to Pope Adrian IV.precise.ItIn the manuscripts that have come down to us, we re-mark some important variations and considerable sup-pressions. We also find there some parts inextricablyThus, some manuscripts leave out the diplomaconfused.of Alexander III., and do not even allude to it.Scribeshave, in consequence, modified the preamble ; and by aninconceivable mistake, they have represented Henry II. assoliciting- in 11 72 a privilege from Adrian IV., who diedThen, by a confusion no less strange, they re-in II 59.present John of Salisbury, who, it is said, obtained aprivilcg:e in 11 55, as sent in 1172, not to Ireland, but toRome, with the view of publishing- the diploma at Water-(See the judicious observations offord in 1the Rev. Mr. Dimock, vol. v., p. xlii.-li.)1 74 or 1175.thatIn the last edition, finished about 1209, the suppressionsare more considerable than in the previous ones.Dimockresentment which Giraldussees in it a trace ofnourished against the royal family, who, instead of re-warding his services, had opposed his most ardent wishesfor the religious independence of Cambria.[Ihid., p. xlv.)Camden, in his compendium : Anglica, Hibernica, &c,followed the manuscripts which show considerable suppres-sions, and which have caused the greatest confusion in re-gard to pontifical diplomas connected with Ireland.(Ibid.,P- 315-)What may lead us to believe that the pretended Bull ofAdrian IV. was pretty late in being divulged is that neitherWilliam of Newburgh nor Roger de Hoveden appears tohave had any knowledge of it,Giraldus seems to have believed bona fide in the genuine-ness of the Bull. He inserted it anew in his autobiography[De rebus a se gestis), written about the year 1205 ; but hecited the Bull only with a view to show that the reverses ofthe English in Ireland came from the fact of their nothaving observed the conditions prescribed by Pope Adrian,especially in regard to Peter's Pence.(Ibid., p. 61.)In the autobiography, the diploma of Alexander III. iscompletely omitted, as well as all reference to a pretended——A FRIEND OF IRELAND.71publication of the two Bulls in a Council at Watcrford, re-These suppressions and contra-lated in the Expugnatio.dictions leave everything in confusion and uncertainty.About 1209, all Ireland v^-as in revolt, 1 and the EnglishIn a letter accom.prince lost nearly all his possessions.panying a copy of the last edition, Giraldus represented toKing John that these misfortunes ought to be attributedto a violation of the promises made in regard to Ireland." Your father," he says, '' wisely providing for himselfand his posterity, promised two things to Pope Adrian IV.,in order to obtain authority to invade the land of Irelandand make a conquest of it.This aggression, so terribleand so bloody against Christians, was sanctioned by thehighest authority on earth, on condition of exalting theChurch in that region, and of giving to the Blessed Peterthe annual penny for every house, as is done in England,according to the privilege of the said Pope, which yourfather asked with prudence and circumspection, and whichis faithfully kept^ in the archives of Winchester. ... It iswithout doubt by reason of these two promises, not yet ful-filled, that the advantages of the conquest and the goodeffects that it ought to produce have been so long delayed,and that the chief men among the conquerors of Ireland .have not deserved to leave any legitimate descendants.Nor is this surprising.In point of fact, the clergy of theisland, impoverished, are plunged in the deepest misery.The cathedral churches mourn the loss of the extensivelands and domains with which, in former days, they werepiously and devoutly endowed ; they have been despoiledof them by the first conquerors, or by their companionsAnd thus an exaltation of the Churchand successors.there is changed into a spoliation of the churches. .That God may share in something of this conquest whichhas cost so much blood, it will be necessary to give hence-...' At this period, the Irish had learned by sad e.\perience what werethe real objects of the invaders, and could not but be filled withindignation at such a record of hypocrisy, treachery, and villainy.The motto of the English in plundering Ireland would seem to havebeen " Quocunque modo."Trans,°I£ "faithfully kept," as of the utmost importance, how is it thatno trace of it can now be found, or indeed has ever been seen, while wehave other documents, both genuine and forged, of the same period ?The reason seems to be that it never existed.Trans.,72POPE ADRIAN IV.ItItis a very small, a veryforth the promised Penny.frees everybody, and burdensmodest contribution.I add with the same earnestness that, to preservenobody.the memory of the conquest of Ireland by the English, itwould be well to establish firmly an annual tribute of gold,of game, or even of trees, as a perpetual testimony thatthe kingdom of Ireland is bound by an inviolable chain tothe Crown of England."(Giraldus, v. 408.)Hence result several important facts,i. In 1209, Peter's2. The families of thePence had never existed in Ireland.3. The Irishfirst conquerors were destroyed, annihilated.4. Theclergy were reduced to a state of extreme poverty.property of churches had been pillaged by the English.5. The false Bull of Adrian was preserved, according torumour, in the archives of Winchester.6. Giraldus, itseems, continued in good faith, sincerely believing in the7. The advice that Giraldus gavegenuineness of the Bull.to establish an annual tribute as a perpetual testimony ofthe subjugation of Ireland to the Crown of England, seemsto have been followed by King John, when, four yearsafterwards, he offered to Pope Innocent III. to pay to theHoly See an annual quit-rent of three hundred markssterling, in the name of Ireland.Later on, I shall saywhether the Pope accepted this token of sovereignty.