CHAPTER XA COLLOQUY, FOE EXERCISING BOYS INSPEAKING LATIN ; FIEST COMPILED BY.ELFEIC, AND ADDED TO BY ^LFEICBATA, HIS DISCIPLE 1Scholar. We boys beg you,Master, to teach usto speak Latin correctly, for we are ignorant, and wespeak badly.Master. What do you wish to talk about ?Scholar. We do not care what we talk about, aslong as our speech is correct, and useful, and notfoolish, or base.Master. Are you willingtobe flogged whilelearning ?Scholar. We would rather be flogged that we maylearn, than remain ignorant, but we know that youare kindly, and that you will not lay strokes uponus, unless we oblige you to do so.1 This is translated from Thorpe's Analecta Saxonica.The MS.that he took it from is MS. Cott. Tib. A. 3.Latin, with aninterlinear Saxon gloss. Some critics think the gloss was addedlater, but Thorpe supposes it by .ffilfric, v. p. vii in his Intro-There is another MS., including the Grammar and someduction.other colloquies, in the library of St. John's College, Oxford.This MS. is being edited by Mr. W. H. Stevenson, M.A., Fellowand Librarian of that college.183184AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTMaster. I ask you what you are to talk about?What work have you ?Scholar. I am preparing to be a monk, and everyday I sing seven times with the brethren, and I ambusy with reading and singing ; yet in the meantimeI wish to learn to converse in the Latin language.Master. What do these companions of yours know ?Scholar. Some are ploughboys, some shepherds,some oxherds, some also are huntsmen, some fisher-men, some fowlers, some chapmen, some tailors, somesalters, some bakers in the place.Master. What do you say, Ploughboy, how do youcarry on your work ?Ploughboy.Master, I have to work far toomuch; I go out at dawn, driving the oxen to thefield, and I yoke them to the plough ; I dare not inthe severest weather lie hid at home, for fear of mylord ; and when I have yoked the oxen together, andfastened the ploughshare to the plough, I have toplough a whole acre every day, or more.Master. Have you any companion ?Ploughboy. I have a boy who threatens the oxenwith a goad, and he is also hoarse with the cold andhis shouting.Master. What more do you perform in the day ?Plougliboy. Certainly I do more besides that.Ihave to supply the mangers of the oxen with hay,and give them water, and carry their dung outside.Master.Ploughboy. Yes, it is a great labour that I have toThis is a great labour.indeed !fulfil, for I am not free.Master. What do you say, Shepherd, have you anywork ?A COLLOQUY185Shepherd. Indeed, I have.In early morning Idrive my sheep to the pastures, and I stand by them,in heat and cold, with dogs, lest the wolves shoulddevour them, and I bring them back to their folds,and milk them twice a day, and I move their foldsI also make butter and cheese, and I ambesides.faithful to my lord.Master* Oxherd, what do you work at ?Oxherd.Master, I labour much. When theploughman unyokes the oxen, I lead them to thepastures, and all night I stand by them watchingagainst thieves, and then, early in the morning, Igive them over to the ploughman, well fed andwatered.Master. Is that boy one of your companions ?Oxherd. He is.Master. Can you do anything ?Huntsman. One craft I know.Master. Which is that ?Huntsman. I am a huntsman.Master. Whose ?Huntsman. The King's.Master. In what way do you practise yourart ?Huntsman. I make myself nets, and set them ina fitting spot, and I urge on my dogs, to chase thewild animals, till unawares they get into the nets,and so they are entangled, and I cut their throatswhen in the nets.Master. Don't you know how to hunt without nets ?Huntsman. Yes, I am able to hunt without nets.Master. How do you manage that ?Huntsman. I hunt the wild animals with swift186AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTI take stags, and boars, and fallow deer, anddogs.goats, and sometimes hares.Master. Were you hunting to-day ?Huntsman. I was not, because itis the Lord'sDay, but yesterday I was hunting.Master. What did you catch ?Huntsman. I took the stags in nets, and I cut thethroat of the boar.Master. How was it that you were daring enoughto cut the throat of the boar ?Huntsman. The dogs drove him towards me, andI, standing towards him, suddenly cut his throat.Master. You were very daring then.Huntsman. A huntsman must not be fearful, fora number of various beasts haunt the woods.Master. How do you dispose of what you havecaught ?Huntsman. I give whatever I catch to the King,as I am his huntsman.Master. And what does he give you ?Huntsman. He clothes and feeds me well, andsometimes he gives me a horse, or a bracelet, thatI may the more willingly practise my art.[Anglo-Saxon men were fond of wearing bracelets.]Master. What craft do you know ?Fisherman. I am a fisherman.Master. And what do you gain by your craft ?Fisherman. Food, and clothing, and money.Master. How do you catch the fish ?Fisherman. I get into a boat, and place my netsin the river, and I throw in a hook, and baskets,and whatever they catch I take.Master. What if your fishes are not clean ?A COLLOQUY187Fisherman. I throw the unclean away, and takethe clean ones for food.Master. Where do you sell your fish ?Fisherman. In the city.Master. Who are your purchasers ?Fisherman. The citizens.I cannot catch as manyas I could sell.Master. What kinds of fish do you catch ?Fisherman. Eels and pike, minnows and joltheads,trout and lampreys, and any fish that swim in theriver.Master. Why don't you fish in the sea ?Fisherman. I do sometimes, but it is a long wayto the sea, so I seldom go thither.Master. What do you catch in the sea ?Fisherman. Herrings and salmon, dolphins andsturgeons, oysters and crabs, mussels and winkles,cockles, plaice, soles and lobsters, and the like.Master. Are you desirous of catching a whale ?Fisherman. I am not.Master. Why is that ?Fisherman. Because catching a whale is a dangerousI prefer to go on the river in my ownbusiness.boat rather than to accompany a number of boatsfor hunting a whale.Master. How is that ?Fisherman. Because I like better to catch a fishthat I can kill, than a fish that by one blow candrown or put to death both myself and my com-panions.Master. Yet there are many, who catch whales,the dangers and make great gainand escapethereby.188AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTFisherman. You speak the truth, but I dare not,for my mind is slothful.Master. Fowler, what have you to say ? How doyou deceive the birds ?Fowler. I have many ways of deceiving the birds ;sometimes by nets, sometimes by snares, sometimesby lime, sometimes by whistling, sometimes by ahawk, sometimes by a trap.Master. Have you a hawk ?Fowler. I have one.Master. Do you know how to tame them ?Fowler. Yes, I know how. What use would theybe to ine, unless I knew how to tame them ?Huntsman. Pray give me a hawk.Fowler. Willingly, if you will give me in return aswift dog. What sort of hawk do you want, a largeone, or of the smaller kind ?Huntsman. Give me a large one.Master. How do you feed your hawks ?Fisherman. They feed themselves, and me in thewinter, and in the spring I let them fly away to thewood, and I catch young ones in the autumn andtame them.Master. And why do you allow those whom youhave tamed to fly away from you ?Foider. Because I do not like feeding them in thesummer, for they eat too much.Master. Yet many persons keep the hawks whichthey have tamed through the summer, that theymay have them ready again.Fowler. Yes, they do, but I am not inclined tobestow so much labour on them, as I know how tocatch others, and many of them.A COLLOQUY189Master. What have you to say, Merchant ?Merchant. I maintain that I am useful to theKing, and to the nobles, and to the wealthy, and tothe whole people.Master. How so ?Merchant. I go on board ship, with my merchandise.I sail to regions beyond the sea, and sell my goods,and buy valuable produce that is not made in thiscountry, and I bring it you here.I face greatdangers in crossing the ocean and sometimes Isuffer shipwreck, with the loss of all my goods,hardly escaping with my life.Master. What kinds of things do you bring us ?Merchant. Purple and silk, precious stones andgold, various sorts of clothing, pigments, wine andoil, ivory, copper, brass and tin, sulphur and glass,and the like.Master. Are you willing to sell your things justas you bought them there ?Merchant. By no means.If I did so, what goodwould my labour be to me ?I wish to sell dearerhere, than I bought there, that I may gain someprofit, to keep myself, and my wife and son.Master. You, Shoemaker, what do you produce ?Shoemaker. My craft is indeed very useful andnecessary for you.Master. How is that ?Shoemaker. I buy skins and hides, and preparethem, and make various kinds of sandals, slippers,shoes, and high boots, besides bridles, harness, andother horse trappings, halters and spurs ; and alsoleather bottles, flasks, purses, and bags.11 The order of some of these names has been transposed in the190AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTMaster. Oh, Salter, of what value is your craftto us?Salter. My craft is of great value to all of you ;none of you would enjoy his dinner or supper unlessmy craft were his entertainer.Master. How is that ?Salter. What man would enjoy pleasant meats,without the savour of salt ? Who could fill hispantry, or his storeroom without my craft ?Behold,all your butter and cheese would perish, unless Iwere near to be their keeper, and you could not useyour herbs without me.Master. What have you to say, Baker ? Whatis the use of your craft, or can we live our lifewithout you ?Baker. You might indeed, for a while, live yourlife without me, but not for long, nor well; forwithout my craft, every table would seem empty,and without bread all food would be distasteful.Istablish the heart of man, I am the strength of men,and even the little ones cannot pass me by.Master. What shall we say of the Cook ? Do wein any way need his craft ?Cook. If you drive me out of your society, you willhave to eat your vegetables and your meat raw, andanyhow you cannot have good gravy without my craft.Master. We do not care about your craft, nor is itnecessary for us, for we can ourselves cook the thingsthat need to be cooked, and roast what has to beroasted.translation so as to bring together those that appear to haveIt is by no means easy to identify thethe same meaning.signification of these names.A COLLOQUY191Cook. If therefore you drive me out, to do as yousay, then you will all be servants, and none of youwill be master, and yet without my craft you willnot be able to bite your food.Master.Monk, who hast spoken to me already,behold I find that you have good companions, andvery necessary ones, who are they ?Scholar. I have smiths, iron smiths, goldsmiths,silver smiths, brass smiths, carpenters, and manyother workmen skilled in various arts.Master. Have you any wise councillor ?Scholar. Certainly we have. How couldoursociety be ruled if we had no councillor?{Here the Councillor comes forward.}Master. What say you, Wise one? What artseems to you to hold the first place amongst allthese ?Councillor. I say to thee, that the service of Godholds the primary place among these arts, as we" Seek ye first the kingdom ofread in the GospelGod and His righteousness, and all these thingsshall be added unto you."Master. And which do you think among secularcrafts holds the first place ?Councillor. Agriculture; because the ploughmanfeeds us all.(The Blacksmith now speaks.)Blacksmith. How does the ploughman get hisplough or his ploughshare, or his goad, but by mycraft? How does the fisherman obtain his hook,or the shoemaker his awl, or the tailor his needle,but by my work ?Councillor. What you say is indeed true : but we192AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTall prefer to be guests of the ploughman, rather thanyours ; for the ploughman gives us bread and drink,and what do you give us in your workshop butsparks of iron, and the noise of hammers striking,and bellows blowing ?(The Woodman speaks.)Woodman. Which of you does not avail himselfof my craft, when I make houses, and variousutensils and boats for you all?Blacksmith.Woodman, why do you talk likethat, when you could not pierce a single aperturewithout my craft ?Councillor.friends, and good workmen !Let usquickly cease from these contentions, and let therebe peace and concord between us, and let each of ushelp the other by his art, and let us always meet atthe ploughman's, where we find food for ourselves,and fodder for our horses, and this advice I give toworkmen, that each should diligently practise hiscraft : for every one who forsakes his art is forsakenby his art : whether thou art a priest, or a monk, ora layman, or a scholar, practise thyself in this, bewhat thou art, for it is a great loss and shame to aman to be unwilling to be what he is, and what heought to be.Master.boys, how does this conversation pleaseyou?Scholar. We are indeed well pleased with it, butyour words are deep, and your speech goes beyondour age; pray speak to us as remembering ouryouthful minds, that we may understand what youare talking about.11 The critics consider that JSlfric Bata did not improve upon hisA COLLOQUY193Master. I will ask you why you are so diligent inlearning ?Scholar. It is because we do not wish to be likebrute animals, that know nothing but grass andwater.Master. And what then is your wish ?Scholar. We wish to be wise.Master. "With what kind of wisdom? Do youwish to be clever turncoats, taking many shapes,cunning in lies, acute in speech ; talking fairly, andthinking evil, given to using pleasant words, whilecherishing guile within, like a sepulchre, paintedoutside, but full of foulness inside ?Scholar. We do not wish to be wise in this way,for he is not wise who deceives his own self bypretences.Master. Then how do you desire to be wise ?Scholar. We wish to be simple, without hypocrisy,and wise in avoiding the evil, and in doing what isgood, but up to now your discussion with us is moreprofound than our years can take in ; pray speak tous in our way, and not so profoundly.Master. I will do as you ask.You, my boy, whathave you done to-day ?Scholar. I have done many things.This night,when I heard the call, I rose from my bed, andwent out to the church, and sang nocturns withthe brethren ; then we sang of all the saints, andthe matin song of praise ; after that prime, and theseven psalms, with litanies, and the first mass, thenterce, and we performed the mass of the day, aftermaster's work by his additions. The above remark seems un-reasonable, as the speech is plain enough.194AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTthat we sang sext ; then we ate and drank, and hadour sleep, and rose up again, and sang nones, andnow we are here before you, prepared to hear whatyou may say to us.Master. When do you mean to sing vespers andcompline?Scholar. When it is the time for them.Master. Have you been flogged to-day ?Scholar. I have not, for I behaved with caution.Master. And how was it with your companions ?Scholar. Why do you ask me about that ?I dareEach one knowsnot reveal our secrets to you.whether he has been flogged, or not.Master. What do you eat in the day ?Scholar. I am allowed meat, because I ani stilla boy, living under the rod.Master. What do you eat besides ?Scholar. Vegetables and eggs,fish and cheese,butter and beans, and all clean things I eat, withgiving of thanks.Master. You are very voracious, to eat everythingthat is put before you.Scholar. I am not such a glutton as to be able toeat all these kinds of food at the same meal.Master. Then how do you manage ?Scholar. I eat sometimes this food, and sometimesthat, with moderation, as befits a monk; I do noteat voraciously, for I am not a glutton.Master. And what do you drink?Scholar. Beer, if I have any, or water, if I haveno beer.Master. Don't you drink wine ?Scholar. I am not rich enough to buy myself wine ;A COLLOQUY195and wine is not a drink for boys, or foolish persons,but for elders, and wise men.Master. Where do you sleep ?Scholar. In the dormitory with the brethren.Master. Who rouses you up for nocturns ?Scholar. Sometimes I hear the call, and rise,sometimes the master rouses me up sharply with arod.Master.good boys, and pleasant scholars, yourinstructor exhorts you to be obedient to the rules ofdivine discipline, and to behave yourselves decor-ously, wherever you may be. Walk with steadinesswhen you hear the bells of the church, enter into thehouse of prayer, and bend reverently before the holyStand in good order, and sing together, askaltars.forgiveness for your faults, and go out again, withoutplaying the fool, into the cloister or the schoolroom,APPENDIX ATHE following information has been kindly given me byProfessor Skeat :A great many persons in Anglo-Saxon days were knownby the same names. The Professor states that there werenearly sixty men called JSthelweard, over fifty personscalled ^Elfric are recorded, and more than thirty calledJSthelmeer. They are given in Searle's Monasticon Anglo-" was pronounced sometimesSaxonicum. The diphthongseshort, and sometimes long, according to the etymology of the"word.is short, owing to its origin,namely, from """ ricpowerful," or"power," or "kingdom." "Alfred" is from "self," "elf,"and "rede," "advice." The "^E "mhel,"often written Ethel. But the "se" in JMielmser is long.is also short in "" the "" elf"In " ^Elfricmeaningself,"se"":The Professor refers us to Sweet's A.-S. Primer, where itis shown that the short A.-S. "se" has the sound of the"a" in "cat," "Alfred" and "Alfric," which latter gives usthe right pronunciation of ^Elfric. The long A.-S. "is adifficult sound till you get used to it, but it is very near the" a " in the modern English name "Mary."se"196APPENDIX BTHE LORD'S PRAYER IN ANGLO-SAXON *MATTHEW vi.Faeder tire, Thft the eart on heofenum,Father our, Thou that art inSi thin nama gehalgod,Be Thy name hallowed,To becume thinrice,heaven,Gome Thy Kingdom,earth,Geweorthe thin willa on eorthan, swa swa1 on heofenum,Be doneThy will onsoUre dsegwamlican hMf syle us to dseg,ourloaf give us to-day,And forgyf us ure gyltas, swa"and forgive us ourgyltendum,swa" we forgifath urumas weourforgiveheaven,dailydebts,inassodebtors,And ne gelsede thu us on costnunge, ac alys us of yfle.and not lead Thou us into temptation, but loose us of evil.(Amen.)Sothlice.1 The th is given in modern letters, as well as tlie other letters.Earle's Philology of the English Tongue, p. 30.197APPENDIX CLATIN PREFACE TO VOL. II. OF THE CATHOLICHOMILIES, a humble little servant of Jesus Christ, wishes tothe honourable and lovable Archbishop Sigeric perpetualwell-being in the Lord.I confess to thy Bountifulness,Venerable Lord, that I think myself altogether unworthyand presuming, in that I have taken upon myself to addressthee by religious discourses, namely, in the little book whichI have lately set forth under thine authority ; but inasmuchas thou hast only too amply praised the result of my study,and hast willingly accepted that translation, I have hastenedto form this following book, according as the grace of GodI have tried to do this avoiding garruloushas guided me.verbosity, and strange expressions, and seeking rather withpure and plain words, in the language of their nation, to beof use to my hearers, by simple speech, than to be praisedfor the composition of skilful discourse, which my simplicityhas never acquired.And though I was much shaken by the incursions ofinjurious pirates, after I had sent the previous little book tothy Holiness, yet being unwilling to be found false to mypromises, with a suffering mind I have carried through theIn the former work I had arranged fortypresent work.sermons ; in this one the number of discourses is not less,though some of them are reduced to greater brevity.This work I commit to thine authority, to be corrected, asI did the former, earnestly praying thee not to refrain fromwiping out any stains of evil heresies that may be foundtherein, for I would rather receive blame from thy Benignity,than praise from the ignorant for attractions which are notI beg thy Benignity to read through thiswell founded.translation, as thou didst the previous one, and to judgewhether it should be given to the faithful, or cast aside. Theblame of the envious will not disturb me if the granting ofthis favour is not displeasing to thy gracious authority.Fare thee well always in Christ.198Amen.INDEXorAbingdon, Monastery of, 169.JElfeah,ofWinchester,Archbishop of29, 39.Alphege, BishopandthenCanterbury,Alfred, King, 17.JElfric,appointed Abbot ofEynsham, 54 ; list of writ-ings, xv ; lives till 1020, 65..flSthelmser, 51..SSthelred, King, Charter of, 54.^thelthryth, 175.JEthelweard, 51.^Ethelwold, Life by JSlfric, 167.Alban, St., 156.Atonement, 73.Augustine, of Canterbury, 14.Augustine, of Hippo, 47.Bata, JElfrio, 63.Bede, 18, 65.Benedict, St., 5.Blickling Homilies, 21.Boethius, 18.Brooke, Stopford, 141.Byrthnoth, 37.Canterbury, siege of, 38.Canute, King, 165.Cassino, Monte, 7.Castles in Wales, 2.Cernel, 46.Charles the Bald, 87.Charles the Great, 17.Chronicle, Anglo-Saxon, 18, 31.Cloveshoe, Council of, 10.Columba, 14.Columbanus, 4.Cotton, Sir Robert, 19.Cuthberht, Saint, 130.Cynegils, King, 145.Danes, money paid to, 43.Danes' -blood, flowers of, 40.Dialogues of Gregory, 18.Dietrich, 20, 67.Doctrines of the Anglo-SaxonChurch, 66.Donatus, grammar, 49.Dorsetshire, 34.Drihthelm, 135.Dunstan, Archbishop of Canter-bury, 10, 169.Edgar, King, in JElfric's youth,149.Edmund, King, 160.Elephants, 152.Euphrasia, 146.Eynsham, 34.Fleury, 10, 171.Florence of Worcester, 63.Fuller, 43.Glastonbury, 169.Glossary, 50.Gospels, 19.Grammar, 49.Gregory the Great, 17.Haymo, 47, 113.Healas, or Healon, East, 58.Heane, 181.Holy orders, 81.Homilies, Blickling, 21.Homilies, Catholic, 97.Hooker, 107.199200INDEXHousel, 97, 128.Hubba, 161.Intercessions of Virgin Maryand Saints, 71.lona, 14.Irish monasteries, 4, 14.Irish writing, 14.Isidore, 59.Jerome, 47, 113, 132.John Scotus, Erigena, 78.Jonathan, 154.Judas Maccabeus, 152.Kennet, 35.Kenulfus, Bishop, 166.Latin, 49, 111.Laud, Archbishop, 19.ofLegalprinciplesSaxons, 75.Anglo-Lingard, Dr., 83, 99.London, siege of, 33.Lord's Prayer, Appendix B.Mabillon, 182.Maccabees, 155.Maidulf, 14.Maldon, battle of, 37.Mass books, 13.Medehamstede, 175.Mercia, 56.Mission of Augustine, 14.Mission of Celtic teachers, 14.Monasticism, early, 2.New Minster, Winchester, 12.Norman Conquest, 19.Northumberland, 170.Nursia, 7.Old Minster, Winchester, 12.Origen, 75.Orosius, 18.Oswald, King, 10.Paphnutius, 146.Parker, Archbishop, 19.Paschasius, Eadbert, 87.Paul, St., 118.Penitence, Anglo-Saxondoc-trine of, 82.Peter, St., 72.Predestination, 77.Priscian, his Grammar, 49.Pronunciation of Anglo-Saxon,Appendix A.Psalter, Anglo-Saxon, 19.Queen, heavenly, Virgin Mary,69.Eabanus, Maurus, 88.Eatramnus, 89.Eolls Series, 11.Eouth, Dr., 106.Eunic Letters, 14.Sacrifice, on Easter Day, JE1-fric's sermon on, 94.Saints, Lives of the, by JElfric,141.Salvation Army, 2.Sigeric, Archbishop, 32.Sigward, 58.Smaragdus, 37, 113.Society, JElfric, 20.Society, Early English Text, 20.Swithun, St., 149.Theodore, Archbishop, 70.Thorney, 175.Transubstantiation, 86.Trent, Council of, 106.Virgin Mary, doctrine as to, 67.Wales, Church of, 14.Wallingford, 35.Wessex, 56.Wilfred, 10.Willibrord, St., 71.Witan, 33.Worcester, 17.Wulfgeat, 57.Wulfsige, Bishop of Sherborne,53.Wulfstan, Archbishop of York,29.Wulstan, 182.C A triumphant and unqualified success.Bible students.'Sir W. BOBERTSON NICOLL, LL.D.Indispensable to ministers andNOW COMPLETE.A Dictionary of Christand the Gospels.Edited by J. HASTINGS, D.D.In Two Volumes.Price per Vol., in cloth binding, 21s. net ;in naif-morocco, gilt top, 26s. net.The purpose of this Dictionary is to give an account of everything thatrelates to CHRIST His Person, Life, Work, and Teaching.It is first of all a preacher's Dictionary.Its authors are scholars aswell as preachers.The articles are all new.Even when their titles are the same as thetitles of articles in the 'Dictionary of the Bible,' they are written bynew men, and with a new purpose.The articles are not limited even to the Bible, but gather togetherwhatever touches Christ in all the history and experience of theChurch.It is called a DICTIONARY OF CHRIST AND THE GOSPELS, because itincludes everything that the Gospels contain, whether directly relatedIts range, however, is far greater than that of theto CHRIST or not.It seeks to cover all that relates to Christ throughout theGospels.Bible and in the life and literature of the world.There are articleson the Patristic estimate of Jesus, the Mediaeval estimate, the Keforma-tion and Modern estimates.There are articles on Christ in the Jewishwritings and in the Muslim literature. Much attention has been givento modern thought, whether Christian or anti- Christian.Every aspectof modern life, in so far as it touches or is touched by Christ, is describedunder its proper title.It will be found that the contents of the Gospels, especially theirspiritual contents, have never before been so thoroughly investigatedand set forth.Full Prospectus will be sent post free on application to tJie Publishers.T. & T. C/sr&'s, Publications.THE KINGDOM AND THE MESSIAH.By Prof. ERNEST F. SCOTT, D.D., Author of "The FourthGospel : Its Purpose and Theology."Post 8vo, 6s. net.. We desire to speak in"A new volume of conspicuous ability...the warmest terms of the excellent work contained in the volume.Itmerits, and will doubtless receive, the earnest attention of Biblicalscholars."Methodist Times.THE ESCHATOLOGICAL QUESTIONIN THE GOSPELS;and other Studies in recent New TestamentCriticism.By Rev. CYRIL W. EMMET, M.A.Post 8vo, 6s. net.SUMMARY OF CONTENTS. The Eschatology of the Gospels as inter-preted by Schweitzer M. Loisy and the Gospel Story M. Loisy's View ofHarnack on the Second Source of the First and Thirdthe ResurrectionGalatians theGospelsEarliest of the Pauline Epistles The Problem of the Apocalypse and itsBearing on the Conception of Inspiration.Should the Magnificat be ascribed to Elizabeth ?"The busy clergyman, who has heard of Schweitzer and Loisy, but hasno time to study their books at length, will find the essence of their respec-tive positions given with clearness and with conspicuous fairness. He willalso be enabled to estimate their views from the standpoint of a sane andjudicious criticism. We have no space even to summarise Mr. Emmet'sdiscussion. We would rather urge our readers to get the book and studyit for themselves."Record.THE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE OF MAN.By Prof. H. WHEELER ROBINSON, M.A.Post 8vo, 6s. net.' ' We know of no recent work which better enables us to see the spiritual,divine, and infinite content of human nature, the essential and abidingrelation of man to the unseen and eternal, the indisputable fact of hisfreedom, even in a universe governed by supreme and majestic law."Baptist Times.T. & T. Clark's Publications.AN INTRODUCTION TO THELITERATURE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT,By Prof. JAMES MOFFATT, B.D., D.D., Author of "The His-New Volume ' ' Internationaltorical New Testament," etc.Second Edition.Post 8vo, I2S,Theological Library."" We express our heartiest thanks for a work which must for long be theonly manual for English students and the basis for all their work on thesubject."Prof. JAMES DENNEY, D.D."I do not doubt that it will at once take its place as our standardwork."Prof. A. S. PEAKE, D.D." There is no other English book on the subject so comprehensive, andthe reader, whether critic or student, will be impressed with the author'slearning, lucid style, methodical arrangement, and reverent attitude."Athenesum.THE EARLIEST LIFE OF CHRIST :Being the Diatessaron of Tatian.By Rev. J. HAMLYN HILL, D.D. A popular Edition, withIntroduction.35. net.Dr. Hamlyn Hill's larger edition, containing the valuable Appendices,has been out of print for some time.It is hoped that the low price atwhich this edition is now issued will enable many to place in their librariesa copy of one of the most interesting of early Christian writings.' 'Absolutely necessary to every serious student of the Gospels. Thepublishers have therefore done us a real service in issuing a cheaper editionof it."Expository Times.VISIONS AND REVELATIONS.Discourses on the Apocalypse.By Rev. JOHN T. DEAN, M.A.Post 8vo, 55. net."A scholarly exposition of a difficult but fascinating subject. Thehistorical and literary illustrations are drawn from a wide range of reading,and are both apt and illuminating."Scotsman,4 An excellent series of biographical studies.'- ATHENJCUM.The World'sEpoch-Makers.EDITED BYOLIPHANT SMEATON, M.A.'The whole Series is a history of the thought of the world and ofvery great value as an educator.'- EXPOSITORY TIMES.'A valuable series of studies in religious philosophy. 'LONDONQUARTERLY REVIEW.IN CROWN 8vo, PRICE THREE SHILLINGS EACH.The following Volumes are now ready:Cranmer and the Reformation inEngland.By ARTHUR D. INNBS, M.A.' With undeniable literary faculty and a style at once incisive and severe, Mr. Innesunites the scholarly instinct and that taste for wide research which is the primerequisite for every earnest student in our time who aspires to do first-rate historicwork. ... To find oneself in the hands of the earnest and accomplished author ofthis notable monograph, is to feel lifted into a higher plane of thought and feeling.'Athenaeum.Wesley and Methodism.By F. J. SNELL, M.A.'A well-studied account of the system of belief and practice which grew up aroundthe figure of John Wesley.It reckons up not only Wesley's contribution to clericalaffairs, but his influence in the social life of hia own and later times. A thoughtfuland valuable monograph, which should be read with sympathy and profit by everyone interested in its subject.'Scotsman.Luther and the German Reformation.By Principal THOS. M. LINDSAY, D.D.1Especially is there room for so able and judicious a work as this. The story ofLuther's life is told simply and well, and it is, above all, related to the time and itsBtrange new forces and problems. ... We think that students of the life of Luthercould hardly find a better work than this.'Spectator.The World's ^Epoch-Makers.Buddha and Buddhism.By ARTHUR LILLIE.' His book is a solid performance, showing much industry and scholarship, and hispresentation of Buddha and his message of peace, charity, and universal benevolenceis both discriminating and sympathetic, and deserves hearty welcome.' Indian Review.William Herschel and his Work.By JAMES SIME, M.A., F.R.S.E.' Nothing remains but to praise this full and accurate account of his life and work.We have no work in the country which supplies what this volume gives iu full.Although it deals largely with astronomical matters, and might easily have beenmade exceedingly dull, there is not an unreadable page in the book.'Critical Review,Francis and Dominic,, and the MendicantOrders.By Prof. JOHN HERKLESS, D.D.1 A book that appeals strongly to students of religious zeal within the Church of. The progress of the two Orders, the service they rendered to Rome, andRome. .their pitiful decline and fall are sketched with learning and insight in this valuablehistory.' London Quarterly Review..Savonarola.By Rev. GEORGE M 'HARDY, D.D.Dr. M 'Hardy is fair, judicial, and yet considerate; his pages reveal the student,and he directs the reader to sources which will enable every one to frame a verdict onthe sentence. ... In this excellent work the substance, drift, and final meaning ofthis heroic yet visionary life are given.' Bookman.Anseflm and his Work.By Rev. A. C. WELCH, B.D., Th.D.'This "Anselm" is an admirable book.Merely to turn over its pages is to findoneself face to face with first-hand use of original authorities as illuminated byHis presentation of the subject is well-proportioned, sym-modern scholarship.pathetic, everywhere vigorous, and not seldom eloquent.Literary World.1Muhammad and his Power.By P. DE LACY JOHNSTONE, M.A.'This interesting volume gives in a moderate compass a thoroughly good, popularaccount of Muhammad's career and influence. The author is evidently well read inthe literature of his subject, and his work could hardly have been better done. 1Guardian,Origen and Greek Patristic Theology.By Rev. WM. FAIRWEATHER, D.D.1 A monograph of real value.It is lucid in style, clear in its arrangement, and,while written by a sympathetic hand, gives an impression of perfect fairness of mindnud trained historical sense.'Guardian.The World's Epoch-Makers.The ftiedici and the Italian Renaissance.By OLIPHANT SMEATON, M.A.1 Their history is delightfully set forth in Mr. Smeaton's charming pages, whichgive evidence of wide and careful reading, masterly historical analysis, discriminatingjudgment, and sympathetic handling.' Aberdeen Journal.Plato.By Prof. D. G. RITCHIE, LL.D.' An excellent text-book for students.It is very well written, and altogether it isone of the best volumes in the series.' Manchester Guardian.Pascal and the Port Royalists.By Prof. WM. CLARK, LL.D.1 This is the best book we know for any one who wishes to study a great man and anhistoric controversy.' London Quarterly Review.Euclid: His Life and System.By Prof. THOS. SMITH, LL.D.1 A book of fascinating interest to many who would never dream of calling them-selves mathematicians.'Westminster Review.Hegel and Hegelianism.By Prof. ROBERT MACKINTOSH, D.D.' Whilst the book is the work of a careful, penetrating, and exact thinker, it iswritten in a clear, terse, vivacious style, and is brightened by felicitous illustrationsIt can be confidently commended to all who wish to getfrom general literature.some understanding of Hegel.'Christian World.David Hume and his Influence on Philo-sophy and Theology.By Prof. JAMES ORR, D.D.1 Prof. Orr has made Hume his special study.is hidden from him.considered. A better choice for this volume could not have been made.'There is no corner of his mind thatThere is no cause or effect of his philosophy that he has notRousseau and Naturalism in Life andExpository Times.Thought.By Prof. WM. H. HUDSON, M.A.1 Prof. Hudson has given us an admirable sketch of Rousseau's life, and an equallyThis is one of tb* best volumesadmirable summary and criticism of his writings.of the series.'Critical Review.The World? s Epoch-Makers.Descartes, Spinoza, and the New Philo-sophy.By Principal JAMES IVEKACH, D.D.'This book constitutes, within a convenient compass, an admirable introductionand incentive to what is, intellectually, one of the great periods of human develop-ment.'Literary World.Socrates*By Rev. J. T. FORBES, M.A.The author has done a real service to the educated public by issuing a bright,sound estimate, biographical and critical, of the charm and limitations attaching tothe Greek primal path.'EiVbert Journal.Wycliffe and the Lollards.By Rev. J, 0. CABRICK, B.D.An able book which we can cordially commend.' Sword and Trowel.Cardinal Newman and his Influence onReligious Life and Thought.By CHARLES SAROLEA, Ph.D., Litt.D.1 Nowhere could we find a more impartial estimate, not of the man only, but of allthe facts, mental and emotional, which condition the study of theology.'Spectator.Marcus Aurelius and the Later Stoics.By Vice-Principal F. W. BUSSELL, D.D.' A comprehensive and critical consideration of Btoicism, both in its Greek origin. The student of Stoicism should not, andand its development by the Romans. .must not, fail to use this inexpensive but scholarly work. 1Oxford Times..Kant and his Philosophical Revolution.By Prof. R. M. WENLEY, D.Sc., Litt.D.' A worthy addition to the admirable volumes which have already appeared in theseries. The author has succeeded in presenting us with a clear and concise and, onthe whole, a comprehensive epitome of the man and his work. 1Glasgow Herald.Trtf-p /" | A D I/"3S Geor^e Street, EDINBURGH.. CC 1 . *L>L<r\lv.r^9 13 Paternoster Square, LONDON.London Agents: SIMPKIN, MARSHAL, HAMIIiZOH, KENT, ft CO. ltd.T. and T. Clark's Publications.One thousand pages, with Maps.In cloth bindingIn half-leather .....2os. net.255. net.Dictionary of the Bible.COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME.Edited by JAMES HASTINGS, D.D.This Dictionary is entirely distinct from the Five-VolumeIt is not based on any other Dictionary, but is aDictionary.wholly new and original Work.Every Article is signed by the Author.This is the firsttime that all the Articles in a single-volume Dictionary of theBible have been committed to Specialists and bear theirsignatures, as in the largest Dictionaries.Complete Prospectus, with Specimen Pages, free.' A very fine achievement, worthy to stand beside his larger Diction-aries, and by far the most scholarly yet produced in one volume inEnglish-speaking countries, perhaps it may be said in the world.'Christian World.'1 An exceedingly valuable and comprehensive work. 'Thoroughly abreast of present-day knowledge.For presentation andlibrary purposes the book outstrips all its rivals, and its closely packedpages are a perfect mine for teachers and ministers.' Sunday SchoolChronicle.Record.1 To produce in a single volume a Dictionary of the Bible sufficientlyample in its scope and plan, abreast of present scholarship, not tooelementary to be of use to students and ministers, and not too technicaland scholastic in its method for an ordinary reader is, as will be readilyunderstood, an extremely difficult undertaking.So far as our examina-tion of it has gone, it has been admirably accomplished.'Recorder.MethodistA *H OJM^T r,Crof,UNIVERS TY OF CHICAGO-^^am |45 253 947/ O Z 3