CHAPTER XIV.HENRY II. HAD ONLY A NOMINAL POWER IN IRELAND.(1173-I180.)LiNGARD, always moderate in his estimates and statements,says of Henry H., that he " left the island without havingadded an inch of territory to the acquisitions of the originalHis nominal sovereignty was, indeed, ex-adventurers.tended over four out of five provinces, but his real authoritywas confined to the cantreds in the vicinity of his garri-sons. There the feudal customs and services were intro-duced and enforced ; in the rest of the island the nationallaws prevailed, and the Irish princes felt no other changein their situation than that they had promised to a distantprince the obedience which they had previously paid to theKing of Connaught.2 .. The castles which had been for-tified in Meath were burnt to the ground : Dublin was re-four English knights, and four hun-peatedly insulted :dred Ostmen, their followers, fell in a battle in Ossory ;3and the governor himself was compelled to seek refugewithin the castle of Waterford..Far from thinking of conquering Ireland, Henry II.' The character of Pope Alexander III. is thus described byVoltaire, an unexpected admirer, in his Essay on General History :' Perhaps the man who, in those gross times, called the Middle Ages,deserved most of the human race, was Pope Alexander III.It was hewho in a Council of the 12th century abolished slavery, as far as wasIt was this same Pope who, by his wisdom, triumphed inpossible.Venice over the violence of the Emperor Barbarossa, and who compelledHenry II., King of England, to ask pardon of God and men for themurder of Thomas Becket. He upheld the rights of peoples, and put. If men entered again into their rights,down the crimes of Kings. .it is chiefly to Pope Alexander that they are indebted for them.It is(x., 998.) And is itto him that so many cities owe their splendour."to be said that to him Ireland owes many of her misfortunes?Trans.'The historian does not. examine whether the story of this sub-mission is true or false.Trans.' In 1174.,—36POPE ADRIAN IV.employed all his forces to subdue theWelsh, who had re-belled. Lingard says : " Henry exercised his vengeance onhis numerous hostages, the children of the noblest famiKesin Wales. ... By his orders the eyes of all the males wererooted out, and the ears and noses of the females wereamputated."{History oj England,.)According to Roger de Hoveden, Henry O., in 1175,held at Windsor a great Council, at which the Archbishopsof Tuam and Dublin—Cantordis, Abbot of St. Brendanand Master Laurence, Chancellor of Roderic, King ofThe record of the chroniclerConnacht, were present.supplies me with a new proof against the genuineness ofthe Bull attributed to Adrian IV. ; for this Bull was notmentioned a single time, and the English never availedtherriselves of it in these solemn negotiations of peace.Still more, the clauses of the Bull were violated by theIn effect, Adrian IV. had, in thearticles of the treaty.Apocryphal Bull, twenty yearsthatevery house in Ireland should contribute to the Peter'sPence, as in England. Henry II. did not say a word of itin his treaty with Connacht: he claimed for himself atenth cowhide or sheepskin.If the Bull of Adrian hadbeen published in a Council of Irish Bishops, as GiraldusCambrensis assures us, would the Archbishops of Dubhnand Tuam have allowed this treaty to pass over the ponti-fical contribution in silence ?prescribedbefore,At this time, Henry 11. and his barons possessed nothingin Ireland but Dublin, Wexford, and Waterford. We mayso conclude from the stipulation of the treaty, as relatedby Hoveden.(Page 312.)GiralduschaplainCambrensis.The King'sThis annalist is useful, because he serves as a checkondid,not depend on thecredulous Welshman, well as heknew the work Hibernia Expugnaia, which was pub-lished years before the death of the English chronicler.Giraldus relates that the Bull of Adrian was sent intoIreland—carried by William Fitz-Aldelm, and Nicholas,Prior, of Wallingford ; and that it was publicly read in aCouhcil of Bishops at Waterford, by John of Salisbury,who was sent to Rome for it, and who had also broughtthe ring of investiture : a ring deposited, with the Bull,in the archives of Winchester.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.37We might accordingly suppose that John of Salisbury,arriving from Rome at this moment, published in a Coun-cil of 1 175 the Bull which he had just obtained from PopeAdrian IV. , who died about fifteen years previously.The ancient annals of Ireland have not recorded anygeneral assembly of bishops in 1175.It is improbable thatthe bishops would have chosen the city of Waterford as aplace of meeting, because it was in the power of Welshand Norman adventurers. ^' A certain learned writer, who is an earnest advocate for Adrian'sgrant, admits that St. Laurence O'Toole, who became Archbishop ofDublin in 1161, was a " persistent opposer of English rule in Ireland."Now, can any one suppose that the Saint would have been such, if hebelieved that Henry had any authority from Rome to rule in Ireland ?And if any man in Ireland knew the sentiments of Rome, surely it wasIn point of fact, St. Laurence, when com-the Archbishop of Dublin.missioned in 1171 to make terms with Strongbow, required that heand his followers should surrender all the places they had taken, andquit the island by a certain day.As wonders will never cease, the aforesaid writer contends that inthe whole domain of history there is no fact better proved than Adrian'sYet, preferring a more mild and euphemistic term, he con-grant.tinually speaks of it as Adrian's Privilege—the privilege, shall we say,of robbing and killing the Irish, under the Christian plea of civilisingThus, he informs ,us that Henry, implicated in the murder ofthem ?St, Thomas, and hastening out of reach of the Legates, " in order todo something to propitiate Rome, and at the same time gratify hisambition, prepared to go in person to Ireland, and carry out the refor-mation for which he had obtained a privilege from Pope Adrian."High time indeed to set to work in 1171, if the privilege was receivedin 1 155, and a strange method indeed of appeasing that Pope who, ifwe may believe Voltaire himself (a man not likely to give unduepraise to a ! Pope), "put down the crimes of Kings and upheld therights of peoples !" We now learn that this royal reformer (who hadsuch need of reforming himself) was accompanied by a fleet of 400vessels, carrying " mail-clad knights in hundreds and tens of thousandsof archers." Though puzzled somewhat by the numbers here given,and amazed at the novelty of the plan, we look about for the magnifi-cent reformation to follow. Do we find it ?Alas, the words of AbbeMcGeoghegan, the distinguished French historian, immediately occurto us, " A bad Christian makes a bad Apostle."Far from finding anyreformation, we find only the beginning of a long-continued andatrocious deform'ation, ruinous alike to the spiritual and the materialwelfare of the Irish people. And is it possible that any Pope could beso wanting in prudence as to sanction such an enterprise, or not toforesee the dire results that should certainly be expected from it ?(See Dublin Review, April, J884, p. 318.)—Trans.38POPE ADRIAN IV.,