CHAPTER IIIANGLO-SAXON CHEONICLE:DANISH WAESIT is very desirable to gather from, the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle what the state of the country waswhile -/Elfric was quietly working in his monasteryand animating his countrymen to piety and energyWith a king, Ethelred the Un-by his writings.1 who was of no use as a leader, and who didready,not even behave well to his own subjects, the" DeliverEnglish were under great discouragement.not the tasks of might to weakness," says Tennyson ;and if ever in our history they were so given over,His weakness wasit was in the time of Ethelred.infectious ; his subjects were unwilling to defend theirThe English were no longer the warriorscountry.they had been under Alfred, and hardly anywhere,except in London, did they hold out successfullyEven there they eventuallyagainst the Danes.The Chronicle frankly acknowledgesmade terms.and laments bitterly their unwillingness to fight,and their useless payment of thousands of pounds1 The "Unready" was not used in our sense.It meant "redeless,'-*i,e, without counsel.Yet he was also unready in our sense.3132AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTto buy off their enemies, who took the money andthen raided as much as ever.Some instances ofthese miseries from the pages of the Chronicle willgive an idea of the situation.We may begin by quoting the notice of the" This year (A.D. 984)death of Bishop ^thelwold.died the benevolent Bishop of Winchester, -ZEthel-Then (A.D. 986), thewold, 'Father of monks.'"" Thisunnatural conduct of the King is referred to :year the King laid waste the bishopric of Eochester.This year departed the holy ArchbishopA.D. 988.Dunstan, and passed to the heavenly life, and BishopEthelgar succeeded after him, to the archbishopric,and little while after that he lived, but one yearand three months.A.D. 990.This year Sigericwas consecrated archbishop, and afterwards went toEome for his pall.In that year it wasA.D. 991.decreed that tribute, for the first time, should begiven to the Danish men, on account of the greatterror which they caused by the sea-coast, that wasat first ten thousand pounds ; this counsel was firstOne orgiven by Archbishop Sigeric."two gleams of success are now recorded. A traitor,who frequently betrayed the English cause to theenemy, earldorman ^Ifric, got the worst of it.The ships from East Anglia, and from Londonmet the army, and there they made great slaughterof them, and took the ship, all armed and equipped,in which the earldorman was.A.D. 992.A.-S. CHRONICLE: DANISH WARS 33The battle at Maldon.A.D. 994.A.D. 993." attacked London, on the nativityWhen the enemyof St. Mary (Sept. 8) and continued fighting stoutlyagainst the city, and would have set fire to it, theythere sustained more harm and evil than they eversupposed any citizens would be able to do untoFor the holy Mother of God on that daythem.showed her mercy to the citizens and deliveredThen they went thence,them from their foes.and wrought the utmost evil that ever any armycould do, by burning and plundering, and by man-slaying, both by the sea-coast, and among the EastSaxons, and in the land of Kent, in Sussex, and inThen the King and his Witan decreedHampshire.that they should be sent to, and promised tributeand food, on condition that they should cease fromtheir plundering ; which termsthey accepted."Usually this compact was not observed by theenemy, but the Chronicle tells us that one of theirleaders named Anlaf had become a Christian, and" the King received him at the bishop's hands, andAnd Anlaf made a covenantroyally gifted him.with him that he would never come with hostilityto the English nation again, and he kept his word."We may note that the Chronicle tells us, underA.D. 995, that in this year ^Ifric, who is describedas bishop of Wiltshire, was made archbishop.Herewe have clear proof that he was not the sameperson as our ^Elfric, for the latter is recorded to334AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOThave been abbot of Eynsham, a monastery whichwas founded between the years 1000 and 1005;that is, subsequent to the appointment of the otherJSlfric as archbishop."A.D. 998.This year the army (thisis thedesignation of the enemy) went up as far as theyAnd forces were gatheredwould into Dorset.against them, but as soon as they should havejoined battle, then was there ever, through somecause, flight begun, and in the end they ever hadthe victory.""A.D. 999.This year the army again cameabout into Thames, and went then up along the.And then the KentishMedway and to Eochester.forces came there to meet them, and they therestoutly joined battle : but alas ! they too quicklyyielded and fled, for they had not the support whichAnd the Danish men hadthey should have had.possession of the place of carnage, and then they tookhorse and rode wheresoever they themselves would,and full nigh all the West Kentish men theyruined and plundered. ,Then the King, with hisWitan, decreed that with a ship force and alsoButwith a land force, they should be attacked.when the ships were ready, then the miserable crewdelayed from day to day, and distressed the poorpeople who lay in the ships ; and ever as it shouldhave been forwarder, so was it later from one timeto another, and ever they let their enemies' forcesincrease, and ever the people retired from the sea,And then inand they ever went forth after them.A.-S. CHRONICLE: DANISH WARS 35.security, the Islethe end, these expeditions both by sea and landeffected nothing, except the people's distress andwaste of money, and the emboldening of their foes.""In the year 1006 Archbishop JElfric died ; andafter him Bishop ^Elfeah succeeded to the arch-. When it became winter,bishopric (Alphege) .then went the forces home, and the army thencame, over St. Martin's mass (Nov. 11) to theirof Wight, and pro-place ofcured themselves there from all parts that whichAnd then, at midwinter, they wentthey needed.their ready storing of provisions, throughouttoHampshire into Berkshire, and to Beading; andthey did their old wont, they lighted their warThen went they to Walling-beacons as they went.ford, and that all burned, and were then one dayin Cholsey ; and they went then along Ascesdun toCwichelms-hloew, and there abode, as a daringboast ; for it had been often said, if they shouldreach Cwichelms-hloew, that they would never againgo to the sea, then they went homewards anotherThen were forces assembled at Kennet, andway.they there joined battle ; and they soon broughtthat band to flight, and afterwards carried theirBut there might the Winchesterbooty to the sea.men see an army daring and fearless, as they wentby their gates towards the sea, and fetched them-selves food and treasures from over fifty miles tothe sea."Our Chronicle goes on to describe how the Kingmade a great effort to provide an adequate naval36AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTforce; but when the ships were all ready, therewas desertion and treachery, and a storm dashed" Then was it as if itsome of the ships to pieces.had been all hopeless ; and the King went his wayhome, and the earldormen and the high Witan andthus lightly left the ships, and they let the wholenation's toil thus lightly pass away."These passages may suffice to show the sad stateof the English nation, the uselessness of their king,and the cruelty of the invaders, and may make uswonder the more that, at no great distance fromsome of these distressing scenes, Abbot ^Elfric wassending forth writings which might animate hiscountrymen to braver resistance, and at the sametime lead them to a Christian life, and to prepara-for that wonderful spiritual and heavenlytionworld, which is the sure and certain object of theChristian hope.JElfric was, as has been already stated, constantlypointing out to his countrymen the need of militarytraining for Home defence, and encouraging them byexamples of valour drawn from Scripture and fromTheir ill -success in the reign ofsecular history.Ethelred was largely due to the incompetence ofthe King, and to the extraordinary prevalenceYet there is a further reason given byof traitors.Professor Oman in the first volume of the Historyof England which he is now editing. He tells usthat the only disciplined soldiers in the service ofA.-S. CHRONICLE: DANISH WARS 37the English kings were their house-carls, or body-guard, and the Territorial force or "fyrd" wasneither trained nor properly armed, being mainly amultitude of farmers and labourers, provided atHence thehazard with any available weapons.Saxons could only hope to overcome the Daneswhen theyassemblednumbers.superiorFor the successes of the Danes werewereveryinlargely due totheir being well provided withoffensive and defensive armour, and to their beingFrom these causes they had antrained fighters.organized superiority before a battle began, and wecannot be surprised that, when it was over, theyso often " had possession of the place of carnage,"as the Chronicle tells us.^Elfeah,ArchbishopAmid the sad decadence of the reign of Ethelred,two heroes stand out offering a noble contrast tothe prevailing inefficiency and cowardice.TheseCanterbury, andareByrthnoth, the leader in the splendid fightofThe name JElfeah, or St. Alphege, isMaldon.rightly commemorated in the Calendar of our PrayerBook, and no more suitable name could be found inthe present day when builders of a new Church areseeking for a patron saint.ofThe Earldorman Byrthnoth refused to pay tributeto the Danes, and fell in the battle of Maldon,whereshowed something of theirancient valour, and gave the Danes severe " handSaxonsthe38AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTplay." A considerable fragment still exists of aspirited poem on this battle, which will be foundThein the Analecta Anglo-Sationica, by Thorpe.reader is referred to a vivid outline of these versesin the Gambridge History of Literature, vol. i. p. 144.The following is the account of the martyrdomof ^Elfeah 'in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle :"A.D. 1011.In this year between the nativityof St. Mary and St. Michael's Mass they besiegedCanterbury, and got into it through treachery,because ^Elmar 1betrayed it, whose life the Arch-And there theybishop .ZElfeah had before saved.took the Archbishop JElfeah and JElfweard theKing's steward, and the AbbessLeofrune, andAnd Abbot ^Elmar they let goBishop Godwin.. And they remained within the Cityaway .And when theyafterwards as long as they would.had thoroughly searched the city, then went theyto their ships, and led the Archbishop with them.He was then captivewho erewhile wasthe head of the English raceand of Christendom.There might then be seenmisery, where men ofterewhile had seen bliss,in that hapless city,whence to us came firstChristendom and blissfor God, and for the world." And they kept the Archbishop with them until1 Florence of Worcester describes ^Elmar as archdeacon.A.-S. CHRONICLE: DANISH WARS 39.the time came that they martyred him."Thisoccurred in the year 1012, "for," the Chronicle" in this year came Mdnc the earldormancontinues,and all the chief witan, clergy, and laity of the. andEnglish people to London before Easter .they were there then so long as until all the tributewas paid, after Easter ; that was eight and fortyThen on the Saturday (19th ofthousand pounds.April) was the army greatly excited against thebishop, because he would not promise them anymoney : but that he forbade that anything shouldThey had also drunk deeply,be given for him.for wine had been brought there from the south.Then took they the bishop, led him to their trust-. and there they thening on the eve of Sunday ;shamefully slaughtered him: they cast upon himbones and the horns of oxen, and then one of themstruck him with an axe-iron on the head so thatwith the blow he sank down ; and his holy bloodfell on the earth, and his holy soul he sent forthAnd on the morrow the bodyto God's Kingdom.was carried to London and the bishops ^Ednoth and.ZElfun and the townsmen received it with allreverence, and buried it in St. Paul's minster ; andthere Grod now manifesteth the miraculous powersof the holy Martyr."..We find that in 1013, "in the year after thatin which the Archbishop ^Elfeah was martyred, the1 In the Dictionary of National Biocjrapliy it is stated thatThurkill, the leader of the Danes, hastened to the spot, and offeredto give gold and silver, -and all that he had, save his ship, if theywould save the life of the Archbishop.40AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTKing appointed bishop Lyfing to be Archbishop atThis is an additional proof that ourCanterbury."^Elfric could never have held this high office.lIn concluding this short notice of the Danishinvasion, I have obtained permission from the Editorof Notes and Queries to quote the following interest-to plants whoseing particulars with referencenames were connected with these sanguinary contestsThey show how deeply theby popular tradition.cruelties of .the Danes had been stored up in thefolklore of the people."DANES'-BLOOD, A FLOWER (US. ii. 48 8).Thisis a local name in Hertfordshire and Essex appliedto several plants which are supposed to owe theirorigin to the blood of slaughtered Danes. My firstthis denominationacquaintance with a plant ofproved to be the Danewort or dwarf elder, whichgrew fairly freely in places by the side of the mainroad between Anstey and Barkway." Weever in his Antient Funeral Monuments, 1631,p. 707, referring to Bartlow, Essex, says :" ' Danewort, which with bloud-red berries commeth uphere plenteously, they still call by no other name than Danes-bloud, of the number of the Danes that were there slaine.'"Camden in his Britannia, 1607, refers to theItsame plant as the wall-wort or dwarf elder.should be noted that the elder-berries are not red,but a reddish-black, and yield a violet juice.1 The quotations from the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle are taken fromthe translation by the Kev. J. Stevenson, Seeleys.1853.A.-S. CHRONICLE: DANISH WARS 41" The Anemone pulsatilla or pasque-flower, foundin abundance near Ashwell, Herts, is also knownMr. E. V. Methold in hislocally as Danes'-blood.Notes on Stevenage, Herts, remarks that in thehedges of the field known to this day as ' Danes'Blood Meld ' there grows a plant called 'monkshood,'in which, during the spring, the sap turns to areddish colour.W. B. G-ERISH." In Tongues in Trees,a, work on plantlore publishedby George Allen in 1891, I read at p. 48 :" * The pasque-flower. Anemone pulsatilla, a native in thefields near Royston, is there supposed to have grown from theblood of Danes slain in battle. The same idea attaches inWiltshire to the Banewort or dwarf elder, Sambucus JEbulus ;though at the High Cross on Watling Street near Leicester itis recorded as having been planted by the Romans as a preser-vative against dropsy.'W. T."According to Folkard, the plant to which thislegend properly belongs is the dwarf elder. Hequotes Aubrey in support, who locates the legendat Slaughterford in Wilts." Friend says the name is given in various placesto the rose, anemone, thistle, Adonis, and otherflowers tod numerous to mention.C. C. B." Britten and Holland, Plant Names, 1886, p.1. Sambucus Ebulus,species :2. Anemone pulsatilla, L., Cambs,142, give threeL., Cambs, "Wilts ;N.Essex,Norf.3. Campanulaglomerata,S. L. PETTY.L.,Cambs.Ulverston."It is not only the clustered bell-flower (Gam-42AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTpanula glomerata) that is known as Danes'-blood.The dwarf elder, Sambucus Ebulus, is also known bothas Danes'-blood and Danes'-wort (Berkshire), and,as may be seen in Salmon's London Dispensatory,was a common remedy for various ills.The popularbelief that the flower sprang originally from theblood of the Danes which stained the ancient battle-fields is still common in Wiltshire, North Hertford-shire, Hampshire, Cumberland, North Essex, andIn Northamptonshire the plant is knownNorfolk.also as Dane-weed, and Defoe, in his Tour throughGreat Britain, speaks of his going a little out ofthe road from Daventry to see a great camp calledBarrow Hill, and adds :" ' They say this was a Danish camp, and everything here-about is attributed to the Danes, because of the neighbouringDaventry, which they suppose to be built by them. The roadhereabouts, too, being overgrown with Dane-weed, they fancyit sprang from the blood of Danes slain in battle ; and that,if upon a certain day in the year you cut it, it bleeds.'Vol.ii. p. 362.There is a full account of the traditionin The515.andBritten, s.vv.Gardeners' Chronicle, 1875, p.PriorDanewort, Daneweed;Aubrey's Natural History of Wilts, p. 50;" NaturalHistory and Antiquities of Surrey," iv. 217, citedin Flowers and Flower Lore, by the Eev. HilderieFriend, 1884.J. HOLDEN MAcMiCHAEL.alsoSee4 Hurlingham Court, S.W."^Ethelred began his reign in the year 979, anddied in 1016.A.-S. CHRONICLE: DANISH WARS 43The following sums were paid to the Danes, whotook the indemnity, and ravaged all the same, in hisThese payments were begun by the advicereign.of Archbishop Sigeric :A.D.991 ... 10,000994 ... 16,000100210071014.........24,00036,00021,000When we consider the different value of money inthose days, it seems wonderful that England shouldhave been able to raise so much for payment of"Danegelt."Old Fuller 1 remarks on this: "King ^Ethelredhearkened to the persuasions of Siricius, Archbishopof Canterbury, and withten thousand poundspurchased a present peace with the Danes.Indeed,it was conformable to the calling of a Churchman toprocure peace, having not only Scripture preceptsSeek peace, and pursue it/ but also pre-therein,cedents for the same, when gracious Hezekiah with apresent persuaded Sennacherib to desist from invadinghim. However, this Archbishop generally suffered inhis reputation, condemned of all, for counselling ofwhat was, first, dishonourable, that an entire nation1 Fuller's Church History of Britain, book ii. p. 136, printed forJohn Williams at the sign of the Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard, anno 1656.44AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTbeing at home in their own land should purchasea peace from foreigners, fewer in number, andfetching their recruits and warlike provisions froma far country ; let them be paid in due coin ; notif once thesilver, but steel.Danes got the trick to make the English bleedmoney, they would never leave them till they hadsucked out their heart-blood and exhausted theSecondly, imprqfitable ;whole treasure of the land."