CHAPTER XXX.BRIEFS OF THE HOLY SEP. ON THE WAR OF IRISH INDEPENDENCE.Si.VERAL briefs of Gregory XIII., and two other briefs byClement VI 1 1, twenty years later, approved of the risingof the Irish against the English, to recover the nationalindependence, and freedom of worship for the Catholicreligion.' Even at the present day, it seems that three-fourths of thefarms are crowded on one-fourth of the land.Trans.^ If, at the time our esteemed author wrote, the History ofIreland in the Eighteenth Century, V. vols., by William E. H. Lecky,had been published, he would likely have had a great deal more tosay on the reigns of WiUiam, Anne, and the Georges. The goodclauses of the Treaty of IJmerick held but for a very short time.Abbe McGeoghegan shows from French official documentsthat between 1691 and 1745 more than 450,000 Irishmen died in theservice of France alone, to say nothing of Spain or Austria. Lifein Ireland had been rendered next to impossible for them.Trans—A FKlliND Ol- IKHLAND.—I29In point of fact, the champions of independence appealedto the Sovereign Pontiff, and the Popes often sent thempecuniary and mihtary aid, and exhorted the Irish, byletters or by messengers, to shake off the English yoke,and to free their country from civil and religious bondage.The brief of Gregory XIII. on the 13th of May, 1580,mentions another, anterior by a few years, which had like-wise exhorted the Irish to take up arms for the defence ofThe Pontiff granted the indulgencesthe Catholic Faith.of the Crusadec, to all who should favour the good cause,The brief hasby supplying- either ammunition or food.It rhay be found in thebeen published by historians.Hisioire d'Ireland, by McGeoghegan, with the follov/ing" Behold the remedy that Gregory XIII. wouldremark :bring to the evils of Ireland, which one of his predecessors,Adrian IV., had caused !"(T. 2, p. 1139.)The first brief of Clement VIII. is dated the i6th ofAfter the death of James Geraldine and hisApril, 160a.relatives, the army took as its leader Hugh O'Neill, Earlof Tyrone. 1 The Pontiff renewed the indulgences of theCrusades for men in the army, and for all others whoshould assist in the cause of independence and the defenceof religion.The Irish formed a national association against desertersClement VIII. highly approved of theirfrom the Church.zeal ; recommended concord, a good understanding, tothem ; promised to write earnestly to Catholic princes ;and announced the sending of a Nuncio, who would resideamong them, and contribute to the maintenance of union.This brief, dated the 30th of January, 1601, was addressedto the Captain-General of the Catholic army.In 1603, two cases of conscience were laid before thePrince Hugh O'Neill wages warUniversity of Salamanca.against the Queen of England for the defence of the Catho-lic religion, that the Irish may be permitted to profess ita liberty that the Queen wishes to take from them by forceCan Irish Catholics in conscience, by arms andof arms.all other means, help Prince Hugh in this war? And canIrish Catholics, without mortal sin, enlist in the enemy's' It will be observed, that, notwithstanding what has been saidat p. 121, the name O'Neill still survives.Trans.—130POPE ADRIAN IV.,army, fight against Prince Hugh, and favour the Englishby arms or in any other manner?The Spanish Doctors answered the first question affirma-tively, the second negatively.The resistance of the Irish was just, because they de-fended religion, which the English endeavoured by force ofarms to abolish. On the side of the Irish, it was a defen-sive war ; they wished to preserve themselves from a reli-Forgious persecution and a most tyrannical oppression.the same reason, the war that the English made being un-just, an Irishman could not in conscience fight in theirranks, against his fellow-countrymen, iThe Bull of Adrian IV. was never brought forward in theIs it not truly significant that thisbriefs that I have cited.Bull was never mentioned in any official document ?therepresentativeThe Irish, bravely risen against England, earnestly de-sired that the Pope should take the temporal sovereigntyof the kingdom, and be declared its lord and master.Peterof Hugh O'NeillLombard,withClement VIII., believed in the genuineness of the Bull, asmay be seen in the " Annals of Ireland," which he pub-lished at Louvain.Frequently admitted to a Pontificalaudience, according to a promise given in the brief of 1601,he had many an opportunity of speaking of the Bull, andprobably he urged the Pope to rely upbn this ancient proofof pontifical right. But Clement VIII., resisting all impor-tunity, took good care not to admit the genuineness of theBull.? Don Philip O'SuUivan, in his Histories Catholicat HibcrnimCompendium, has given much blame to some Anglo-Irish priests,doctrine :— " Cujus mail maxima culpa in aliquot Anglo-lbernoswho, through culpable or inculpable ignorance, taught a contrarysacerdotes jure transferenda est, qui tartareum dogma ab orcoin Catholicorum perniciem emissum non negabant, licere Catholiciscontra Catholicos et suam patriam pro hsereticis gerere arma, etQuod si sacerdotes isti sand mente, et cum coeteris indimicare.hEercticis oppugandis unanimes et Concordes extitissent, et Iberniallis non obstitissent, facili negotio potuissent hsereticorumaliijugum cervicibus discutere, ut ex omni nostra historia fusius etEdited by the Rev. Dr. Matthew Kelly,assertius constat."p. 339.Trans.—A FKllCNU Of IRliLAND.I3I