CHAPTER VIICATHOLIC HOMILIESEXTRACTS from the Homilies of the Anglo-SaxonChurch, formed by ^Elfric, from theold Latinwriters.These two volumes are called ^Elfric'sCatholicHomilies ; Mr. Benjamin Thorpe, F.S.A., publishedthem with an English translation in 1846, and heremarks in his Preface that this work "now pre-sented to the -ZElfric Society is the first fruit ofits praiseworthy attempt to rescue from oblivionthe literary remains of our forefathers, and wasselected for the earliest publication of the Society,on account both of its valuable matter, and thebeautiful medium by which it is conveyed." Thefollowing extracts are taken from this translation :LATIN PREFACE TO VOL. i. OF CATHOLIQ HOMILIES"I, ^Elfric, scholar of JUthelwold, the benevolentand venerable Superior, send greeting of good wishesto his Lordship Archbishop Sigeric in the Lord.However rashly or presumptuously undertaken, Ihave nevertheless formed this book out of Latin112HHHnHciHHHOOaCO&HO>aWowt-1SO>Hnog><t->t,iwCATHOLIC HOMILIES113writers, and from Holy Scripture, translating intoour ordinary speech, for the edification of the simple,who know only this language both for reading andfor hearing; and for that reason I have used nodifficult words, but only plain English ; so that ourmessage might the more readily reach the hearts ofthose who read or hear, to the profit of the soulsof those who cannot be taught in any other tongue,than that to which they are born. And I have noteverywhere translated word for word, but have giventhe sense; and at the same time have carefullyavoided falling into errors that might lead astray,lest I should be found carried away with any heresy,The authors whom Ior darkened by any fallacy.have followed in this translation are these ; Augustineof Hippo, Jerome, Bede, Gregory, Smaragdus, andsometimes Haymo ; for the authority of these writersis willingly accepted by all Catholics." And I have not only explained the writings ofthe Evangelists in this work, but have also set forththe life and passion of saints, for the benefit of theI have arranged forty dis-unlearned of our race.courses in this book, believing that these might beenough for the faithful in one year, if they are readto them as they stand, by the ministers of God inBut I have in my hands the preparationchurch.of a second book, which is to contain the sermonsMoreover I have notor histories omitted here.touched upon all the Evangelic narratives assignedto the course of the year, but only those which Ithought might be enough for simple persons, for theamendment of their lives, inasmuch as laymen cannottake in all things, though they may learn them from8114AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTthe mouth of the learned.I have divided thisinto two books, intending that onetranslationshould be read in church one year and the other inthe following year, to guard against vagueness inthe hearers; yet I give permission, if any one sowishes, that both should be used as one book."Therefore, if any one is displeased with myinterpretation as not being always word for word,or desires a shorter explanation than the writingsof the authors offer, or is dissatisfied that I have notgone through all the Gospels in their ecclesiasticalorder, let him frame for himself a book with ahigher kind of exposition, as may please him ; onlyI adjure him, not to pervert my translation, which Itrust by the grace of God, and not from vain glory,I have been able to work out by careful study."I only beseech thee earnestly, most benignantFather Sigeric, to condescend to correct by thyindustry, any defects of evil heresy, or misty errorthat thou mayest find in my translation ; and thento allow this little volume to be sanctioned by thineauthority, and not set down to the credit of soFare thee wellunworthy a person as the writer.Amen."always in Almighty God./Elfric follows this with an Anglo-Saxon preface :"I, JSlfric, monk and mass priest, although 'moreweakly than for such orders is fitting, was sent inKing JjJthelred's days, from Bishop JSlfeah, ^Ethel-wold's successor, to a minster which is called Cernel,at the prayer of ^Ethelmser the thane, whose birthand goodness are known everywhere.Then itCA THOL1C HOMILIES115theevangelicaloccurred to my mind, I trust through God's grace,that I would form this book by turning Latin intothe English tongue; not from confidence of greatlearning, but because I have seen and heard of mucherror in many English books, which unlearned men,through their simplicity, have esteemed as greatwisdom: and I regretted that they knew not, norhad notdoctrines among theirwritings, those men only excepted who knew Latin,and those books excepted, which King Alfred wiselyturned from Latin into English, and which are still. Very many I know in this countryavailable. .more learned than I am, but G-od manifests Hiswonders through whom He will. As an AlmightyWorker He works His work through His chosen,not because He has need of our aid, but that we mayearn eternal life by the performance of His work.' We are God's assistants,' andPaul the Apostle said,yet we do nothing for God without the assistanceof God.".Sermon on the Beginning of Creation.Note the expressionP. 27." Da Worhte Hefela wundra, thaet men mihton gelyfan thaet Hewaes Godes Beam (God's child)."The same (continued).P. 30."The child laid in a bin""thaet cildgeled on anre binne."Sermon on the Nativity of our Lord.P. 39." Now weDignity of men as Christians.are accounted citizens of God, and like to angels ; let116AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTus therefore take care that sins do not separate usVerily men are calledfrom this great dignity.man, the dignity of agods; preserve therefore,god against sins, since God became man for thee."Our Lord's Person.P. 41. "The divine nature is not mingled withthe human nature, nor is there any separation. Wemight tell unto you a little simile, if it were not toomean; look now on an egg, how the white is notmingled with the yolk; and yet it is one egg. Noralso is Christ's divinity confounded with humannature, but He continueth to all eternity in oneperson undivided."Sermon on the Passion of St. Stephen.^P. 53. A fine passage on Stephen and Paul." Whither Stephen preceded, stoned with the stonesof Saul, thither Paul followed, aided by the prayersof Stephen."Sermon on the Epiphany.P. 113. On the choice of good and evil." Thegreat mercy of our Lord hath redeemed us throughHis humanity, if we with all our hearts will obeyHis commandments."God "predestined no one to evil, for He Himselfis all goodness, nor destined He any one to perdition,for He is true life."Sermon on the Purification of St. Mary.Christ the true Light.P. 145." As light scattersdarkness, so also love and faith of Christ scatter allCATHOLIC HOMILIES117vices and sins from our heart ; and He is the gloryand the bliss of all believing people."Sermon for Shrove Sunday.Blind Bartimseus.P. 157."If the devil troubleus with manifold thoughts and temptations, we shouldcall louder and louder to Jesus, that He drive theevil temptations from our hearts, and that He en-lighten our mind with His grace. ... If we continuepraying, then may we with our cry incline Jesus tostand, who was before passing on, and to hear ourcry and enlighten our hearts with good and pureEvil thoughts cannot harm us, if theythoughts.are not pleasing to us; but the more the deviltempts us with evil thoughts, so much the bettershall we be, and dearer to God, if we despise thedevil and allG-od'shistemptationsthroughassistance."The same (continued).P. 163." He fled from worldly honour, when Hewas chosen King ; but he fled not from reproach andscorn, when the Jews would hang Him on a cross.He would not encircle His head with a goldencrown, but with one of thorns, as it was done atHis passion. He would not reign for awhile in thislife, Who rules eternally in heaven.This world isnot our country, but is our place of exile ; thereforeshould we not set our hope in this deceitful life, butshould hasten with good deserts to our own country,for which we were created, that is to the kingdom ofheaven."Verily it is written,' Whosoever will be a friend118AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTof this world, he shall be accounted a foe of God.'Christ said in a certain place that the way is verynarrow and steep which leads to the kingdom ofheaven ; and it is very wide and smooth which leadsThe way which leads to the king-to hell torment.dom of heaven is narrow and steep, in order thatIf we'we should with difficulty gain our country.to obtain it, we should love mercy anddesirechastity and truth, and righteousness and humility,and have true love to God and to men, and givealms according to our means, and be moderate inour food, and observe all other holy things.Thesethings we cannot do without difficulties, but if wedo them, then may we, with those labours, throughGod's support, ascend the steep way which leads us' Christto eternal life. .suffered for us, and gave us an example that we; that is that we shouldshould follow His footstepssuffer something for love of Christ, and for our sins.Well suffers the man, and acceptably to God, whostrives against wickedness, and promotes goodness,as he best may. He who will suffer nothing inthis life, shall suffer against his will in the life tocome.". Peter the Apostle said,'.Sermon for the First Sunday in Lent.P. 17. On our Lord's temptation (the second).If we anywhere slide down, arise forthwith, and"earnestly mend what shall there be broken."Mid-Lent Sunday.P. 181.without pride and vain praise."Whatsoever good we do, let us do itThe man who doesCATHOLIC HOMILIES119any good for pride, to his own praise, will have noreward with God, but will have his punishment."P. 185." God hath wrought many miracles anddaily works ; but those miracles are much weakenedin the sight of men, because they are very usual.. Who now gives fruit to our fields, and multipliesthe harvest from a few grains of corn, but He who"multiplied the five loaves ?..Sermon for Palm Sunday, vol. i. p. 213."We will say to you a parable. No man maymake himself a king ; for the people have the optionto choose him for king who is agreeable to them;but after that ,he has been hallowed as king, he haspower over the people, and they may not shake hisIn like manner, every manyoke from their necks.has his own choice before he sins, whether he willThen if hefollow the devil's will, or withstand it.bind himself with the works of the devil, he cannotby his own power unbind himself, unless the AlmightyGod unbind him with the strong hand of His mercy.Of his own will and his own heedlessness he is bound,but through God's mercy he will be unbound, if heafterwards merit his liberation of God."P. 261. On the equality of all men before God."All Christian men, whether high or low, noble orignoble, and the lord, and the slave, are all brothers,The wealthy isand have all one Father in heaven.not better on that account than the needy. Asboldly may the slave call God his Father as theKing. We are all alike before God, unless any oneThe rich for his wealthexcel another in good works.is not to despise the poor, for the poor is before God120AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOToften better than . the rich. God is our Father,therefore should we all be brothers in God, and holdthe brotherly bond unbroken ; that is true peace, sothat each of us love others as himself, and commandto no one that which he would not another shouldcommand to him. He who observes this is a childof God, and Christ, and all holy persons who thriveto God are his brothers and his sisters."Easter Sunday.P. 229." Let us believe that God the Father wasever without beginning, and that the Son was everbegotten of the Father ; for He is the Wisdom andPower through which the Father hath created allcreatures ; and they were all quickened by the HolyGhost Who is the Will and Love of the Father andThese Three are one God indivisible,of the Son.existing in one Godhead, all equally powerful; forless, and less powerful, that is notwhatsoever isGod."P. 241." He flees not with body, but with mind "(Augustine).Sermon on the Lord's Prayer.P. 267. On the bread." The body quickly wastesaway and decays, if its sustenance is withdrawn fromit; in like manner the soul perishes, if it has notghostly sustenance, that is God's commandments, onThe ghostlywhich it shall thrive and be cherished.bread is also the holy housel, with which we confirmour belief ; and through partaking of the holy houselour sins will be forgiven us, and we shall bestrengthened against the temptations of the devil.CATHOLIC HOMILIES121Therefore should we frequently cleanse and confirmour souls with ghostly refection."Sermon for the First Sunday after Easter.P. 293. In the next world." There will be knownthose who were known before, and those who wereunknown, dwelling in brotherly love with God, everto eternity."Sermon on the Catholic Faith.P. 293." The Holy Father created and mademankind through His Son, and He would afterwardsthrough the same redeem us from Hell torment,Without any passion Hewhen we were undone.might have saved us, but that seemed to Him unjust.But the devil undid himself, when he instigated theJewish people to the slaying of Jesus, and we wereredeemed by His innocent death from the eternaldeath."Sermon on the Lord's Ascension."" Jesus taught the holy lore, etc."P. 297.Verily after the universal resurrection our bodieswill require no strengthening of earthly meats, forJesus will supply all our needs with heavenly things,and we shall be enriched with glory, and mighty toexecute whatsoever is pleasing to us, and we shallbe full swift to go through all the immensities of theKingdom of God."Sermon on the Ascension.P. 309. A curious"He whocomes to Me, may not be My disciple, unless, he hatehis wife."interpretation.122AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTSermon for Pentecost.P. 313." The offered Lamb betokened the slayingof Christ, Who innocent was offered to His Fatherfor our redemption. Now is His passion and Hisresurrection our Eastertide, because He redeemed usfrom the thraldom of the devil."In same.P. 321. The Holy Ghost as a dove, and as fire." Eor He causes those to be meek in innocence, andburning in the Will of God, whom He fills with HisGrace."Sermon for the Second Sunday after Pentecost.P. 329." Some men will imagine that there is noperil in precious garments, but if there were no sin,the holy gospel would not have so evidently mani-fested with respect to the rich man, that he wasadorned with purple and fine linen. No man heedsprecious garments save for vain pride, verily that hemay through his splendour be accounted before othermen."Second Sunday after Pentecost.P. 335.Painful and unloving view." Therighteous will ever see the unrighteous suffering intheir torments, that their bliss and love to theirLord may be the greater, Who rescued them fromthe power of the devil, and from the wicked band."Fourth Sunday after Pentecost.P. 349. "Who may be happy, unless he have" God is every-his Creator dwelling in himself ?"CATHOLIC HOMILIES123where, though the angel be local, the Almighty Euleris not local."Nativity of St. John the Baptist.P. 359." He is called Lamb, from the innocenceof the Lamb's nature, and was, guiltless, for our re-demption, offered up a living sacrifice to His Fatherin the manner of a Lamb."The Assumption of the Virgin.P. 444, etc." a heavenlyShe is here designated,queen," and all the host of heaven are described aswelcoming her.P. 453." Let us call with constant prayers to theholy Mother of God, that she may intercede for usin our necessities with her Son."clergy.Kesponsibility ofDedication of the Church of St. Michael.P. 515." He whoenters upon a holy order in God's Church, and after-wards by instigation or by sinful life gives evilexample to others, and perverts their understanding,then better were it for him that he alone perishedin his worldly life, than that he in holy guise shoulddraw others with him to perdition through hisdepraved morals."Twenty-first Sunday after Pentecost.P. 521. How we become Christians."Throughbelief and baptism we are begotten to God, andadopted as His spiritual children, through Christ'shumanity, and through grace of the Holy Ghost."124AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTThe same.P. 529. "The marriage garment betokens thetrue love of God and men. .. The Son of God,who through love came to men, signified in thegospel that which the marriage garment betokened,Every one of those who with faith andtrue love.baptism incline to God, comes to the marriage ; buthe comes not with a marriage garment, if he holdsnot true love.".The same (continued).P. 531." The feet which will not visit the sick,and the hands which give nothing to the poor, shallthen be bound in torment, because they are nowwilfully bound from good works."The same (a prayer)." Lead us, Almighty God, to the numberP. 539.of Thy chosen saints, with the everlasting bliss ofThy kingdom, which Thou hast prepared from thebeginning of the world for those who love Thee,Thou who livest and reignest with the Eternal Fatherand the Holy Ghost for ever and ever.Amen."Sermon for all Saints. (An example of the Koman-ising doctrine.)P. 547. '"0 thou blessed parent of God, ever" The example and footsteps of thismaiden Mary."maiden were followed by an innumerable body ofpersons in maidenhood, living in purity, renouncingmarriage, etc,"Sermon on the Nativity of St. Andrew.P. 579.If Jesus had chosen at first eloquentteachers, and sent worldly philosophers, and the like"CATHOLIC HOMILIES125to preach, then would it have appeared as it thetrue faith had not sprung up through God's might,but from worldly eloquence. He chose fishers as Hechose emperors, because it is better that the emperor,when he comes to Kome, should cast aside his crown,and kneel at the fisher's memorial, than that thefisher kneel at the emperor's memorial. Emperors Hechose, but yet He ranked the indigent fisher beforethe rich Emperor."The same, s"P. 585.If any one cannot obtain the means ofoffering a visible gift to God, let him offer an invis-ible one, that is good will, which incomparably excelsearthly treasure. What is good will but goodness, sothat he grieves for another man's misfortune, and re-joices in his prosperity ; loves his friend not for theworld, but for good ; to bear with his foe with love,to command to no one that which he likes not "him-self, to help his neighbour's need according to hispower, and to be willing beyond his power ? Whatis any gift in comparison with this will, when the"soul offers itself to God on the altar of its heart ?THORPE'S TRANSLATION OF JSLFRIC'S ANGLO-SAXONPREFACE TO VOL. n. OF CATHOLIC HOMILIES^"I, ^Elfric, the monk have turned this book fromLatin books into the English tongue, for those mento read who know not Latin.I have taken it fromthe Holy Gospels, and treated it after the expositionsof highly venerable doctors, the names of whichdoctors I wrote down in the former book in the1 See Appendix C.126AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTI have set the matter which I haveLatin preface.turned in two books, because I thought it were lesstedious to hear, if the one book were read in thecourse of one year and the other in the year following.In each of these books there are forty discourses,without the preface, but they are not all taken fromthe Gospels, but are very many of them gatheredfrom the life or passion of God's saints, of thoseonly whom the English nation honours with feastBefore each discourse we have set thedays.argument in Latin, though every one who will mayI noworder the chapters according to the preface.pray and implore, in the name of God, if any onewill transcribe this book, that he carefully rectify itby the copy, lest through negligent writers we beblamed. He does great evil who writes false, unlesshe rectify it, for he has brought the true doctrineto false heresy, therefore should every one correctthat which he has perverted wrong, if he would beguiltless at God's doom."ADMONITION; PKEFIXED TO THE SECOND VOLUME OFTHE CATHOLIC HOMILIES" One thing I now desire to place at the beginningof this book ; not as a preface, but as an admonition ;namely as to guarding against drunkenness, as theLord in Leviticus spoke to Aaron in these words :' Wine, and everything that can occasion drunkenness,drink not thou nor thy sons, when ye go into theit shall be atabernacle of witness, lest ye die ;statute for ever throughout your generations, thatye may have knowledge to discern between the holyand the profane, between the unclean and the clean.'CATHOLIC HOMILIES127" In the New Testament also the Lord admonished' Take heed to yourselves, lestHis disciples saying,at any time your hearts be overcharged with sur-feiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, andso that day come upon you unawares.'So great avice is drunkenness that Paul an Apostle and teacherof the Gentiles bears witness that drunkards cannothow blessed arepossess the Kingdom of G-od.they who live for God, and not for this world, forvirtue, and not for vice ; and though we may not beequal to following the fasts and abstinence of theholy fathers, yet we must by no means weakly yieldto abominable drinkings and intoxications, afterhaving been warned by the terrible threatenings ofour Lord God.These admonitions will suffice forthe teachable, for the unteachable and hard-heartedAgain I desire andno exhortations are enough.pray, venerable Archbishop Sigeric, that it may bewell with thee for ever in Christ."CATHOLIC HOMILIESSermon on the Nativity.P. 12. "We should honour Christ's Nativity andHis birthtide with ghostly joy, and adorn ourselveswith good works, and busy ourselves with songs ofpraise to God, and shun the things which Christ for-bids, which are sins and works of the devil ; and lovethose things which God has enjoined, that is lowli-ness and mercy, righteousness and truth, almsdeedsand temperance, patience and chastity."Sermon on the Epiphany.P. 41." The slaying of the lamb betokened the128AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTslaying of Christ. He resisted not, nor fought morethan a lamb does, but consented very patiently tobe sacrificed for the sins of all the world ; becauseunless He had suffered for us, none of us could cometo the Kingdom of God."The same (continued).P. 47." Some men are thought meek, but theyare slack; they appear with mildness, but theirmildness is in sooth sloth and ignorance; but theman who has not the Spirit of God in him is not ofGod."The same (continued).P. 49." Three principal things has God appointedto men for purification: the one is baptism, thesecond is housel, the third is penance, with cessationfrom evil deeds and practice of good works. Baptismwashes us from all sins, housel hallows us, truepenance heals our misdeeds."Second Sunday after the Epiphany.P. 57."The Holy Ghost is of both (that is theFather and the Son) the Love and Will, and everwith them both."The same (continued).P. 63." In the offering of Isaac we are to perceivethe Lord's Passion, of which the Apostle Paul said,that 'God the Father spared not His own Child,but gave Him to death for us all.'Isaac bare thewood for his own burning, and refused not hisfather's bonds ; so also was Christ obedient to HisFather unto death, and Himself bare His rood."CATHOLIC HOMILIES129Septuagesima Sunday.P. 77.." My brothers, what justification can wehave, if we abstain from good works, we who from. Mythe child-cradle came to God's belief? .brothers, behold your conduct and see if ye yet areGod's workmen.Let every one consider what hedoes, and behold whether he labours in God's vine-yard. He who in the present life toils for himselfand not for God, is not yet come within God's vine-They truly toil for God who seek not theiryard.own gain through covetousness, but meditate onGod's tillage, how they may suppress unrighteous-ness, and further righteousness, and benefit othermen with the diligence of true love, and they whocare with wakeful mind how they may gain thesouls of men to God, and lead them to everlastinglife. He who lives for himself, and he who lies inhis fleshly lusts, is rightly accused of idleness ; for hecultivates no fruit of divine work."Second Sunday in Lent.P. 111. "With belief pray to God's saints fortheir intercession."Sermon on St. Gregory the Great.P. 133."Gregory also gave to Augustine holygifts of mass-robes and books, together with therelics of the Apostles and martyrs ; and commandedthat his successor should always fetch the pall andthe archiepiscopal dignity from the apostolic seeof the Eoman Church.Augustine after this estab-lished bishops from among his companions over allthe cities of the English nation, and they have con-9130AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTtinued prospering in God's faith to this presentday."iThis last sentence is, of course, inaccurate history.Bishop CutJiberht.P. 139."Cuthberht, as was his wont, wentpreaching the faith, that he might teach the ignorantpeople the way of life, when an eagle fled beforehim on his journey, and he began asking his com-panion, who for that day should give them food?Then said his companion, that he had long beenconsidering where they should ask for sustenance,as they had gone the journey without provisions.Lo, God Almighty canThen Cuthberht said to him, 'very easily provide food for us through this eagle,Who of yore fed Elijah through the swart raven,before he journeyed to heaven.'They then went onjourneying, and lo, the eagle sat on the shore, havingflown thither with a fish which he had just caught.' Eun toThereupon the saint said to his companion,the eagle and take from him a part of the fish whichhe has caught, for our refection.Praise to theAlmighty, Who would feed us through this bird.But give a part to the eagle in reward of hislabour.'"St. BenedictP. 187."This blessed man Benedict wrote therule of the monks with great judgment, and in1 This Sermon on the Festival of Pope Gregory was translatedand published by Elisabeth Elstob, London, 1709.She waslearned in Anglo-Saxon, but the Anglo-Saxon text is said to becorrupt which she used.CATHOLIC HOMILIES131brilliant language, in which every one may know allthe acts of his teachership, for the saint so lived ashe taught. The blessed man was cheerful in aspect,with white hair, beautifully formed, and in mindfilled with great love, so that he was dwelling in theheavenly country, although he still continued onearth."Here follows an account of his death.Mid-Lent Sunday.P. 215."Jesus heals His people of their sins,and leads them to the eternal country of the kingdomof heaven, as the leader Jesus (Joshua) led the oldIsrael to the country which had been promised tothem.""Sermon for the Sacrifice on Easter Day.P. 279.Holy books enjoin that water be mixedwith the wine destined for housel, because water istypical of the people, as the wine is of the Blood ofChrist."Another Sermon on Easter Day.P. 285." We have a twofold need in book-writing.One simple need is to consider with careful mindthe written lore ; the other to turn it to works.IfMoses and all the prophets prophesied that Christ,through the anguish of His Passion, should pass intoheavenly glory, how then can he be accounted aChristian who will not, according to the capacity ofhis understanding, search the book-writings, howthey refer to Christ, or fail in the effort through anydifficulty, to merit with Christ eternal glory."132AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTThe same (continued),The walk to Emmaus. "They then invited Himto their guest-house, and offered Him meat, andknew Him at the refection Whom they had notknown when Holy Writ was being explained. Theywere not enlightened because they had heard thecommandments of God, but they were enlightenedwhen they turned the commandments of God towork by hospitality ; for it is written that they shallnot be accounted righteous with God, who withoutwork hear His commandments, but they shall beaccounted righteous, who fulfil His commandmentsby works."The Finding of the Cross (close of the Homily).P. 307." Thus wrote Jerome, the wise expositor,concerning the holy rood, how it was found." ' Christian men truly should bow to the hallowedrood in the name of Jesus, for although we have notthat on which He suffered, its likeness is neverthelessholy, to which we ever bow in our prayers to theMighty Lord, who suffered for men ; and the rood isa memorial of His great passion, holy through Him,though it grew in a wood. We ever honour it forthe Concur of Christ, Who redeemed us with lovethrough it, for which we thank Him ever in life.'"On the greater Litany.P. 317." The love of God manifests itself byworks, and if it is idle, then it is not love. He wholoves not God loves not himself; because he willBut the Lord said innever thrive without God.His preaching, 'Ye are my friends, if ye do theCATHOLIC HOMILIES133things which I commanded you to observe.'It isa great mercy of the Lord Creator, that we are sobenignly called our Creator's friends, if we fulfil Hisbehest, we who were not worthy to be called Histhralls, and that we have such honour throughobedience. We rejoice in mind for that greathonour, but we should meditate how to obtain it.Let no man, on account of enormous sins, despair ofmeriting that great dignity, and of being the friendof God, through good deserts, if he repeats not hisFor sinful men Christ gave Hisformer misdeeds.Let him only despair, who endlessly sins, andbefore his last day makes no repentance.Let uslove God with good knowledge, and also our neigh-bour as ourselves. God will dwell in us, if we loveeach other, and His true love will thus be completedin us, and we may by that alone fulfil His Law."life.The same (continued).P. 317." The Holy Trinity, Which is God power-ful in majesty, comes unseen to the pious heart, whichis obedient to His behests in deed, and it shall beadorned through God's visitation, and enlightenedby His sojourn within. Men put their houses inorder, and are well content if they desire to receivea friend to them, that no impropriety may offendhim, and we should cleanse ourselves from uncleandeeds, that the mighty God may dwell in our minds,Who visits every one through His Spirit, and forsakesthe foul, for their depravity, deprived of light, becausethey love Him not."The same (continued).P. 319. On Christian love," The guileful fiend134AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTsows discord among mankind through divers causes,and instigates one man to desire our possessions, andinflames our minds with great anger against anotherwho will persecute us.Then we lose, through alittle wealth, true love, which is the best of wealth.But we should ever shield that true love which leadsus to the living God, rather than the possessionswhich will perish from us.Verily our soul may notfly to the kingdom of heaven, unless it have thewings of true love of the Creator and of men, morethan any bird has power of flight, if one of its wingshas been previously broken."The same (continued)." Let every one now consider what befits his state,for men may, through diligence of mind, in everystage propitiate the Almighty."The same (continued*)."P. 321.Bishops and mass-priests are set as criers,to announce the faith to lay people, and also tointercede for them to Almighty God; it thereforebefits them to have goodness, and to be adorned withfair morals. ..." The priest may not intercede for men, nor evenfor himself, if he lie under sins, and by foul deedsmake himself criminal, unless he first arise from thereeking dunghill, and with true penitence washhimself, that he, may with certainty have calling onthe Lord."Aninteresting Legend ofthe Angelic World "Fursens""Notice how in the other world twoP. 333.priests address Furseus, and advise him when re-CATHOLIC HOMILIES135turning to the world again ; they say .' tomonastic men it is fitting that they lead their livesin stillness. Do thou make known thy vision to theworld, and be sometimes in privacy, and sometimesamong men. When thou artin privacy, holdsedulously the commandments of G-od.'"..Another Vision (the Thane Drihthelm).P. 355. A story at the end of this, from Gregory'sDialogues, of a man who saw many things, when hissoul had been led from this life. Amongst others,he saw where they were erecting a building, all ofbeaten gold, and the workmen were making thebuilding on a Saturday, and it was then nearlyended. He inquired then for whom the building, sowonderfully constructed, was designed.They toldhim that it was designed for a shoemaker in Borne,After this the dead man arose,and also named him.and diligently inquired about the shoemaker, how hehad acted in worldly life, and it was then found thathis practice was, that he wrought his work for sevendays, and sold on the Saturday ; then he took fromhis craft his sustenance, and with bounteous spiritdistributed the overplus to the poor; and thereforewas the building made on the day on which heusually distributed his alms.Third Sunday after Pentecost: a Sermon on theParable of the Feast.P. 375.The right control of the senses."Im-moderate curiosity is a grave sin, for we should turnour look from evil sight, our hearing from evil speech,our taste from unallowed aliments, our noses from136AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOThurtful smells, our hands and whole body from fouland sinful contacts, if we are desirous of coming tothe delicacies of the eternal refection."P. 393." The tempest is open temptation, and thecalm is stealthy and clandestine temptation. .Eegard not so greatly the stillness of this world, butconsider thine heart, whether that be in stillness.Look that the inward wind do not cast thee down.It will be a great bliss to thee, that thou perish notin thy bliss."..Twelfth Sunday after Pentecost.P. 431.In Ezekiel " the four beasts had eyes onevery side of their bodies, because God's chosenshould consider their deeds beforehand on everyside, so that they ever desire good, and guard them-selves against evil."Sixteenth Sunday after Pentecost.P. 465." Plants are tender creatures, and throughwintry chill always wither ; nevertheless the bountyof the Almighty adorns them with such beauteousblossoms, that they excel by their fairness all earthlyNeither the glorious Solomon, nor anycolours.earthly king, could get such beautiful dyeing forhis garments, as the rose has, and the lily, andmany other plants that appear wonderful, theseplants are to-day blooming in winsomeness, andto-morrow are burnt. Why gives God to the meanherb so fair an aspect, and forbids us to be solicitousabout our decoration, but because we should bysimpleness and true loveliness merit the heavenlyfairness and decoration, which Adam lost, becauseCATHOLIC HOMILIES137he would, through the instigation of the devil, begreater than he was created."The Nativity of St. Matthew.P. 471." God tries the heart of every man, andhe who receives His visitation with good will, willbe feasted within through the grace of the HolyGhost, and God will dwell with him, if he persistin good works."The same (continued).Pharisees and Scribes." The Lord said to them,' The hale- need no leech, but the sick.' He thatthinks he is whole is sick."Passion of St. Matthew.P. 479. A prayer, supposed in the legend to beoffered by St. Matthew. "God Almighty, Creatorof bodies, and Inspirer of souls, Thou who despisestnot any age or any condition ; for Thou art of allCreator, and likewise Redeemer ; preserve these Thinehand maids against all pollution, and strengthen themin holy virtues, that they with the glory-crown ofeternal maidenhood may come to the pure fellowshipof Thy Son Jesus Christ." 1On the Nativity of an Apostle." Christ said,P. 525.' I have called you my friends,because I have made known unto you all things thatI have heard from my Father/ What did Christmake known to His disciples but the heavenlysecret, and the great joy of the everlasting life, which1 A beautiful prayer, but it shows the overvalue of celibacy, forglory of eternal maidenhood " cannot be greater than that ofthe "motherhood.138AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOT...He also daily fixes in the hearts of His faithful,through inspiration of the Holy G-host ?" The Apostle said,' Ye are saved by God's grace,Through that grace by which thethrough faith.'human Christ was a Child of God, through that samegrace will every Christian man be chosen to God,Through the samefrom the beginning of his belief.Spirit through which Christ was born, through thesame His chosen will be born again in Holy Baptism.Through the Holy Ghost the human Christ was voidof every sin, and through the same Spirit will oursins be forgiven us."From the same.P. 527.Of the recognition of our dear ones." When God's chosen come to death, then they findan heritage. A great company of faithful friendswill await us there, secure for themselves, yet anxiousLet us therefore hasten to ourfor our salvation.country, that we may see our friends, and greet ourkinsmen."On the Nativity of several Apostles." The Lord said,P. 531.' The reaping is great,This we cannot say withoutand the reapers few.'filled withgreat sorrow.priests, but nevertheless in God's reaping few ofthem are working."Lo, now this world isOn the Nativity of Holy Martyrs.P. 547."Gregory has written of a patient man,named Stephen, who forsook all worldly things, andfled from the tumult of men, and devoted himself tohis prayers, dwelling in some monastery. He hadCATHOLIC HOMILIES139so great patience that he would thank him who didhim an injury, and accounted him as his friend whoinflicted on him some vexation, and every mischancehe accounted as a gain to him, and held all hisAfter a time, whenadversaries as his supporters.his decease took place, many men came to him, onaccount of his glorious life, and some of them sawangels entering."On the Nativity of Holy Virgins.P. 575.The parable of the wise and foolish virgins." We should there-The conclusion of this Homily.fore watch in our hearts, and in faith ; we shouldwatch in hope and in true love; we should watchin good works, and do without vain glory, if we dosome little good, that we may go into the kingdomof heaven, with the pure bridegroom, Jesus Christ,Who liveth and reigneth with His Heavenly Father,and the Holy G-host, for ever and ever.Amen.""On the Dedication of a Church.P. 583.Living stones."" In the earthly churchstone lies over stone, and each bears other, so like-wise in God's congregation, the believing hold upeach his after-comer, by precept and patience, untilthe building comes to the last righteous one, and hewill have no after-comer whom he may bear. ButHe Who holds all the building, and Whom no onebears is Jesus Christ, Who holds us all and none ofus holds Him."A PBAYEE, AT THE END" I thank the Almighty Creator with all my heart,that He has granted to me, a sinner, that to His140AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTpraise and honour, I have disclosed these two booksto the English race, for the unlearned ; the learnedhave no need of these books, (because their ownI say now that I willlearning may suffice them.never henceforth turn gospel or gospel-expositionsfrom Latin into English.If any one will turn more,then will I pray him, for love of God that he set his.book apart from the two books that we have turned,as we trust, through G-od's direction. Be to Himever glory to eternity."from the Danes.The years from 991 to 994 were full of trouble^Elfric remarks as regards this" With sorrowful mind,second volume of homilies :distressed by the many evils received from wickedpirates, we have, lest we should be found false toour promise, completed this book."It is probablethat it was finished in that terrible year, whosesufficiently indicated in the Saxonhorrors areChronicle.