CHAPTER XXXII.Approaching the end of my work, I think it well to saysomething very briefly of the chief writers who have treatedof the Bull of Adrian' IV.As outside of England the old chroniclers have not men-tioned the Bull, I am led to believe that it was unknown ondialects," says Dr. Jamieson, " seem to excel all others for philo->logical and ethnological purposes." And Sir William Bethamremarks : " The most ancient manuscripts in Europe are Irish."" Irish Gaelic," says the Very Rev. U. J. Bourke, "is for Europeansavants a very ready, practical, and truthful vehicle for linguisticresearch in archaic fields of human speech and of history."Father Bourke also remarks that, is his opinion, the followingis the correct order and division of the Indo-European family ofAryan languages :2, Zend or Persian ; 3,Keltic or Irish-Gaelic ; 4, Latin ; 5, Greek ; 6, Gothic or German ;(See Aryan Origin of Gaelic7, Lithuanian ; and 8, Sclavonian.Race and Language, pp. 121, 154).Thus, Irish-Gaelic hold a veryhigh and honourable place.i, Sanscrit or Indian ;In some respects, Hungary may serve as a great exampleIt is said that, within the memory of living men,for Ireland.Hungary had not five journals in which a word of the Hungarianlanguage was used, and its annual revenue was under ;^6,ooo,ooo ;whereas, at present, under a better regime, it has 800 newspapersand journals published in the Hungarian language, and its revenueis ^42,000,000.Trans.1 The Rev. P. Finlay, S.J., lately reviewing tlie position ofCatholics in Ireland since the Emancipation, andthenecessity of Catholic Associations such as exists with the best resultsin other countries, especially Germany and the United States ofAmerica, used the following weighty words :— " Look abroadto the Catholics of the Continent, who have even harder strugglesthan our own, and read the lesson which they teach us.In Holland,Belgium, Germany, Catholics not only hold their own : they areadvancing surely, peacefully, and vigorously along all the pathsof civil progress. They have governed Belgium for the last twentyyears ; they control the government of Cermanv ; they are fairlyrepresented in the Ministry of Holland. They are' organisecj andurgingA FRIEND OF IRELAND.I37the continent till about the beg-inning of the seventeenthcentury.Indeed, Saint Antoninus himself does not seemto have known it. He wrote a pretty long chapter onAdrian IV. He there cites the Polycraticus of Salisbury ;but he completely omits Chapter XLII. of the Metalogicus,which speaks of Ireland and the pretended donation. Heselects from the Polycraticus the lamentations of PopeAdrian on the misfortunes of Popes : " De quo JohannesSalesberiensis,sic ait';Audivi papam Adrianum dicentem quod romano pontificcnemo est miserabilior ; conditione ejus nulla miserior."(S. Antonin., Pars Historialk , tit. 17, c. i, § g.)to speak in the following sections : —Here are the names of the writers of whom I am goingei multum familiaris,eratquiI. Cardinal Baronius, who although he seems to havehad little belief in the genuineness of the Bull, inserted itin his Ecclesiastical Annals, and thus contributed to makeit known.—united ; and so their claims are adjudged reasonable, or at an^"-rate, resistless. And look at Italy, or worse still, at Francevast Catholic majority, but without cohesion or force ; disunion,and, therefore, apathy or barren efforts ; place, power, patronagein the hands of the enemies of Catholicism, and persecution forIf French and Italian Catholicsthe loyal children of the Church.would only look across their borders ; would sink their class andparty differences, as German, Dutch, and Belgium Catholics havedone ; woiild unite to combat energetically the socialistic andanti-Catholic minority, a short, though it might be a sharp, strugglewould give them a complete victory.""aspeaks thus :— " I have read Father Finlay's Lecture on ' CatholicsIn connection with this subject, His Eminence Cardinal Loguein Civil Life ' with great interest and great pleasure. He putsthe claims of Irish Catholics on their true basis with scientificprecision. We seek no monopoly or ascendancy- We claimequality—fair play—even-handed justice—our share in the patron-age and employments which are maintained, in great part, by ourIt is an undoubted fact that we are almost wholly ex-money.cluded from these, and that our Faith is the chief disqualification.It appears to me an equally undoubted fact that we have theremedy iu our own hands."All Catholics in Irela,nd who are entitled to vote on any occasionshould take special care to see that they are not deprived of theirrights through any negligence of their own or through some legalquibble. They should al.so examine the list of voters to see thatnone are enrolled there but such as are justly entitled to be so.All this is only to borrow a leaf from the book of their opponents,who are usually most vigilant on such matters.Social life in Ireland, as elsewhere, has undergone wonderful138POPl- ADRIAN IV.,2. Bzovius, a Polish Dominican, Continuator of Baro-nius, picked up a most strange story, in such a manner asto surpass Cambrcnsis liimself.3. Bongars, in 1611, in Gesta Dei per Francos, publishedtlie letter of Adrian to Louis VII. Thirty years afterwards,Andre Duchesne re-edited this letter (t. 4, Rerum Franci-carum Scriptnres.)4. Lynch, an Irish priest, published in 1662 the cele-brated work Cambrensis Eversus, in which he directlyattacks the genuineness of the Bull.5. About 1692, Colonel Charles O'Kelly, in the Exci-diumMacaricB, followed the general sentiment. A man ofthe sword, he could not easily become a scholar by pro-fession.6. Antony Pagi, instead of imitating the circumspectionof Baronius, thought that Raoul de Diceto, Giraldus Cam-brensis, and Matthew Paris left no room to doubt oPthechanges during the last hundred years. We have been assuredby a native of Cork that in that city, about the early part of thenineteenth century, it was no uncommon thing to see a businessestablishment closed up, and a large placard " Gone to Dublin "pasted on the shutters—so that customers might be on the look-out for the return of the proprietor with a new supply of goods,and doubtless a good supply of news. How different from thepresent day, when we can stay at home, and, by means of agramophone, listen to the magnificent singing of a full GregorianChoir at a Pontifical High Mass in St, Peter's, Rome !The great consolation of the Irish people during their centuriesof suffering was their religion. They regarded faith as a precioustreasure ; it was their chiei', often their only, comfort in life and inOverwhelmed with misfortunes, and even famine-stricken,death.they held fast to it.Tt is said that in the eighteenth centuryimmense numbers of the people went barefoot, not being able to buyBut let us remember that poverty is not inconsistent withshoes.Lazarus, whose sores were licked by dogs, the angelssanctity.the Bosom of Abraham.thought it an honour todeserts of Egypt and PalestineMultitudes of hermits in theseemed in want of allthings, and yet added to their painsby lettingby mosquitoes.But thestunggreatest example of poverty and sanctity combined in moderntimes is surely that of St. Benedict Joseph Labre. The strangemanner of life that he adopted was of his own choice, not ofnecessity—his parents being in good circumstances, and himselfthe eldest son—and so far was he from being an ignorant man,that he spoke Latin fluently.For his food he was content withorange peel, cabbage stalks and leaves, withered and rotten fruit,themselves becarry toA FRIIiND OF IRELAND.139genuineness of the Bull.uncle.Francis Pagi copied from his7. In VHisioire d'lrlande, published in French at Parisin 1758, and dedicated to the Irish Brig-ades in the serviceof France, McGeog-hegan made some judicious observa-tions that deserve to be known. Without absolutely deny-ing- the genuineness of the Bull, he skilfully pleads that itwas surreptitiously or obreptitiously obtained.8. Dr. Lingard abstained from directly touching theHowever, he says enough to let us see that hequestion.had little faith in the genuineness of the Bull.9. In our days, Mr. John Cornelius O'Callaghan hasdiscussed the Bull of Adrian, first in notes to the MacaricBExcidium, published at Dublin in 1850 (p.242-279).Twcnt3'-two years afterwards, he again came forward witha summary of his assertions in a newspaper called theIrishman, June, 1872.Mr. O'Callaghan believed in goodfaith that his reasons were unanswerable.look.The endurance ofetc., thrown out of doors and windows, and tying on the streets.He never asked alms.Tf it were offered him, he took only whatTf he met with neither food nor ahns,he needed for one day.he went out into the country, ate grass, and drank water.Hishair and beard were quite neglected ; perhaps at Christmas he hadhimself shaved. He usually slept in the open air.His raggedclothes, the same in winter and summer, swarmed with vermin,which gnawed him day and night.thisloathsome pain, an excruciating torment, was his greatest penance.No articleYet his countenance always bore a sereneof his clothing was ever changed till worn out ; or even washed.Prayer was his continual occupation. A mostHe made no vows.holy man, he never lost his baptismal innocence ; he held theBut as for sanitary laws, heslightest sin in the utmost abhorrence.did not regard them as essential to the practice of virtue.Thusin Ireland it is often found, especially in houses where the Rosary issaid at night, or in localities where good schools exist, that children,even though very poor, grow up like the purest lilies, notwithstand-ing the dangers that surround them. And does not the wonderfulexample of Pope Adrian IV. show what a poor boy, with good disposi-tions, may come to ? Many of the actions of St. Benedict Joseph areonly to be admired, not imitated, by people in general, whose dutiesIf the managers of any institutionrequire a different conduct.allowed the inmates thereof to swarm with vermin, or encourageddisease by a neglect of the laws of health, how quickly and howjustly would they be condemned !In like manner, the dwellingsof the poor ought to be improved in many ways.With St. Bernard-we advocate cleanliness, which we believe to bo akin to godliness.Our churches, convents, hospitals, orphanages, etc., are usually,—140POPE ADRIAN IV.10. In reply to the aforesaid article, the Most Rev. Dr.Moran, Bishop of Ossory, published in the Irish Ecclesias-tical Record the memoir of which I have already spokena substantial work, full of new and judicious remarks,eminently calculated to raise the best founded suspicionsagainst the Bull.SECTION I.—BARONIUS.The letter of Pope Adrian IV. to Kin.o- Louis VII. appearsto have been unknown in the time of Baronius. The learnedannalist never speaks of it. The oldest edition that I knowIf Baronius had known it, his sagacityis of the year 1611.would probably have been awakened to make him examinedirectly the question of the genuineness of the Bull.Roger de Hoveden, Gervase, and William of Newbridge,are the sources from which Baronius draws. He nowhere".Order is Heaven's first law."models of neatness and tidiness.But from the example of St. Benedict Joseph Labre, who is nowhonoured on the altars of the Universal Church, we learn thatpoor people, strangers to the refinements of life, may be greatfriends of God, and worthy of our deepest respect.Some people in this country have a great deal of fault toTheyfind with Irish Catholics for building expensive churches.can point specially to the Cathedral of Armagh, which has cost;f 2 50, 000— though most of this money came from other lands.These wiseacres, who hold so much property that once belongedto Irish Catholics, regard such magnificent churches as suitedBut let us hear how His Eminence Cardinalonly for the rich.Moran, in a recent number of the Australasian Catholiclfecord (]an." These would-be critics," he says, " forget190s), refers to them.that Catholic Churches are the House of God and the home of theThere is perfect equality of rich and poor in the presencepoor.The poorest old apple-woman may enter theof the Altar of God.cathedral in her rags with as much confidence, and as much senseof ownership, as the richest nobleman in the land.Nothing canexercise a more ennobling, and elevating, and purifying influenceon a religious people than such beautiful edifices erected to the gloryof the Most High."A Parish Priest, to whom the care of souls is committed, maysometimes help much towards the bodily health of his parishioners,and thus imitate our Divine Master, who " went about doing good."With a knowledge of hygiene, he may, for example, caution themagainst the dangers of breathing bad air, drinking infected water,etc. Many simple points regarding air, food, mastication, white-—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.141quotes Giraldus Cambrensis, or Matthew Paris, though ofthe latter he found a manuscript in the Vatican.At the year 1155, Baronius gives a long extract fromthe Polycraticus, relating to the conversations of Salisburywith Pope Adrian. On the other hand, the annalist passesover in silence the Metalogicus, with its false donation ofIreland.Coming to the year1156, he relates, according toWilliam of Newbridge, the submission of the Welsh, whowere subdued by Henry II.At 1 158, Baronius relates, as done by Gervase, the :?-conciliation of Louis VII. with Henry II., the journey ofthe latter toParis, the festivitiesin consequence, themarriage of their children, and other particulars.If theannalist had had the letter of Adrian laefore his tyes, hisperspicacity would likely have led him to discover thewashing, etc., are often overlooked by poor people. What aconsolation for him it will sometimes be to reflect that by hiswarnings he has averted a serious epidemic, which might have provedfatal to the lives of many !In the building of churches, schools,etc., he will see that there is no forgetfulness of sanitary principles.He will also be mindful of the dangers of consanguinity, since,according to recent statistics, sixty-seven per cent, of sick ordeformed children come from the marriages of first cousins, and the ,dreadful percentage of ninety-six from the marriages of doubleIt is quite certain that many evils, physical as well ascousins.How prudent thereforemoral, arise from preventible causes.to anticipate them in time !As regards moral evils, it need only be remarked that, sincethe establishment of Industrial Schools in Ireland, nearly halfThis fact alone showsthe gaols of the country have been closed.how much depends on the instruction and training ofyouth,Indeedthe latter being a very necessary supplement to the former.it is the opinion of many that the most important part of a child'seducation is completed before its sixth year ; because at thatage, even though the use of reason has not been attained, themind has taken a particular set, from which it cannot afterwardsOf course a highly importantbe removed without difficult3'.part of education remains to be accomplished in the years thatTheol. Moral, vol. i., numbers 789,follow.(See Lehmkuhl,786.)It is said that in Belgium many priests take a most active part infounding and directing co-operative and other societies among theIn some, perhaps all, of the dioceses there is a priestpeasantry.specially appointed for social work of this kind, just as a catechist is(See Irish Ecclesiastical Record, June, 1905,for religious instruction.p. 504).Trans.142POPE ADRIAN IV.,objact of this alliance ; for the letter says clearly that thetwo princes wished to undertake together an expeditioninto another country, which could be no other than Ire-land.After noting the death of Adrian IV. in 1159, Baroniusgives a long biography of the Pope from an old manuscriptThere is not a single word in it aboutin the Vatican.Ireland, or a donation that the Pope made to the King ofEngland.It is enly after all this that the annalist ends by sayingthat, not to forget anything connected with the memory ofso great a Pontiff, he is going to copy from a Vaticanmanuscript (this is the chronicle of Matthew Paris) adiploma given to Henry, King of England, with a view to.re-establish in better form the affairs of religion in Ire-land ; but in what year the diploma was given is uncertain.It seems to me that Baronius could not have shown moreclearly the doubts that he entertained regarding theAn historian does not expressgenuineness of the Bull.himself in this loose manner regarding a document that heWhile declaring the uncertaintybelieves to be certain.of the date, the annalist gives the lie again to the Metalo-gicus, as well as to the chroniclers who attach the Bull tothe year 1155, or to the sojourn of John of Salisbury atBcneventum.In the memoir that appeared in 1872, Dr. Moran ex-presses himself thus : — " In the present instance we areof the Vatican, Monsignor Theiner .not left in doubt as to the source whence Baronius derivedhis information regarding Adrian's supposed Bull. Duringmy stay in Rome I took occasion to inquire whether theMSS. of the eminent annalist, which are happily preserved,indicated the special ' Vatican Manuscript ' referred to inhis printed text, and I was informed by the learned archi-. that thevistCodex Vaticanus referred to is a MS. copy of the Historyof Matthew Paris, which ispreserved in the VaticanThus it is the testimony of Matthew Paris aloneLibrary.that here confronts us in the pages of Baronius ; and nonew argument can be taken from the words oftheRelying on the same high authority, Ieminent annalist.am happy to state that nowhere in the private archives oramong thein theprivate papers ofthe Vatican,or.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.,.143Regesta ... or in the various indices of the PontificalLetters, can a single trace be found of the supposed Bullsof Adrian IV. and Alexander III."SECTION 2.BZOVIUS.Called to Rome, under Paul V., the Polish Dominicanransacked the archives of the Vatican,and publishedvarious works, among which we find an ecclesiastical his-tory, in two volumes folio, an abridgment of the twelvevolumes of Baronius ; also, a continuation of the annals ofthe learned Cardinal, from iigS to 1565, in eight volumes.The first volume, dedicated to Paul V., saw the light in1615.Although Baronius had given the Bull of Adrian IV., asI have said above, Bzovius, in his ecclesiastical history,does not say a word of it. He cites, however, John ofSalisbury, and gives three passages from the. Polycraticusbut he passes over in complete silence the Metaloglctisand the donation of Ireland.At 1 171, he cites Hoveden on the pretended submissionof the Irish Bishops to King Henry II.At the year 1172, he relates the oath that Henry II.swore in the cathedral of Avranches. The clause relatingto the feudal subjection of England is in the same terms asin Baronius.He adds a point which shows that the letter of Adrianto Louis VII. could refer only to Ireland.According tothe historian, the two Cardinals, occupied with the reha-bilitation of Henry II., required from him a promise to gointo Spain, if necessary, and the Pope should wish it :Si necesse fuerit, et dominus papa ei mandaverit, ibit inHispaniam, ad liberandam terram illam a paganis."It isincredible that, a few years previously. Pope Adrian haddissuaded the same Henry II. and Louis VII.frommaking an expedition into Spain.{Historia Eccle.siastica,t- 2, p. 331, 333, 353, 354.)I turn to the Annals of the same author.At the year1321, he gives the letter of John XXII. to King Edwardwithout date, and without name of place from which it wasHe prints this letter again in Vol. XX. of thewritten.Annals, 1542, No. 12.This time he dates it from theI 44POPE ADRIAN IV.,tenth year of John XXII., but he omits the preamble.Itis here that we read his extraordinary story, truly un-worthy of a grave historian : —" About the year ii6o,i the Chair of Peter being occu-pied by Adrian IV., an Englishman by birth, who, beforehis Pontificate, had, by his sanctity and preaching, con-verted the kingdoms of Norway and Sweden to the Faithof Christ, the Irish, who, in the beginning, immediatelyafter receiving the Christian religion, had given them-selves and all they possessed into the dominion of theRoman Pontiff, and from that time had recognised noother supreme prince than the Roman Pontiff alone, seeingthemselves greatly afflicted by the intestine wars of a mul-titude of petty kings and tyrants, some among them and agreat part of the people, in order to enjoy peace, and lestthey should be subjugated by others, desired to submitthemselves to Henry II., King of England (under whomSt. Thomas of Canterbury afterwards suffered martyr-dom, and who was at this very time in Ireland with aThis is the reason why they humbly askedgreat army).Pope Adrian, in the name of the two parties, viz., the kingon one side, and the princes and bishops of Ireland on theother, that, in order to put an end to the quarrels andseditions almost continual that arose from the multitude ofpetty rulers, and also to regulate better the worship of theCatholic religion, which had been much impaired by thefrequency of wars, especially as regarded the celebrationand observance of marriages, his Holiness would vouchsafeto grant the dominion of all Ireland to King Henry, whohad already acquired some places in the island by his ownarms and those of his friends, namely, Robert FitzStephenand Richard Earl Pembroke, the Pontiff, for these andother causes, whether because he derived no profit fromIreland, or because he could not without great expensesend help to a kingdom so remote, yielded with little diffi-culty ; but prescribing certain conditions by which the saidHenry and his descendants would hold the kingdom, andacknowledge that it had been given by the Apostolic See.When King Henry, and the Irish princes and people, hadbound themselves by oath to these conditions in two coun-cils, one held at Dublin and the other at Cashel, the King'Adrian died the previous year, 1159.A FRIEND OF IRELAM).145of England was declared by apostolic authority Lord ofIreland."Bzovius does not tell us the source of his information.I consider it needless to point out the anachronisms and thediscrepancies of the story.SECTION 3.BONGARS AND DUCHESNE.James Bongars, a Calvanist, councillor and steward ofHenry IV., born at Orleans in 1546, was employed by thisprince at the Courts of Germany, as resident ambassador.He died at Paris in 161 2, the year that followed the publica-tion of Gesta Dei per Francos. He had acquired a greatpart of the manuscripts of St. Benedict's on the Loire,scattered about after the pillage of this abbey by the Cal-vinists. He also purchased many manuscripts of thelibrary of the Cathedral of Strasburg.The letter of Pope Adrian to Louis VII. appears in GestaDei per Francos.(Page 1174, Hanoviae, 1611.)isItofthetheletterswrittentwenty-eighthtoTwenty-sevenLouis VII. by kings, princes, and prelates.were borrowed from the library of President Petau, but ofthe twenty-eighth, that of Pope Adrian, Bongars does notthe preface : —mention the source." Epistolae a regibus, principibus, praelatis, ad regem Fran-Ex biblio-corum Ludovicum Juniorem, viginti septem.I suspect that all these letters cametheca P. Petavii."from the Abbey of St. Benedict on the Loire,Probablythey were given by Bongars to Petau, except the letter ofAdrian, which he preserved, and which did not enter thePresident's library until after the writer's death.Thus we read inParis.Thirty years later, Andrew Duchesne found these sameletters in the hands of Alexander Petau, senator, or coun-They appeared incillor inVolume IV. of Rerum Francicarum Scriptores, publishedafter the death of the editor, in 1641.the Parliament ofWe are told that the manuscript of these letters wasold: —" Epistolarum volumen, quas Pontifices RomaniEx veteri codice... ad Ludovicum VII. scripserunt.senatoris ParisiensisMSS. virinunc primum editum, 1641." The volume appeared afterthe death of Andrew Duchesne, asThisclar. Alexandri PetaviiI have said.——146POPE ADRIAN IV.,learned man could hardly have been unaware that Bongarshad published the letters.question.manuscript of the letters inThe Abbey of St. Victor in Paris possessed anotherThe editor ofDuchesne admits it : —" Fuit et simile olim exemplar inbibliotheca Canonicorum Regularium Sancti Victoris Paris,not. II., 22, cum sequent! inscriptione.—Plures epistolseSummorum Pontificum Adrian! IV. et Alexandri III., &c.Inter quas multse habentur concernentes statum hujusecclesiffiUnde conjici facile potest banc epistolarum collectionem abaliquo monasterii Sancti Victoris abbate, vel canonico,fuis.se factum."Sancti Victoris sub primis abbatibus nostris.[Rerum Francicarum, t. iv., p. 557.)The manuscripts of President Petau were purchased fortheir weight in gold for Christina of Sweden, who leftthem to the Vatican Library, in which they form the chiefcollection of the Queen.Bongars, first of all, arbitrarily interpreted of Spain theinitial letter H. of the manuscript. By this mistake, moreor less intentional, he led editors and historians astray.It is natural to inquire if Bongars, a Calvinist, had anyinterest in leaving the literary world ignorant of the factthat Pope Adrian, far from authorising a conquest of Ire-land, had, on the contrary, formally dissuaded the King ofFrance and the King of England from attempting it, andpositively refused his concurrence in the expedition.Itseems to me clear that the publication of the letter in theyear 161 1 would have seriously thwarted the designs ofEngland over Ireland.Could a Calvinist point out the way to justify a Popefrom an accusation specially odious, which, during so manyages, had sullied the memory of this Pontiff ?i' After reading the above remarks, which help to solve a seriousdifficulty (namely, the frequent mention of Spain), the followingingenuous, but rather very misleading :— " The letter of Adrianremarks from a supporter of Adrian's Bull will not appear verywas printed for the first time from an orginal manuscript in theyear 161 1 by Bongars, and while Spain is the country mentioned,not a word about Ireland,About thirty years afterwards it waspubHshed from another manuscript by Duchesne, and of SpainEvery subsequent historian, from Bouquetalone mention is made.to Natalis Alexander, mentions Spain as the country in question,"Not the slightest allusion here to the letter H^ by which theTrans.reader might form a correct idea of what actually occurred,—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.I47Unless I am greatly mistaken, I have shown as clear asnoon-day that the letter of Adrian to Louis VII. cannotrefer to Spain, and that it must refer to Ireland.(ChaptersVI. and VII.)Had the King; of France any need of the Pope's permis-sion to aid the King' of Castile, who was his father-in-law?What interest could induce Henry II. to wage war inSpain P'^ He was so little disposed to it by nature, that the.Cardinal Legates made it a condition of his absolution, atthe time of the Avranches Conference.If there was question of Spain, was it an Englishman,Rotrodus of Warwick, who would be chosen to negotiatethe affair at Rome?And the clergy, the princes, the people, who ought to beconsulted—who had a right to interfere-—could all thatrefer to Mussulman Spain?It seems to me certain that King Henry II., not daringto come forward openly, got Louis VII. to ask PopeAdrian for permission to attempt the conquest of Ireland,but that the Pope absolutely refused any such permission.Therefore, it is not possible that this same Pope issued thesupposed Bull—-a Bull, moreover, that neither Bongars norDuche.snc found anywhere among their manuscripts of thetwelfth century.SECTION 4.-—LYNCH.The arguments of Lynch against the Bull have so muchthe more weight as he was not by any means a man of un-Moderate by char-reasonable or untractable disposition.acter, he took his place among those Irishmen whoapproved of the treaty for one year's suspension of armsconcluded with the Marquis of Ormond.^ He passed into' This is a point which perhaps is worthy of more considerationthan it usually receives. What motive could induce Henry toundertake a costly expedition to Spain, for the purpose of main-taining the liberties of the Church there, while he attacked themat home ? Would not Ireland, by its proximity, offer a betterfield for plunder and conquest to a rapacious monarch ?Trans.^ It is to be hoped that the day will soon come when thecharacter of the Papal Envoy, the illustrious .\rchbishop Rinuccini,and also that of the brave commander, the noble-minded OwenRoe O'Neill, which suffered so much at this sad period, will be—148POPE ADRIAN IV.,France in 1652, when Galway was taken by the troops olCromwell.During- his abode in France, he still devotedhimself to the interests of Ireland.It was proljahly in France that he published CambrensisEvcrsus : the work bears no name of printer or place. Thewriter conceals himself under the pseudonym of GratianusThis work has become exceedinglyLucius Hibernicus.rare : we are told that a multitude of copies perished in afire at London.It is a folio of 356 pages.The work wa? reprinted between i8j.8 and 1852, in threevolumes octavo, under the care of the Rev. Matthew Kelly,for the " Celtic Society." This edition is not in stock withbooksellers. 1In 1659, Richard Ferral, an Irish Capuchin, presented amemoir to the Cardinals of the Propaganda, under thethoroughly vindicated. Many works have lately appeared thatthrow a flood of light on the events of the seventeenth century.See, for example, Spicihgium Ossoriense, by Cardinal Moran ; TlieConfederate Wars, by Sir John Gilbert ; The Chances of Way, anhistorical tale, by the Rev. T. A. Finlay, S.J.Also several worksmentioned by the Dublin Review, when treating of these matters.(March, 1845 and April, 1874).It should be remembered thatwhen calumnies have once gained ground, they are not easily dis-Moreover, the books in which Catholic writers mightplaced.hope to find a true account of events were often so rare andexpensive as to be beyond their reach.Thus, 'so late as' in 1844,with all our advances in printing, Burke's Hihernia Dominicana,even without the supplement, was selling for five or six guineas;Lombard's Commentarius de Rehus Hihernia;, seven guineas ; andO'Sullivan Beare's Histori/E CathoUco! Cnmpendium (a small quarto),seventeen guineas.Trans' As the three letters (see p. 32) attributed to Pope AlexanderIII., and first published in 1728 by Thomas Hearne, sub-librarianof the University, Oxtord, were generally unknown in the timeof Dr. Lynch, it was impo.ssible for him to make any commentson them. Abb6 McGeoghegan, who wrote some thirty yearsafter Hearne, seems never to have heard of them.In this con-nection, it is well to remember that when John of Salisbury wasat Beneventum (see p. 48), Cardinal Roland, who afterwardsbecame Pope Alexander III., was also there, as one of the PapalCourt (see p. 63, note). We cannot suppose that any importantgrant regarding Ireland was made by Pope Adrian IV. throughJohn of Salisbury, without the Cardinal's signing a documentin reference to it, or at least knowing all about it.Yet John inwriting afterwards to Pope Alexander III. never asked a con-firmation of it, or made anv more allusion to it than if it neverDublin Review, first series, xvi., 520.—A FKlEND OF IRELANt).I49title : Autores ct modus eversiunis catholkcc religionis inHibernia, &c. Convinced that tlie memoir of the Capuchincould only increase the troubles of Ireland, by sowingdivisions between the old Irish and those of English origin,Lynch opposed it, and published in 1664 his Alithinologia,It is a quarto of 82 leaves. A supplement of 137&c.leaves appeared in 1667. These two works, still more rarethan Cambrensis Eversus, are much sought for, andreach very high prices at public sales.In 1G69, Lynch brought out at St. Malo his Pii antistitisIcon, sive de vita et morte P. Francisci Kirovani Alladensisepiscopi, autore Joanne LynchcBO, archidiacono I'uamensi.It is an octavo of 72 leaves.Nicholson, in his " Irish Library," says that he has seena manuscript work from the hand of Lynch himself, a col-lection of some of the most authentic annals of Ireland.Itis, he says, a work as complete as it is exact and interest-This author also speaks of a letter of Lynch to Bayle,ing.in order to prove that the Scots who first taught in theuniversities of Paris and Oxford were Scots of Ireland.Finally, he assures us that Lynch was promoted to theBishopric of Killala, in Ireland, a short time before hisdeath, which occurred about the year 1680.It is worthy of remark that a writer so enlightened asLynch should have boldly pronounced against the genuine-ness of the Bull of Adrian.About the same time appeared at Liege the " Ecclesias-tical Annals " of Afford, who also raises doubts on theexisted (seep. 51, n.). He could say enough of minor affairs, andcould he say nothing of a matter of the utmost gravity ?Moreover,in the three letters mentioned above, Pope Alexander III. shows noknowledge whatever of any such grant made by his predecessorfsee p. ,^3) ; and in the other letter attributed to Alexander III.(see p. 64) he shows a total misconception regarding the natureof the said grant, as explained in the Bull attributed to PopePassing over the last-mentioned letter, of whichAdrian IV.Giraldus himself makes little account, is it easy to believe thatIt may be objected thatthe other three letters are authentic ?Cardinal Moran believes them to be so. We can only say inreply that his Eminence gives no reason for so doing, and we aretherefore unable to consider on what grounds he proceeds. Wedo not know how anything in the book brought to light byHearne can be proved to be authentic. We rather think that anold book of this kind—probably compiled by an enemy of Ireland^deserves to be regarded with suspicion.Trans.150POPIi ADRIAN IV.,Bull. AUord was born in London in 1382. Having retiredto Lancashire, he collected materials for his Annals. Hepassed over to the continent in 1658, and died the sameHis work appeared five years after-year at St. Omer.Alford was notfour volumes.wards,Liege,atinThe two writersacquainted with Cambrensis Eversus.agreed without knowing it.historiansIt was the silence of the old chroniclers that raised" Neitherdoubts in the mind of Alford regarding the Bull.Matthew Paris," he says, " nor any one elsetheofEngland,Alfordoldit."was mistaken as far as concerns Matthew Paris ; but it isquite true that Roger de Hoveden, William of Newbridge,and, generally speaking, the chroniclers of the twelfth cen-tury, make no mention of the Apocryphal Bull.(See Chap.XXn., above.)speaksofofSECTION 5.MACARI-E EXCIDIUM.(1G92.)This work contains a history of Ireland under fictitiousTheMacaria or Cyprus is nothing but Ireland.names.English are called Cilicians. The high-priest of Delphos isColonel Charles O'Kelly surrounded himselfthe Pope.with mystery, chiefly on account of the part that he hadtaken intranslation\yas made in the last century by a Catholic priest, who tookthe pseudonym of Gratianus Regallus. A volume contain-ing both Latin and English texts, was brought out in Dub-lin in 1850, under the care of Mr. John C. O'Callaghan,as I have said above.A LatinRevolution.IrishtheI must confine myself to what regards the Bull ofAdrian ; and, in order to be more clear, I shall replace thepseudonyms by the real names." But never yet was kingdom placed on such a surefoundation that it did not ultimately arrive at the limit ofits existence ; and the Irish empire, which had enduredmore than 2,000 years, at length yielding to the decrees offate, had to recognise this immutable law, to which allhuman powers are subject. Henry, the second of the name,King of England, had promised his assistance to Dermod,the suppliant prince of Leinster, whom the King of IrelandA FRILND OF IRELAND.I5Ihad exiled, for carrying away the wife of another provin-The English leaders, whom Henry II. hadcial prince.sent over with a well-appointed fleet, to re-instate Dermod,forcibly possessed themselves of a large portion of Leinster,and, having expelled the inhabitants, divided their landsamong the English adventurers. Nor do I know that ithad ever previously occurred that one nation, professingthe Catholic faith, should usurp the dominion over anothernation of the same religion, and extirpate and expel its in-habitants from their native, soil; it being in that creedexpressly forbidden, and counted an especial sin, to covetthe goods of one's neighbour ; and, at that time, not theEnglish and Irish only, but almost all the nations ofEurope, were religious observers of the Roman Catholicrites. A success, so fully in accordance with the wishes ofHenry II., led him to carry out a plan he had long medi-tated ; for he had long since anxiously considered how hemight subdue Ireland, and extend his English empire bysuch an accession of territory. For this purpose, he forged(unless, haply, it was genuine) a Bull of the Pope of Rome,which, he pretended, granted him the dominion of Ireland,on the condition of his becoming the patron of the priest-hood, and restoring, in their ancient splendour, the ruinedtemples and neglected altars of the heavenly powers, inaccordance with Catholic rites." The Pope claimed this right over Ireland, in virtue of agrant made to him by Constantine, the first emoeror ofthe Romans who embraced the Catholic faith, who, heto him and his successors thestated, had conveyeddominion of all the islands which lay scattered amidst theOh, vain invention ofrecesses of the Mediterranean Sea.an ambitious Sovereign !—for the annals of all nations,and the monuments of every age, bear testimony the mosteloquent, that Ireland never was under the sway of theRoman Empire, and therefore its Emperor had no power togrant to another a right which he never had himselfNor, at that time, was there in all the globe,possessed.not even in Rome itself, a spot where the heavenly powerswere more rehgiously adored, and the Catholic rites moresincerely celebrated, than in the island of Ireland." Now, when Henry II. approached the shores of Ire-land with a mighty host, levied in every quarter, rumourgreatly magnified his numbers, and the lesser princes, in-"152POPE ADRIAN IV.,timidated, and more particularly afraid of opposing- thePope, whom they venerated as a second Deity, made theirsubmission to him at Dublin.Roderic O'Conor, however,who was then chief King of the whole island, relying- on theposition and natural strength of Connaught (over which hehad been the toparch, before he was called to the supremeauthority), and neither intimidated by Henry's numeroushost, nor by the unjust Bull of the Sovereign Pontiff (whohe well knew was an Englishman by birth), made vigorouspreparations to assert by arms the rights and hberties ofhis kingdom."It is needless for me to point out the anachronisms thatour gallant colonel mixes up with his narrative.Let itsuffice to remark that in his eyes the Bull attributed to PopeAdrian was an exceedingly suspicious document, and inany case very unjust, as the English aggression itself hadbeen.SECTION 6.ANTONY AND FRANCIS PAGI.These two writers discussed the question superficially.They took no trouble to fathom it thoroughly.In his notes on the Annals of Baronius, under the year1 159, Antony Pagi, thinking to correct the learned Cardi-nal, who gave the Bull without date, cites Raoul de Diceto,who refers it to 1154, but adopts with Matthew Paris the" Baronius, num. 21 et seqq. , rcfert Hadrianidate 1 155.papse epistolam Anglorum regi scriptam sine die et mense,in qua laudat eum quod velit in Hibcrniam intrare, et earndominio sancti Petri subjicere. Eamdem epistolam recitatRadulphus de Diceto in Imaginibus Historiarum, p. 529,et eam cum anno 11 54 copulat. Verum cum Henricus II.rex Angliae coronatus sit exeunte dcccmbri ejusdem Christiaiini, non potuit eo anno literas ab Hadriano IV. recipere,ideoque Mathaus Parisius eam accurate cum anno 1155connectit.Treating of the question again at the year 1171, AntonyPagi considers himself happy in citing Giraldus Cambren-sis ! He blames Alford and Lynch for raising any doubt" Quia ante prse-regarding the genuineness of the Bull.sentem annum (1171) Henricus II. expeditionem iUam ilUussuscepit, Alfordus hoc anno num. 36 de sinceritate illius"A FRIEND OF IRELAND.I53diplumatis dubitat, quod, inquit, MathaBus Paris, et aliquian*iqui rerum Anglicarum historic! illius non meminerent.Vrrum jam anno 1159 Mathseum Parisiensem, et Radul-phum de Diceto, qui lioc sseculo vixit, citavi, et utriquenunc addo Giraldum Cambrensem, qui hoc etiam temporevivebat.P'rancis Pagi, nephew of Antony, published in 1718 theBreviarum of the history of the Popes, in four volumes,quarto. Too often ,he limited himself to copying the notesthat his uncle had made on Baronius.For Francis Pagi" Diplomathe Bull of Adrian is g-enuine in all its parts.illud omni ex parte sincerum et genuinum, ac juxta illudHenricus rex anno 1171 expeditionem Hibernicam sus-cepit. " He cites Hoveden and Gervase, who do not speakAs for the Council, Francis Pagi takes careof the Bull.not to say whether it was held at Cashel or at Lismore.But if Henry H. made the expedition to Ireland in virtueof a Bull of Adrian, how are we to explain that PopeAlexander IH. relied upon a supposed voluntary submis-sion of the Irish bishops in order to confirm to King Henryand his successors the possession of Ireland, as Francis" Auctoritate apos-Pagi, following Hoveden, assures us?tolica confirmavit (Alexander) illi et haeredibus suis regnumHiberniae secundum formam chartarum archiepiscoporumHoveden is excusable, as heet episcoporum Hiberniae,"knew nothing of a Bull of Adrian ; but Francis Pagi, whohad just pronounced boldly for the genuineness of the Bull,should naturally have said that Pope Alexander, confirm-ing the diploma of his predecessor, gave Ireland to theKing and his heirs conformably to this Bull. By relyingon a spontaneous submission of the Irish, the existence ofthe Bull is denied.(Breviariiim, t. 3, p. 93.)SF.CTION 7.MCGEOGHEGAN.1 can do nothing better than let the author speak forAlthough his thesis is not complete, it is full ofhimself.judicious observations, which greatly shake the credit ofAfter what I have said in the foregoing chap-the Bull.ters, I have no need to make a few reservations on someparticular points, and I leave them to the sagacity of thereader.154POPE ADRIAN IV.,'' The English having- put an end to this monarchy in thetweh'th century, and wishing to give some colour of justiceto their usurpation and to the tyranny that they practisedagainst the inhabitants of this island, without any othertitle than a pretended Bull of Adrian IV. and the law of thestrongest, represented them as savages who dwelt inwoods.ofnation.this" The title of Henry II. had no foundation but a Bullobtained furtively from Pope Adrian IV., an Englishmanby birth. The motive of the Bull was a false account thatHenry had given to the Pope, regarding the impiety andCambrensls wasthe barbaritytheIrishrepresentation, onwritingappointed to verify inwhich the grant of the Bull had been extorted. He did notfail to strew his work with absurdities and unwarrantablecalumnies, but which the credit of a powerful King knewIt was in this spirit thathow to make available at Rome.Cambrensls laboured at his memoirs, and it was fromthem that English writers took the false colours underPassion and in-which ancient Ireland was represented.terest made these writers pass over the retractation thatCambrensls felt himself obliged to make, inthe latteryears of his life, of many false imputations with which heMoreover, Cambrensls had nothad filled his memoirs.History is not athe qualities requisite for an historian.mere product of the imagination. He spent only eighteenmonths altogether in Ireland, and he saw only a third partof it, which obeyed England. He could not even set hisfoot with safety in the rest of the kingdom.It being im-possible for him to consult the annals of this people, writtenin a language to which he was a total stranger, he foundreplace truth by falsehoods and thefancies of a prepossessed mind, in order to swell up hisI., discours prelim.,\olunies."[Histoire d'Irlande,necessary toitt.n. 13.)" Can anyone suspect the Vicar of Jesus Christ for an,Can anyone believe him capable ofinjustice so crying?dictating a Bull that overthrew a whole nation, dispos-sessed so many old proprietors of their patrimonies, led tothe shedding of so much- blood, and caused the ruin of re-ligion in this island?It is a thing inconceivable." In point of fact, if we consider the circumstances andthe motives of this Bull, it has all the characteristics of aA FRIEND OF IKELAND.155..Bull lorged under the borrowed name of Adrian.It isgiven in Baronius without date of year or day, whichrenders it very suspicious.It remained seventeen yearsit was written, we are told, inwithout seeing the light :1155, and was not made public till 1172. ." We derive no great advantage in favour of this Bullfrom the authority of John of Salisbury (afterwards Bishopof Chartres) in his treatise De Nugis Curialibus.Thiswriter is made to say towards the end of the last chapterof his fourth book that at his request Pope Adrian grantedIreland to King Henry, to be possessed by him by a titleof inheritance, because all islands belonged to the RomanChurch by a concession of the Emperor Constantine.Butlearned men regard this passage as a mere rigmaroleadded by a foreign hand, because the author, when speak-ing- expressly of his visit to the Holy Father at Bevenen-tum, where he remained three months, mentions variousconversations that he had with his Holiness, even to theirleast circumstances, without, however, saying a singleYet the affair was of suffi-word of the Bull in question.ciently great importance : and this was naturally the occa-sion to speak of it...." King Henry, who had found satellitessufficientlydevoted to avenge him on the holy prelate of Canterbury,was not at a loss for venal penmen to add to and to takefrom the writings of the time, so as to clothe with anappearance of reality a diploma that was so necessary tojustify his conduct.visit Adrian," It seems that Salisbury made the journey to Italyfrom his master, in order tohis fellow-countryman, but without any commission on the part ofthe King : since the Bull, according to Matthew of West-minster, was the fruit of a solemn embassy that Henry-sent to the Pope ; although, to say what I think, this em-bassy appears to be only a new fable added to the formerone. ..." The silence that Newbridge, an English contemporaryauthor, observes regarding this embassy and the Bullis an argument which,supposed to have been its fruit,Thisthoughauthor, zealous in sounding the praises of Henry and ofhis nation, begins his narrative by saying that the Englishhad entered Ireland with a military force, and that, theirdeserves some consideration.negative,156POPE ADRIAN IV.,I think not." The Bull speaks only of islands.numbers beingf increased, they subdued a great part of it.He does not stiy a word of a Bull granted by a Pope.Isit probable that he would have forgotten a circumstance sonecessary in order to give some colour of justice to the(Page 540.)irregular conduct of his nation?But I do not see whyan island, or a kingdom in the ocean, ought to belong tothe Holy See, as is said in the Bull, rather than a kingdomon the mainland, unless I am informed that it (the HolySee) holds the sovereignty of all islands from the liberalityof the Emperor Constantine :to which I reply that Ire-land, which had never obeyed the Romans, could not beone of this number ; therefore, the pretension made with re-gard to Ireland is frivolous, and the grant made in conse-Such a pretension might be betterquence isfounded with regard to Great Britain, which obeyed theRomans before and after the reign of Constantine. .unjust." English authors also present to us a Bull of Alexan-der III., which confirms that of Adrian, and which seemsto be of the same stamp. ... If we compare this Bull andthe previous one with the treatise on Conquered Irelandwritten at the same time by Giraldus Cambrensis, we shallfind in these works a great similarity of style ; and, if theyare not all from the same hand, they at least seem madefor mutual support, and to gain credit reciprocally one foranother...ofthereligion," The Bull of Alexander III. must seem a paradox to allwho examine closely the manners of Henry, and his con-duct towards the Court of Rome. A bad Christian makesa bad Apostle. What was Henry II. ? A man who, in hisprivate conduct, failed in the essential duties of religion,Superstitious, he joined,often even in those of nature.underpracticestheveilthe most frightful disorders.withhishis humour the mosthe broke according towords,swornsolemntreaties.enemytherights,ofcontemptuouslypersecuted their adherents,their legates, encroached on the immunities of the Church,and took pleasure in encouraging the most unjust usur-this was what caused the martyrdom of Saintpers :Thomas of Canterbury.areacknowledged by all historians. No one is ignorant thatpredecessors,attackedholiestFaithlesshis debaucheriesLikePopes,dismissedFinally,hishetheirinaA FRIRND OF IRULAND.I57he carried them so far as to seduce Ahce, the betrothed ofhis son Richard, and that this passion, as obstinate as itwas foolish and criminal, occasioned nearly all the misfor-Behold then, thetunes that troubled the close of his days.apostle, behold the reformer, whom the Holy Sec shouldThe misunderstandinghave chosen to convert Ireland !between the Sovereign Pontiff and the King of Englandwas carried to its furthest limits by the martyrdom ofSaint Thomas : can anyone believe that in such circum-stances the Pope would have openly laden with benefits aman who was tacitly excommunicated ?Can anyonesuppose that his Holiness would have chosen, for the con-version of Ireland, a prince in conflict with the Holy See?It is not possible to admit such ideas. .(Page 442.)." After all that I have just said of the state of religionin Ireland during the five hundred and fifty years thatpassed before the reign of Henry II. ; of the many councilsassembled for the regulation of manners and the restora-tion of discipline ; of so many holy and learned prelateswho did honour to religion, and of whom several werethought worthy to be called in iiyq to the third Jreneralcouncil of Lateran ; of so many zealous missionaries whohad quitted their native land, their ministry not seeminp'indispensable at home, to go and instruct foreign nations ;1' The early missionarj' voyages of St. Brendan, though after-wards turned into fabulous legends by story-tellers, just as worksof fiction are produced at the present day, had a European fame.He is supposed to have visited America, and to have preachedto the Aborgines there, among whom traces of Christianity andThe following incident incivilisation were afterwards found.connection with the discovery of America may be interesting r—" It is a well-known fact that Columbus, while maturing liisDlans for his great expedition, visited Ireland as well as Icelandin Quest of information bearing on his theories. He was assistedin his researches bv an Irisli gentleman named Patrick Masuire,Therewho accompanied him also on his great voyage of discovery.are other Irish names on the roster of the ship's crew, preserved inthe archives at Madrid ; but it is specially recorded by FatherTornitori, an Italian priest in the seventeenth century, of PatrickMaguire, that he was the first to set foot on American soil. Onthe eventful morning of he landing, the boats bearing Columbusand some of his crew were launched ; but approaching the land,the water shallowed, and Patrick Maguire jumped out to lightenthe boat, and then waded ashore."— Brendam'ana, by the Rev.Denis O'Donoghue, P.P., Ardfcrt, p.For a .short, vivid, interesting sketch of St. Columba's voyages.^33.I5SPOPK ADRIAN TV. ,of SO many roundations made by the generosity of thefaithful ; and, finally, of so many examples of virtue givenby the chiefs of the nation : can anyone imagine that cor-ruption was so general and so inveterate as is representedin the two Bulls ?"The majority of those who went toIreland underHenry II. were the descendants of Normans, real adven-turers, for whom nothing was sacred.These, then, werethe teachers whom Henry 11.Ireland, bysentintoapostolic authority forsooth, to correct morals, and to re-Their conduct was much more proper tostore religion !shake the faith of true believers than to confirm them inChristianity." A conquest, to be lawful, supposes a war whosemotive is just ; such as an injury from those who are to beThere was no war between the Irish and theconquered.English ; and, if the King of Leinster brought them tohelp him in recovering his crown, he rewarded them well.He could not transfer to them any right over the otherprovinces, because he had none himself."(Page 456.)SECTION 8.DR. LINGARD.Although this judicious historian does not directly ex-amine the question of genuineness, he lets us see that hehas little faith in the Bull.First, the pretended donation must have been extorted" Toby captious and false representations of the King :justify the invasion of a free and unoffending people, hisambition had discoveredthattheirmanners and the reform of their clergy were benefits whichthe Irish ought cheerfully to purchase with the loss of their{History of England, Reign of Henry 11.)Independence."The historian qualifies as singular the negotiation ofSalisbury at Rome :" Fourteen years after this singularnccotlation, a few Welsh adventurers landed in Ireland."He points out the disagreement between the Pseudoi-the civilisationofmissions, and labours, see Derriana, by tlieMost Rev. Dr.'O'Doherty,Bishop of Derry. p. 8 ?.For numerous lists of Irish Saints and scholars, as well asmonastic foundations, on the Continent, see Haverty's History cfJff/aKC?, 'chapters, xi., xii., xv., and xvi.— Trans.—A FRIEND OF IRKI.AND.159Salisbury and the Bull : " John of Salisbury, who musthave known its real purport, calls it a grant of inheritance.''But the Bull expresses no such idea :" It is, however, ob-servable that Adrian in this instrument avoids the usuallanguage of feudal grants."Not being able to discuss every fact, Lingard confineshimself to transcribing from chroniclers.Admitting thatSalisbury brought the Bull, what use did Henry II. make" Other projects offered themselves to Henry'sof it?ambition ; and the Papal letter was consigned to oblivionin the archives of the castle of Winchester."Fourteen years rolled by before the landing of a fewadventurers on the Irish coast.During the five months that Henry spent in IrelandNor did he add(1171-1172), he never spoke of the Bull.an inch of territory to that acquired by the first adven-turers.Five years later, according to Giraldus Cambrensis, the" It was during this period,Bull was at length divulged.when his authority in Ireland was nearly annihilated, thatHenry bethought him of the letter which he had formerlyprocured from Pope Adrian.It had been forgotten duringalmost twenty years : now it was drawn from obscurity,was intrusted to William Fitz-Aldhelm and Nicholas .and was read by them with much solemnity to a synod ofIrish bishops. "1..^ How innocent of Henry IT. to forget all about the papalletter, making him a present of Ireland 1 Let us, however, not forgetthat it is an old practice with many Englishmen to invent plansand plots by which the ordinary observer may be deceived.Thus,when, in the reign of James I, there was question of sweeping theIrish from their lands in Ulster, Sir John Davis advised that thevshould all get legal grants from'the King, after which " His Majesty'sblessed genius will banish all those generations of vipers out of it."What Cunning and perfidy ![State Papers. 1606-8, pp. 273-4.)Plots having been invented, great merit was gained by theirdiscovery at a convenient time, and they were used as a iustificationS?ee Gunpowder Plot, by thefor the most unjustifiable measures.Rev. John Gerard, S.J. It gives a good idea of the plotting spirit inthe days of " Crafty Cecil."Titus Oates, by his j^lot, obtained a pension of li,-2oo a vear fromHis story,' however, having in the reign of James II.Charles II.been proved a mere concoction, he was condemned to be imprisonedfor life, to be whipped, and to stand in the pillory four times.''.Afterwards, favoured again by fortune, he obtained a pension of;{400 a year from William III.Trans.—l6oPOPE ADRIAN IV.,Lingard adds with much good sense : " How far itserved to convince these prelates that the King was therightful sovereign of the island, we are left to conjecture."The letter of Adrian to Louis VII. did not escape theWhile following the opinion thatattention of Lingard.this letter referred to Spain, the judicious writer found init a presumption against authority for the Irish expedi-tion : " When Louis a few years later meditated a similarexpedition into Spain, and for that purpose requested theconsilium et favorem Romanse ecclesiae, the answer wasAdrian dissuaded him, because it was in-\cry different.consulta ecclesia et populo terras illius."^SECTION 9.MR. O CALLAGHAN.Here, then, are the seven reasons ofAlthough this writer has several times treated of PopeAdrian and the Bull, his arguments are common andordinary. They present nothing new, no interesting view.I content myself with a summary of them, without againgoing over ground already passed.writer: — i. The testimony of John of Salisbury. 2. TheBull of Adrian, related in extenso in Giraldus Cambrensis4. Theand contemporaries.in a Council at Waterford.publication of these Bulls5. The complaints that the Irish sent to John XXIL, witha copy of Adrian's Bull—which copy the Pontiff forwarded6. The insertion ofto King Edward II.Codice Vaticano in the Annals of Baronius.Roman Bullarium printed in 1739 gives the Bull.3. The Bulls of Alexander.extheBull7. Lastly, thethis esteemedThis worthy writer imagined in good faith that all hisunquestionable,documents were true, genuine, official,and of conclusive value !He was probably awakened from his dreams on theappearance of the Memoir of which it remains for me tospeak, fi-ud from which I have already borrowed so much.' This is a Kood point from Dr. Lingard. How nnreasonable to11 59 Pope Adrian IV. dissuaded Louis VII. fromsuppose that ininvading Spain, incnnsuUn cccUsia et i>ot>ulo terrm illuis, and thatin 115; the same Pope authorized Henry II. to invade Ireland,makino; no account of the ecclesia and popuhis there ? Father Chaillotdoe; not believe in either story.Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.l6lSECTION 10.—THE " IRISH ECCLESIASTICAL RECORD."Although the question of Pope Adrian has not to-daythe importance it had in former times, there are circum-stances which occasionally require us to revert to it. Thus,a few years ago, a portion of the Irish Press opened a dis-cussion on the genuineness of the Bull, with the foolishhope of weakening in the minds of a Catholic people theirattachment to the Holy See.Protestants, always happy in being able to injure aPope, slipped the Bull of Adrian into elementary educa-Dr. Moran quotes Professor Richey, who,tional works.writing for the pupils of a Ladies' College, gave a verythe Pope haderroneous translation of the Bull,authorised Henry to subjugate the country, and to takepossession of the island, while the Pontifical letter, apocry-phal as it is, abstracts from all idea of conquest, and con-tains no transfer of dominion.asifSome people have set forth the Bull as a definition exThe Bull,cathedra ; but this idea bears no examination.even if it were genuine, has none of the conditions of adogmatic definition.In our days it would not be easy to forge or to accredita false Bull, because there would be little delay in dis-The Middle Ages, which had no printing orowning it.telegraph offices, were often led into error by apocryphaldocuments, which had a verj long life.At all periods the Irish nation, as if by an infallible in-stinct, has rejected the false Bull of Adrian, and loudlydeclared that it was nothing but a trick of the English.I content myself with these brief observations, becauseI intend to give Dr. Moran's Memoir among my justifyingpapers.