CHAPTER XXVI.THE PONTIFICAL COURT OF THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY KNEWNOTHING ABOUT THE FALSE BULL OF ADRIAN IV.I ASSEMBLE in this chapter various acts of John XXII.,which concur to show that the Pontifical Court had noknowledge of Adrian's Bull from its own archives, or fromchronicles, or from public rumour ; so that writers of thelives of Popes passed over in complete silence the pretendeddonation of Ireland.SECTION I.In 1316, a little after the election of John XXII., KingEdward II. sent three knights to the Pontifical Court asambassadors, to offer the tribute of a thousand markssterling, promised by John Lackland, and to excuse himwith regard to arrears, which extended to twenty-fourThe Continuator of Baronius has published theyears.letter by which Edward accreditedthese ambassadors.Now, this prince makes no distinction between EnglandHe did not at all say thatand Ireland for the tribute.seven hundred marks were for the kingdom of Englandand three hundred for the seigniory of Ireland, conformably" Ad excusandum nos superto the diploma of King John :solutione annul census mille marcharum, qui a nobis persacrosanctam Romanam Ecclesiam exigitur, non facta."Iought, however, to say that the ambassadors made thisdistinction. As the arrears extended to twenty-four years,they promised to pay a fourth during the next four years.(Annals of Baronius, 1316, num. 24.)The Holy See, which had not granted the investiture ofIreland, could not expressly recognise that a part of theMoreover, the Kingtribute had reference to this island.of England had at this period only a very small portion ofthe country, and the Pope should, from a sense of justice,guard the right and the independence of the nationalIn reality the offering of King John seemed ratherchiefs.to be regarded as a snare that he had laid for the Pope,with a view of obtaining for himself a title of sovereigntyover Ireland,,94POPE ADRIAN IV.SECTION 2.If the Pontifical Court had known the Bull of Adrian IV.,accounta most favourable occasion foroccurred when John XXII. asked King- Edward to renderliege-homage, and to take the oath of fealty, as a vassal ofthe Holy See. The pontifical letter, dated from Avignon,the sixteenth of the calends of April, in the first year of thepontificate, may be read in the Continuator of Baronius.(An. 1317, num. 43.)turningtoitJohn XXII. took nothing as the foundation of his claimbut the diploma of King John. He passed over in silencethe promise of Henry II. and the pretended Bull of Adrian.An explanation is offered in strictness that the Pontiff ab-stained from mentioning the oath which Henry took in thecathedral of Avranches, supposing that truly it was thenagreed to keep secret the clause relating to the feudal sub-jection of England towards the Pope. As a matter of fact,the Holy See makes it a point of honour to keep conscien-But this motive did nottiously the secrets confided to it.exist for the Bull of Adrian IV. , nor for the diplomasThis is the reason whyattributed to Pope Alexander III.John XXII., if he knew this Bull and these diplomas,should naturally make use of them, and recallthememory of King Edward that his power over Ireland wasderived from a pontifical grant long anterior to the timesof King John.toThus, John XXII., so deeply informed in things of theHoly See, and so well assisted by intelligent searchers,such as Bernard Guidonis (or Di Guido), found in thepontifical archives no trace of Adrian's Bull or the pre-He did not even knowtended diplomas of Alexander.them by rumour or by chronicles.P'or after reminding King Edward that John Lacklandgave his kingdoms to the Roman Church with their rightsand dependencies {cum omnibus juribuset pertinentiissuis), and promised thatsuccessors would renderhishomage and pay an annual tribute, under pain of for-feiture, John XXII. says that all this is proved by rumourand by chronicles :" Prout haec omnia fama notificat, etchronicarum inspectio manifestat. "It follows logicallyA FRIEND OF IRELAND.95that the Pontifical Court had never heard mention ofAdrian's Bull, and that it knew nothing of the EnglishTherefore, Giraldus Cambrensis,chronicles which give it.Raoul de Diceto, Roger de Wendover, Matthew Paris,and others, who had written their chronicles more than acentury before, were unknown at the Pontifical Court inand1317.authentic registers, John XXII. might have had recourseto public rumour {faina notificat) and to the chronicles ofSince thehistorians [chronicaruin inspectio manifestat).Pontiff does not speak of them in his letter, his silenceleads us to suppose his complete ignorance in regard tothe documents of which there is question.In the absence of the minutesof AdrianoftheoathAlthough King John had promised that his successorswould render homage and takefealty, itappears that the Kings of England did not fulfil exactlyThe letter of March 17, 1317, provestheir obligation.that if the Kings paid the tribute, they neglected thehomage and the oath." Aliqui tamen ex successoribusipsis, et praesertim tupraestarefidelitatis hujusmodi juramentum, et recognoscere memo-ratum homagium eisdem prsedecessoribus nostris Romanis[Loc. cit.) The Pontiff exhortedPontificibus omisistis."Edward II. to place the homage and the oath in the handsof the two Cardinal Legates who were in England.ac genitor antedictus,Did the King yield to the exhortation?The Continu-ator of Baronius says that it is not certain : OhsecutumHow-pontificiis jussis Ediiardum nnn constat.ever, the annalist gives another letter in which John XXII.says to the King that he would gladly, for the moment,close his eyes to the question of homage : Ut de recogni.tione taceamus ad prcBsens.(Year 1318, n. 28.)(Ibid.)SECTION 3.So true is it that the Pontifical Court knew nothing ofthe Bull attributed to Pope Adrian that the Irish them-selves felt obliged to send a copy of it to the CardinalLegates and to the Pope ; but John XXII. took good carethe document :not to believe 'in the genuineness" Quas (literas) prsedictus Adrianus praedecessor nostereidem Henrico regi Angliae de terra Hiberniae concessisseof,96POPE ADRIAN IV.The Pope therefore knew the Bull of Adriandicitur."only by the complaints of the Irish, who, on their side,brought forward the Bull as an argument ad hominemagainst the King of England.Here are the circumstances.Unable to bear the heavyyoke that the English laid on them, the chieftains and thepeople of Ulster took up arms, and called to them EdwardBruce, brother of the King of Scotland. To justify theirrevolt, they sent to the two Cardinal Legates of EnglandTheya complaint of which I shall speak further on.added to their memorial a copy of the Bull, in order toshow that the English could not take their stand on thisdocument, since they had constantly eluded or violated itsclauses and conditions.The Continuator of BaroniusJohn XXII. with the following remarks : —"The Irishprecedesreplytheofaddressed to the Cardinal Legates some letters full of verygrave complaints, and declared that it was this intolerabletyranny which had compelled them to take up arms againstEdward, and that this prince had violated the laws underwhich Pope Adrian had given Ireland to England.In-formed of all this by the Cardinals, John XXII. exhortedEdward to lift the yoke off the people, and to let them seehis clemency."(An. 1317, n. 43.)The annalist tells us that the letter to King Edward ispreserved in the first volume of secret letters, No. 56 ; inpublishing it he suppresses two passages.It is also foundin an old Roman Bullarium, edition of 1588, and in somehistorians, but falsified in a part of considerable import-ance.servants'' John, bishop, servant of theof God, toEdward, the illustrious King of England, healthandThe earnest exhortations that weapostolic benediction.address to you, most dear son, in order that you may dowhat pleases the Judge truly just, preserve peace in thelands and among the subjects of your kingdom, and pro-vide for what may contribute to your renown and yourglory, come from that paternal love with which we desirethe exaltation of your highness. You ought therefore toreceive them affectionately, and to show yourself willingBehold, son, we haveand ready to comply with them.received letters that the magnates and people of IrelandA FRIEND Ol'- IRELAND.97sent lately to our dear sons, Gaucelin, Cardinal Priest ofthe title of Saints Marcellinus and Peter, and Luke, Car-dinal Deacon of the title of Saint Mary in via lata, nunciosof the Apostolic Sec— letters that they have enclosed to usN\e have read there, among other things,in their own.that Pope Adrian, our predecessor, of happy memory,granted, under a certain manner and form expressed inapostolic letters, the dominion of Ireland to your ancestorHenry, King of England, of illustrious memory.ThisKing and his successors, the Kings of England, even toour own times, not ohserving the manner and form afore-said, have, on the contrary, transgressed against everyrule ; and, by cruel vexations, unheard-of oppressions,insupportable burdens, and inhuman tyrannies, crushedthe Irish people to the dust, so much the more miserablyand intolerably as these afflictions have lasted longer. Norwas there any person who would remedy these evils, orNo person seemed to take pitycorrect these disorders.on their misfortunes, although they had recourse to youregarding them, and the loud cry of their distress burst attimes upon your ears.Wherefore, no longer able to en-dure such wrongs, they have felt obliged tO' withdrawfrom your house, and to invite another prince to be theirIf these complaints are grounded on truth, mostruler.dear son, they are so much the more painful to us as wemore ardently desire to see all your affairs prosper. Youought to bring to them all your care, and promptlycarry into effect all that may please your Creator.Be-ware of all that might provoke against you the Lord GodHimself, to whom revenge belongeth, who doth not de-the unjustly afflicted, and who, onspise the groans ofaccount of injustices, rejected His own special people, aswe see in Holy Scripture, and transferred kingdoms.Ata time so troubled as this, we still more earnestly desirethat you should enter into those dispositions which aremost proper to gain affection and submission in the heartsof the faithful, and that you should avoid everything calcu-lated to detach them from your service.Because, there-is your own greatest interest to avoid thefore, son, itrisks of change, and to oppose the beginnings ofdis-turbance, lest they dangerously increase and remediescome too late, we beg your royal highness, at the sametime persuading with wise counsel, to reflect seriously onIIgSPOPE ADRIAN IV.,the aforesaid grievances, and to provide, by all suitableways and means, for their due and prompt redress. Youwill thus please Him by whom you reign ; and, faithfullyaccomplishing your duty, every cause of complaint againstThrough these measures the said Irish,you will cease.lee by a more wholesome counsel, may submit to you aslord, or if (which we hope will not be the case) they wishto remain in rebellion, they will turn their cause intoa manifest injustice, and you will be excused before GodIn order that you may know thoroughly theand men.grievances and complaints on which the Irish rely, weenclose in the present letter that which the aforesaid Car-dinals have sent us, and also a copy of the letter whichthe aforesaid Adrian, our predecessor, is said to havegranted to Henry, King of England, regarding the land ofGiven the 3rd of the calends of July.''iIreland.I do not consider it necessary to point out the severitywith which John XXII. brands oppressions condemned bythe Divine law and by conscience, and gives the King tounderstand that the. cause of the Irish would be perfectlyjust if the prince did not hasten to banish iniquities toolong committed. But, I ask, is the language of John XXlI.that of a sovereign?If, in the mind of the Pontiff, Adrianhad made a donation of Ireland, or if Pope Innocent III.had accepted the sovereignty of the island that King Johnoffered him with that of England, would John XXII. ifiavebeen able to appear so disinterested in the matter? Wouldhe have limited himself to speak only in the name of justiceIt seems to me that, in the hypothesis ofand conscience?a political sovereignty, the Pope would have charged theLegates to proceed to an investigation, and to judge be-tween the King, a pontifical feudatory, and his vassals,who were at the same time vassals of the Roman Church.He would have written direct to the Irish, in order topromise them a redress of their grievances, and to staythe progress of the conflagration.As he did not do so,his letter furnishes a new argument against the ApocrvohalBull of .Adrian.:vph'Let us now come to the falsification of which I spokelastarticlethe letter ofAs a matter of fact, according to the Con-above.John XXII.occurstheofinIt' 29th of June,A FRlIiND OF IRELAND.—"99tinuator of Baronius, who examined the original register,John XXII. expressed himself doubtfully regarding theBull of Adrian: couccssissc diciiur. Now, English writers,falsifying the passage, have used these words: AdrianusHenrico regi Anglia: de terra Ihernim concessit.Accord-ing to them, John XXII. would have admitted withoutdispute the genuineness of Adrian's Bull.Irish historiansthemselves, not suspecting that any one would have daredintentionally to alter the text, have adopted concessit.Thus, Peter Lombard, Archbishop of Armagh, represent-ing the Irish at Rome under Clement VIII., has followedthe interpolated text in his book of the Annals of IrelandMcGeoghegan, who(p.published his Histoire d'Irlande at Paris in 1758, copiedfiom Peter Lombard. He would have discoveredthefraud if he had consulted the Annals of Baronius, which" Ut autem de praedictisgive the true text in these terms :gravaminibusinnitunturetIbernici, tuis sensibus innotescat ad plenum, prsedictaslitteras missas cardinalibus antedictis, tum formam littera-rum quas praedictus Adrianus praedecessor noster eidemHenrico regi Anglise de terra Hiberniae conceississe. dici-TUR,1 tuae magnitudini mittimus praesentibus interclusas.(Annals of Baronius, year 1317, n. 43.)260, Louvain edition,querelis,prasdictiquibus1632).The circumspection of John XXII. is so much the moreremarkable, as the Irish who made the complaint appearto have believed in the genuineness of the Bull of Adrian,while protesting that it had been obtained by false repre-This is proved by a passage in the Irishsentations." Adrianus, papa, praedecessornonMemorial :tantum origine, quantum affectione et conditione Anglicus,anno Domini 1170 (sic) ad falsam et plenam iniquitatesuggestionem Henrici regis Angliae, sub quo et fortassisper quem sanctus Thomas Cantuarise eodem anno projustitia et defensione Ecclesiae mortem sustinuit,sicutscitis, dominium regni nostri, sub quadam certa verborumforma, eidem, quem potius, ob dictam culpam, propriodebuit privasse regno, de facto et contulit indebite, ordinevester,' Pope John , in his letter to the two Cardinals, uses the same words"concessisse dicitur." See Theiner. Vetera monumenta Hibcrnorum, &c.,p. 201. If, therefore, Pope Adrian did not make the grant, every argu-nient built on a contrary supposition falls to the ground.Trans.—100I'OPE ADRIAN IV.,tantiHsecpontificisintuitionem.ijuris omisso omnino, anglicana affectione, pro dolor ! ex-pauca decsecantegeneral! progenitorum nostrorum origine, et de miserabiliin quo romanus Pontifex statu posuit, sufficiant ista vice."On the other hand, it is known that the Irish constantlyHere isrejected Adrian's Bull as false and apocryphal.a remarkable proof of this fact. The Barberini Library inRome possesses a manuscript of the fourteenth century,which is a collection of original documents relating to thepontificate of John XXII., at the very time of which wespeak. We find there a letter from the lord justiciary andcouncil of Dublin, accusing the Irish of various misdeeds,in particular of generally maintaining that the King ofApocryphalEnglandBulls to support his pretended right to the dominion of" Asserentes etiam dominum regem Anglise exIreland :falsa suggestione et ex falsis bullis terram Hiberniae impe-It follows hencetrasse, ac communiter hoc tenentes."^employedpretencesfalseand^ The statement here made in the Memorial is truly extraordinary,when we remember that Pope Adrian IV. died in 1159.It says that, asPope John XXII. himself knows. Pope Adrian, in 1170, having receiveda petition full of falsehood and injustice from Henry, King of England,under whom, and perhaps by whom, St. Thomas of Canterbury methis death that very same year, transferred the dominion of Ireland toHenry, when he ought rather to have deprived him of that of Eiigland,and he did this without regard to the usual course'prescribed by law,being blinded by love of country, for he was an Englishman, not onlyby birth, but even more by affection. Pope John, observing a prudentsilence, takes no notice of the anachronism here set forth, or of theknowledge attributed to himself.Mr. Laurence Ginnell, in his' very ableEand learned essay on"' theBulla, regards this Memorial as E(with or without the knowledge ofDonald O'Neill) the work of the Ulster Scotch, full of hatred againstthe English, and desirous of obtaining Ireland^or themselves andis found in Scotichronicon, a Latin History?' ofRobert Bruce.Scotland, by John de Fordun.It does not appear in old Irish works.The Scotchmen likely thought that if Pope Adrian IV. had givenIreland to the English, his successor Pope John XXII. might very wellfollow such a good precedent, by giving it to them, now that the Englishhad been shown to have so grossly abused their trust.ItTrans.' "Moreover, they assert that the King of England, under false pre-tences and by false bulls, obtained the dominion of Ireland, and thisopinion is commonly held by them." An attempt has been made toshow that by, these w;ords, which are thosejjof one of our highestauthorities, the above Latin passage has not been " fairly and properlyThe critic says that impetrasse means obtaining bytranslated."request—as if he were entitled to say that it has no other meaning.He thenwords ex falsasuggestione etoverboardthrowsthe—A I'KIEND or IRELAND."lOlthat the Memorial addressed to John XXII. could not bethe work of all Ireland ; for it expressed a conviction thatthe Bull, thouy^h null by having been obreptitiously orPopesurreptitiouslyreallyAdrian.emanatedobtained,frominIn point of fact, this Memorial was sent by O'Neill,King of Ulster, who took the title of heir of all Ireland,as we read" Sanctissimo inthe superscription :Christo Patri domino Johanni, Dei gratia Summo Ponti-P.ci, sui devoti filii, Donaldus O'Neill, rex Ultonise, actotius Hibernise hsereditario jure hseres, necnon et ejusdemterras reguli et magnates ac populus hibernicus, cum suirecommendatione humili, devota pedum oscula beatorum.O'Neill believed that he could speak in the name of Ire-This does not prove that every assertion in theland.Memorial ought to be attributed to the whole nation, ^ ofex faUis buUis, and gives as his concise reading that Henry obtainedIreland by a request. We doubt very much if this is a fair and propermode of translation.Du Cange, who is such a great authority on old Latin words, tellsus that sxiggestio is another name for rogatoricE litterm, or a letter ofpetition. The courtly Dublin writer, being a scholarly man, employedth: specific or official term suggestio, and added falsa.The expression " false bull " is sometimes applied to a true bull,obtained by false pretences ; but it is oftener used to denote a forgedIf Abull. The context generally shows in which sense it is taken.says that he has received a letter from King Edward VII, and B saysthat it is a false letter, what does B mean but that the letter was neverwritten or sent by the King ?' The facts are well accounted for by the above hypothesisregarding the Scotch.Referring to this time, Dr. Mat. Kelly, in his notes to Cam-" With the exception of thebrensis Eversus (vol. ii., 622), says :period of Edward Bruce's invasion, there do notappear anyevidences of the popular belief that Ireland was a fief of the HolySee." He did not suspect that the Memorial might have beena Scotchjforgery, in which the sentiments of the Irish people asa body were misrepresented. A very correct tradition prevailedamong the Irish regarding the fief-title of Adrian's Bull.Let ushear a few further remarks regarding this Bull from Dr. Lynch,author of Cambrensis Eversus (vol. ii., 563) :" At all events, it is certain that King Henry either did notbelieve the authenticity of the Bulls of Adrian 'and Alexander,or the validity of the claim which they purported to give to theFor we find hiin distrusting them, andsovereignty of Ireland.labouring to extort from Pope Lucius III, successor of Alexander,Yet, though he had deserveda grant similar to the preceding.well of Pope Lucius, and sent him a largo sum of money in11S3,—102POPE ADRIAN IV.,which the great majority, I repeat it, never had any faithin the Bull of Adrian.spoliations,oppressions,The Memorial confirms what I have said above on thevexations,outrag-es,mudrers, bloody persecutions, that the Irish suffered fromthe English. The document is in John de Fordun, volumethe third of the Scotch chronicle. McGeoghegan has givenmost of it in the second volume of his Histoire d'Irlandc.Dr. Lingard has made an exact and very complete analy-.sis of it. We also meet fragments of it in O'Callaghan'snotes to MacaricB Excidium.deceits,he was disappointed in his expectations.The Pope refused therequest, probably, as well as we can conjecture, because, after anattentive examination of the whole affair, he discovered eitherthat the bulls had never been issued or that they were fraudulentlyHence we find Henry still restless, from the conviction,obtained.perhaps, that the preceding bulls had been unjustly procured,and were therefore invalid.Again, he applies to Urban III, thesuccessor of Pope Lucius, and begs a new grant of the kingdom' In the year 11S5, Henry, King of England, sent hisof Ireland.ambassadors to Urban and obtained many favours, which had beenstern!y refused by Pope Lucius. One of the concessions was thathe was empowered to have any of his sons crowned King of Ireland,and the Pope confirmed that right to him. by a bull, and sent tohim, as a token of his will and approbation, a crown of peacock'sfeathers, wreathed with gold.'As merchantsof slender means cannot get goods on credit, but must pay downready money, even so this writer has no more claims to the' assentof his readers than what his authorities can command. AVould it,I ask, have been more troublesome to give a copy of that bullthan to make this passing notice of it ?Can there be any possiblereason for suppressing it but the conviction that it had not reallybeen granted by the Pope ?In the very first year of his ponti-ficate, before he was under the least obligation to Henry, couldUrban be so indecorous, so flexible, as to grant thus readily whatneither the most pressing solicitation nor the choicest favourscould extract from his predecessor ?Surely he could not takesuch liberty with the property of others, as to make a presentof a whole kingdom to a foreigner, without even communicatingMs design to the inhabitants, or hearing their defence.Surelyhe would send some more respectable pledge of his liberality thana hunting cap of peacock's feathers, which would gird, with morepropriety, the temples of some stage king in a theatre than thehead of a true and real monarch."(Hoveden, p. 631)In Migne's collection of the letters, etc., of Pope Urban III,there is no such bull as that nientioned above.{Patrolugie, vol. ccii)The passage from Hoveden may be found in the edition of his worksbrought out under the direction of the Master of the Rolls, vol. ii,,p. 306.Trans.A FRJEND OF IRELAND.IO3SECTION 4.The pretended Bull of Adrian made so little impressionon the Pontifical Court that the historians of the time didnot think it worth their while to mention it.Two Lives of Pope Adrian IV. were written about thisvery period by men residing at the Pontifical Court. Thefirst had for its author the learned Dominican, BernardGuidonis, who died in 1331.The other, a larger work,was prepared by Cardinal D'Aragon, whom Pope Inno-cent VI. raised to the purple in 1359.Now, in neither is any mention made of the pretendedBull of Adrian IV. , giving Ireland to the King of Eng-However, in the Life of Alexander III., whichland.comes afterwards, Cardinal D'Aragon gives the oath ofHenry II. in the cathedral of Avranches, and some otherdocuments.Since he keeps silence on the Bull of Adrian,it is apparently because he found no trace of it in the pon-tifical archives.SECTION 5.The land of the King in Ireland was very far from com-prising the whole island.In 1319, John XXII. forbadethe invasion of the land of the King in Ireland.If he hadbeen convinced that all Ireland belonged to the King ofEngland by a donation of Pope Adrian, he would havehurled his censures against the aggressors of Ireland inWishing to favour Edward II., who showedgeneral.good dispositions for the Crusade, and was preparing toset out, John XXII. thought it a duty to protect thedominions of this prince : " Fide digna relatione percepta,quod nonnulli nobiles et magnates regem ipsum et regnumac terrain suam HibernicB invadere ausu temerarioetThis chiefly regarded the Scotch.illicite nitebantur. "The Pope inflicted excommunication, and recommendedthe two Cardinal Legates of Engand to promulgate the" Prsecipuesentence, especially in places near the sea :Irishindominions of the King of England were situated alongNotwithstanding all this, some Scotch noblesthe coast.attacked England, and the land of King Edward in Ire-land, and did much mischief there. The Pope then wrotesen mari vicinis." For themaritimis,locis104POPE ADRIAN IV.,a circular to the Archbishops and Bishops of England(but did not address himself to Irish prelates). He recom-mended them to denounce publicly the aggressors as ex-communicated, especially in maritime districts—and thisevery Sunday (candelis accensis) until repentance.This circular of John XXII. proves against the pre-It is in the Roman Bullariumtended donation of Adrian.(vol. 3, part 2, p. 177).Also in Rymer (vol. 3, p. 811).SECTION 6.In 1327, revolt and disorder spread throughout all Ire-land. An ordinance of King Edward, 12th July, 1327," Hiber-shows the deplorable condition of the country :_nici inimici et rebelles nostri, terras nostras, et diversorummagnatum qui terras habent in Hibernia, et in Angliacommorantur, devastarunt, et devastant multiplicitter in.fortified.dies."(Rymer, iv., 294.)The King ordered theto becastlesHaving resolved to go to Ireland, in 1332, the Ivingsent William Burke, Earl of Ulster, before him.The lords who had domains in Ireland were to accom-The Parliament had decided on thispany the King.journey for the pacification of the country and fortheSoon, however, the visit ofsuppression of the rebellion.the King was countermanded. Edward offered an amnestyto the chief rebels, English as well as Irish, and appointedas his plenipotentiary Roger Outlaw, prior of St. John ofJerusalem in Ireland.(Rymer, iv., 503, 507, 526.)As the war with Scotland caused heavy expenses andrequired strong soldiers, Edward addressed a friendly re-'' Vos affectuose re-quest to the Bishops of Ireland :quirimus et rogamus, quatenus de tantis hominibus adarma validis, armis competentibus bene munitis, quantumfacultates vestrae commode permiserint, et instans nostranecessitas exegerit, absque excusationis diffugio, subve-nire. "This occurred in 1335.(Rymer, iv. , 642.)SECTION 7.Edward III. was too much occupied with domestic mis-fortunes, and the third of his wars with Scotland andFrance, to concern himself greatly with the affairs of Ire-A FRIEND OF IRELAND.I05land. The old Irish, by repeated efforts, succeeded in re-ducing the English territory to the narrowest limits.Ifthey had united then in one common effort, they wouldhave been able to drive the invaders into the sea.Theirhostilities were only the sudden result of some particularprovocation,of deliverance.Several tribes did not hesitate to receive an annual pen-sion from the English Government, as the reward of theservices that they rendered, by protecting the colonists ofthe seaboard against such of the Irish as showed them,selves more hostile.not of any general planThe territory occupied bythe English presentedascene of anarchy and confusion. The colonists weredivided into two classes, the English by race and the Eng-The former were the descendants of thelish by birth.ancient aggressors, and considered themselves as the law-ful heirs of the lands and revenues acquired by the swordsof their ancestors. The second class consisted of personswhom the King had sent over from England to variousemployments in Ireland, and a multitude of adventurerswhom poverty or crime banished every year from theirTo the old colonists they were objects ofown country.The Government protectedspecial jealousy and hatred.and advanced them, in order to make use of them as adefence against the discontent of the others.SECTION 8.In 1341, the King married his son Lionel to Elizabeth,daughter of the Earl of Ulster, in the hope that this unionwould confirm his authority in Ireland.(Rymer, v., 247.)A few years afterwards, Edward, having need of troopsfor the war with France, besought the Irish chiefs to sendhim men, in the name of that regard which they had forhim : "Ad Magnates Hibernise, de veniendo ad regem,cum hominibus ad arma et hobelariis.Specialiter vosrogamus, quod ad nos venire velitis. .. Et hoc sicut noset honorem nostrum diligitis, nullo modo omittatis." Theletter is of the 10th July, 1344.(Rymer, v., 417.)Two years afterwards, Edward learns that disorder con-tinues, because the country is without defence. He seesno other remedy than to have recourse again to the Arch-bishop of Armagh, and he begs of him totake such.,I06FOfE ADRIAN IV.measures as are necessary for the defence of the countryand the restoration of peace.(Rymer, v., 669.)SFCTION g.The Eng^Hsh by race Hved in continual contradiction withthe laws of the colony. Many of them adopted the dress,the manners, the lang^uage, and the laws of the old Irish.Not a few were thus gradually transformed from Englishbarons into Irish chiefs.At the time when Lionel, Duke of Clarence, governedthe English province, a Parliament was assembled ;itmade the famous statute of Kilkenny.This statute wasnot directed against the old Irish, but against the descen-dants of English colonists who had rejected the laws ofEngland for those of Ireland.It enacted that marriage,fostering, and gossipred with the Irish should in futuremake the delinquent subject to the penalty of high treason,and that any Englishman who adopted an Irish name orcustom should be compelled, under pain of imprisonment,to give bail for his willingness to return to the customs ofhis own country.The old dissensions among the English still continued,and the Irish continued to extend their conquests.SECTION' 10,So imminent was the danger with which English powerin Ireland was threatened in 1353, that the King forbadeprelates, religious, earls, barons, knights, all men fittedfor military service, to leave the country, when theyshould contribute to its defence.The chancellor receivedorders to arrest and imprison fugitives, cum equis et her.nesiis suis.(Rymer, v., 748.)As matters grew worse, Edward called a great Council,to deliberate on the state of Ireland. He brought togetherthe lords who held domains in the country. The letter ofconvocation proves that Ireland was almost lost for theKing of England.(Rymer, vi., 318.)SECTION II.Edward III. forbade that any of the old Irish should beA FRIEND OF IRELAND.IO7appointed: to the office of mayor or bailiff—in general, toHe ordered that canonries, parishes,any employment.Englishmen.be conferredshouldbenefices,(Rymer, vL, 211.}onlyonIn 1362, he made a new appeal to the lords who haddomains in Ireland, urging them to come forward in per-son, with their men of arms, to defend the country, whichwas in danger of being entirely lost.(Rymer, vi., 350.)Six years afterwards, a new command to the lords to setout for Ireland, in order to defend the country, under painof the forfeiture of their lands, which the King would dis-(Rymer, vi., 594.)pose of to others.SECTION 12.Richard II. spent six months in Ireland, from October,1394, to May, 1395. Rymer does not mention any act ofthe King about Irish affairs.(Rymer, vii., 782.)What strikes us in the various matters cited above, isthe complete oblivion into which the Bull attributed toThePope Adrian had fallen in the fourteenth century.Kings of England employed the force of arms to main-tain their domination ; but in times of the greatest peril,they never appealed to a pontifical donation—nor to anoffering of King John—nor to the sovereignty of the HolySee—nor to Roman investiture, which, in truth, had neverbeen given.