CHAPTER XXVUI.ERECTION OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND BY POPE PAUL IV.{1553-)It wasIreland had never been considered a kingdom.officially designated the Land of Ireland.The Kings ofEngland called themselves Lords of this Land. The Bullsof Popes and the diplomas of Kings unite to prove thisdenomination of Land through all preceding ages. As theletter of Adrian IV. to Louis VII. used the same term todesignate the country whose conquest was desired by theKing of France and the King of England, I have taken anargument from the fact to maintain that the pontifical lettercould not apply to Spain, which comprised three king-doms, and consequently did not exist politically as onesingle nation. King John offered to the Pope the kingdomBut Innocent III. was not so innocent as toof Ireland.mention the pretended kingdom ; for he wrote to the pre-lates, knights, and people, per Hiberniam constitutis : hedid not at all say per Hihernim regnum. Henry VIII. him-self, as I have said above, writing to Leo X. , in order tooffer him his book Assertio Septem Sacramentorum tooksimply the title " Lord of Ireland."The Protestant Parliament that sat in Dublin m 1541Edward VI. took theerected Ireland into a kingdom.pompous title of " King of England, France, and Ire-land."This example was followed by Queen Mary, called tothe throne of England after the death ofher brotherEdward in 1553. When she married Philip of Spain, sonof Charles V., the proclamations and ordinances men-tioned, among other titles of these rulers, that of " Kingand Queen of Ireland."In Lingard's History, we read as follows :" Pole hadforeseen that the new title of King and Queen of Ireland,assumed by Philip and Mary, in imitation of Henry andEdward, might create some difficulty, and had thereforerequested that Ireland might be declared a kingdom beforeI114POPE ADRIAN IV.But the death of Juhus,the arrival of the ambassadors.succeeded by that of Marcellus, had prevented those Pon-tiffs from complying with his advice, and the first act ofthe new Pope,i after his coronation, was to publish a Bullby which, at the petition of Philip and Mary, he raised thelordship of Irelaivi to the dignity of a kingdom.Till thishad been done, the ambassadors waited without the city ;three days later they were introduced."Paul III. had taken it very ill that Henry VIII. assumedthe title of King of Ireland, because it was supposed thatThis sentiment hashe did so in contempt of the Holy See.found an echo in the Annals of Bzovius.(An. 1542, n. 11.)Two official documents regard the erection of the king-dom of Ireland ; first, the consistorial decree, which accom-plished this erection, and secondly, the Bull of the sameday, 7th of June, 1555.The Continuator of Baronius gives the consistorial de-cree, which appears also among the letters of CardinalPole (v. 136). The Bull is found in the Roman BuUarium,i, part 4, page 315).It is also in thelatest edition (vol.Annals of Bzovius (vol. xx., p. 301).The two documents, identical in substance, present thesame affirmations and the same clauses, expressed in theThe consistorial decree is as follows : —same terms." Rome, seventh day of the month of June, 1555.Therewas a consistory at St. Mark's. On the relation of theMost Reverend Puteus, the Holy Father erected the islandSince the time when the Kingsof Ireland into a kingdom.of England acquired the dominion of this island throughthe Apostolic See, they, for the time being, have beenaccustomed to call themselves simply its Lords. The royaltitle was de facto usurped, first by the late Henry VIII.,after his defection from the unity of the Church and sub-mission to the Roman Pontiff, under pretext of a lawmade, it is said, by the Parliament of the aforesaid island ;and then by his son, Edward VI.—both of whom, whilethey lived, held themselves for Kings of .England.HisHoliness erected the kingdom of Ireland in the manner ofother islands, which have the royal title, dignity, andhonour : without prejudice to the rights of the holy Roman1 Paul IV.A FRIKND OF IRELAND.Il5Church, or of any other party that claims to have a rightin or to the aforesaid island ; and he adorned and decoratedit with the title, dignity, honour, power, rights, and royalinsignia enjoyed by the other kingdoms of Christendom."This consistorial decree is repeated in the Bull.Thepreamble of the Bull says that the Pontiff, holding the placeof Him by whom Kings reign, willingly complies with theMtiry is called Queen ofwishes of the Catholic princes.Then the erection of the kingdomEngland and France.is granted at the request of King Philip and Queen Mary :it is not an act motu propria of the Pope.does not atall mention the BullThe erection of the kingdom of Ireland having beengranted at the request of Philip and Mary, it is necessaryto interpret the diploma according to the principles oiCanon Law.(a) PaulIV.ofIf he admitted the genuineness of this Bull,Adrian IV.he would naturally have recalled it, instead of referringvaguely to a time when the Kings of England had ob-tained the sovereignty of Ireland through the Holy See,I suspect that the Pontifical Court of 1555 had no know-It wasledge whatever of the existence of such a Bull.only fifty years later that Baronius, meeting it by chancein Matthew Paris, inserted it in his Annals, showing at thesame time how little he believed in its genuineness.John XXII., it is true, spoke of the Bull of Adrian in aletter that he addressed to King Edward 11. , as I have saidBut it does not appear that this secret letter leftabove.any remembrance or trace in the Pontifical Court.In thetime of Paul IV., the registers of John XXII. being still atthe Pontifical Palace of Avignon, the Roman archivistscould not know the particulars of secret documents thatwere not before their eyes.With what object did John XXII. send to King Edwarda copy of the Bull that he had received from the Irish ofUlster, if not to make known to this prince that he (thePontiff) knew nothing about it, and that he doubted itsIt may be that hegenuineness ?was very glad to warn the King that the Pontifical Courtwould henceforth have an eye on the fraudulent methodsthat the English employed in order to gain the submissionConcessisse dicitur !of the old Irish by a display of Apocryphal Bulls.,Il6POPE ADRIAN IV.John XXII. did not care to keep a copy of the Bull ofNeither Bernard Guidonis nor Cardinal D'Ara-Adrian.gon found a trace of it in the archives.(b) The Bull of Paul IV. passed over in silence theagreement made in 1213 between Pope Innocent III. andIt is beyond doubt that the King offered theKing John.kingdom of Ireland to the Roman Church : tottim regnumHibcrnice ; but it seems no less certain that the Pope couldnot accept this donation. Nemo dat quod non liabet is amaxim given us by the wisdom of nations. Now, KingJohn, who possessed only a small part of Ireland, was notm a position to give the whole island :it is not permittedPopeto perform good works with the property of others.Innocent III., on his side, should not on any account takethe sovereignty of a kingdom that did not exist.If hewished for sovereignty, he should begin by erecting thekingdom. We nowhere see that a Roman Pontiff con-ferred the investiture of Ireland on King John or any ofThis is why Paul IV. kept a prudenthis successors.silence..(c) Neither the Bull of Adrian nor the concordat of Inno^cent III. being able to serve as a title, it is not easy to seewhat led Paul IV. to say in his diploma that the Kings ofEngland acquired the sovereignty of Ireland through theIllius dominium per sedem. prmdictam adeptiHoly See :But lo ! this incidental phrase givessunt reges Anglice." Since the time when the Kingsrise to another difficulty.of England acquired the dominion of this island through. have been accustomed to callthe Apostolic See, they .themselves simply its Lords." How are we to know theKing John, at the beginning of his reign,precise time?and even before it, took the pompous title of " Lord ofIreland." He could not rely on the false Bull of Adrian,which granted no right to the successors of King Henry II.It was Henry who, wishing to screen his son John fromthe nickname Lackland that had been given him and thatremained with him, it was Henry who thought, by his ownauthority, to make John "Lord of Ireland."But thePopes gave John the mere title " Earl of Morton." Afterthe death of Henry II., during the reign of Richard Coeurde Lion, Pope Clement III. having occasion to speak atthe same time of Ireland and of John, gave the latter theA FRIEND OF IRELAND.II7mers title of " Earl of Morton," as if he would not recog-nise that of " Lord of Ireland," so pretentiously assumed.Thus, there is no historical connection between thetaking of the title and any grant whatsoever of sovereigntyin Ireland by the authority of the Holy See.All that canbe said is that Pope Paul IV., or rather the writer of theBull, copied from the petition of Philip and Mary.Onlythat, and nothing more.(d) During a long time, it was inculcated upon the oldIrish that they ought to regard the Pope as sovereign lordof the country. This notion was encouraged by Kings andParliaments, as an easy means of securing submission.We may read on this subject the statutes of the Parlia-ments of the English colony, especially the seventh statuteunder Edward IV.(C. g.)ofthetheSee :HolyallPaulwithtoKings ofsovereignty oftheir power,IV.thatConformably to this notion, towards which the Irishshowed themselvesincredulous, but which the Eng-Philip and MaryspreadlishEng-representedland had acquiredIreland by adominiumgranttheper sedemprmdictam (apostolicam^ ade-hti sunt regesAnglicB ; but the assertion, exceedingly doubtful for elevencounties, seems entirely devoid of exactness and truth ifwe look at the twenty-One counties which held their inde-pendence, and which the English had never subdued. Wemay be permitted to doubt that Paul IV. would have con-sented to the erection of the kingdom, if he had been in-formed that the King of England possessed only thesmaller portion of the island.(insulae)illiusIt is a fundamental principle of the Roman Chancerythat grants on petition are pre-eminently conditional :they depend on the subjective and objective veracity of thesi vera sint exposita ; quatenus preceslepresentation :veritate nitantur. When the foundation is defective, thebuilding falls to the ground. The Bull of Paul IV. showsin every word that the erection of the kingdom of Irelandwas decided on by the petition of Philip and Mary :i' Philip and Mary, and Cardinal Pole, who was Mary's cousin, raavall have believed bona fide in Adrian's grant, and thus led Pope Paul IV.astray by their representations or rather misrepresentations. For a Popecan err in matters of history just as in those of geometry or astronomy,Il8POPE ADRIAN IV.,Philippo rege et Maria regina nobis super hoc humiliterIt is otherwise when the Pope declaressupplicantibus.that he acts spontaneously, or without request from anyperson.(e) The Holy Sec always protects the rig'hts of others.Paul IV. should protect them so much the more in thepresent case as the Irish had not been consulted on anThis is why the Popeaffair that concerned them closely.expressly safeguards the rights that any third party mayprcBJudicio juriumset forth in regard to Ireland : sineipsius Romance EcclesicE, et cujuscunique alterius in ilia(insula) vel ad illani jus habere prcetendentis. The consis-torial decree makes the same reserve.Remark carefully that the Bull does not reserve only thepeaceable possession [jus in re), but it reserves also thefuture or the contested right [jus ad rem). Twenty-one in-dependent counties peaceably possessed their territory :the Pope did not intend to modify at any cost their state.I ask if the old Irish had any rig^ht to claim back the terri-Had not the invasion beentory of the English colony.unjust? Had not the conquest been accomplished byiniquitous means?Irish acquiesced in theirI do not press thespoliation?it is enough to note that the Pontifical Bull re-matter :serves all rights.Had theThis is the jus ad rem.It is very doubtful that the Irish would have consentedto let themselves be included in a kingdom totally wantingin homogeneity, being composed of two disproportionedparts : on the one side, twenty-one independent counties,and on the other, eleven counties of an English colony,which depended on the Crown of England.For example,the republic of Cracow existed from 1815 to 1847 ; but noperson had any idea of regarding it as part of the kingdomof Poland, which the Congress of Vienna gave to theEmperor of Russia.(/) The Bull of Paul IV. did not confer on the King ofEngland any new right over Ireland ; in this respect, thesituation continued the same as before.Investiture, dona-Tt is only in matters of faith and morals that he is infallible, and eventhen, only when he speaks ex cathedra. As a private theologian, he mayerr.— Trans.A FRIEND OF IRFLAND.IIQtion, concession—nothing of the kind is to be seen in thepontifical diploma. The independence of the oldtherefore received no hurt.IrishBy the erection of the king;dom of Ireland, Paul IV. con-ferred an honorary title on the King of England, who fora long time was called the King of France, although hehad no authority in this latter country.(g) I cannot say whether the Irish learned with satisfac-tion that their country had been raised to the rank of aBut I notice in McGeoghegan the following re-kingdom.marks : —" To the month of June in this year (1555) werefer a Bull or Brief of Pope Paul IV., which conferred onIreland the title of kingdom. We do not see very well thenecessity for this new creation of the title of kingdom forThis island was adorned with that title a longIreland.time before the English were known there, and even be-fore the institution of the Papacy."[Histone d'Irlande,t. 2,p. 367.)Bzovius, after the Bull, gives some account of the pri-vate interview that Paul IV. had with the ambassadors ofQueen Mary.After this, says the historian, the Pontiffcomplained that the ecclesiastical goods had not yet beenHe said that the usurpers ought absolutely torestored.be obliged to surrender them—that the English ought tobe well convinced that sacrilegious thefts would draw downa curse from heaven on their families and on their king-dom. He recommended the ambassadors to write often totheir princes on this point, and he renewed this advice onHe expressly ordered that they should en-all occasions.gage them to re-establish Peter's Pence, because he haddecided on sending a collector to England, according tocustom. He had himself discharged this employment forthree years, and he recalled to mind with pleasure theeagerness that the people, and even the poor, showed inpaying this tribute. The English ought not to expect thatSt. Peter would open for them the gate of heaven, if theydid not repair the injury that they had done him byusurping his rights.The Earl of Sussex, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland duringthe reign of Mary, wrested from the old Irish the two dis-tricts of Offaly and Leix, and erected them into counties,which he called King's County and Queen's County, in120POPE ADRIAN IV.,This fact goes tp show that,honour of Philip and Mary.erection of a new kingdom, thenotwithstanding thegreater part of Ireland continued independent of the Crownof England.The Parliament of the English colony re-establishedCatholic worship, acknowledged the authority of the Pope,and proclaimed the legitimacy of Queen Mary.(Statutesof Ireland under Philip and Mary, i, 2, 3, 4.)The Archbishop of Armagh resumed his See ; but mar-ried prelates and priests lost their benefices.Bayle, theProtestant Bishop of Ossory, who had so often putliis lifein danger by his violence and fanaticism, had the prudenceThe number of Protestantsto retire to the continent.appeared too small to excite any fear, and their zeal wastoo prudent to cause any provocation.Considering the state of poverty to which the Churchwas reduced, the Queen restored to it the ecclesiasticalproperties that, during the late reigns, had been annexedShe had renounced the supremacy : couldto the Crown.she retain the riches that came from an invasionofauthority? With the approbation of Parliament, there-fore, tithes, first-fruits, rectories, benefices united to theCrown since the twentieth year of Henry VIII., and pro-ducing a revenue of sixty thousand pounds sterling, wererestored by the Queen, and placed at the disposal of theBishops, who resumed the conferring of parishes and cura-The monastery of the Knights of St. John of Jeru-cies.salem, that of the Benedictines at Westminster, and otherreligious houses were re-established.