CHAPTER XV.CARDINAL VIVIAN.The old Irish annalists mehtion in 1177 the arrival ofCardinal Vivian, who convoked a council of bishops andabbots, and made various ordinances, which are now un-I borrow from the Rev. Mr. Dimock, the mostknown.recent editor of Giraldus Cambrensis, the following note :"The Four Masters, a.d. 1177, say: Cardinal Vivianarrived in Ireland. A synod of the clergy of Ireland, bothbishops and abbots, was convened by this Cardinal on thefirst Sunday in Lent, and they enacted many ordinancesnot now observed." (Works of Giraldus, vol. v., p. 345.)Giraldus pretends, on the contrary, that Cardinal Vivian,in the council, publicly (but verbally) proclaimed the rightof the King of England over Ireland, and the confirmationof the Pope, with a strict precept, as well for the clergy asthe laity, under pain of anathema, to be faithful to theKing.(Ibid.)this is evident from his works.A verbal command, a precept sanctioned by anathema,is a thing very strange ! Yet Giraldus had studied canonlaw :Moreover, theassertion has no guarantee but the word of the author,which cannot be admitted without a most strict examina-tion. He also says at the same year (i 177) that two impor-tant regions of Ireland, namely, Ulster and Connacht,had remained inaccessible to the English, whose attackswere constantly repelled.It is difficult to suppose that theinhabitants should submit to the King of England by orderof the Cardinal.Vivian spent a great many years in England, in Scot-land, and in Ireland, as Fontifical Legate.Giraldus un-doubtedly calumniates him when he accuses him of a covet-ousness that made him very eager for money and other giftsHoveden speaks of Cardinal Vivian, and his voyage toFar from mentioning a pretended coun-Ireland in 11 77.cil in which the right of England over Ireland was pro-claimed, and sanctioned by anathema, the annalist relates" The same year,"the misadventures of the Cardinal.he says, " Vivian, named above, Cardinal Priest of the—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.:3gtitle of Saint Stephen, on Mount Celius, Legate of theApostolic See, spent the festival of Christmas in the Isle ofMan, with King Guthred.After the Epiphany, he set sailfor Ireland, and landed at Down, in Ulster. As he wasgoing along to Dublin by the seaside, he met the troops ofJohn de Courcy, who stopped and held him ; but John deCourcy delivered him and let him go his way.Before thePurification of Saint Mary, John de Courcy besieged andtook the city of Down, the capital of Ulster, where rest thebodies of the holy confessors Patrick and Columba, andalso that of Saint Brigid, virgin. On hearing this, Roderic,King of Ulster, assembled a great army of Irishmen, andgave battle to John de Courcy, who lost a considerablepart of his army, but gained a complete victory, .. TheBishop of Down was taken in the combat, but John deCourcy delivered him at the petition of the Cardinal."(Hoveden, p. 320.).Behold how Henry II. was lord and master of Ireland !In reality, the King had power only in the district of CorkHoveden relates, about the end of 1177,and in Meath.that the King gave Meath to Hugh de Lacy, and also dis-posed of the district of Cork, except the city. He offeredthe kingdom of Limerick to William and Herbert, brothersof Reginald, Earl of Cornwall. He afterwards offered it toJocelyn de la Pomeroy, their nephew.As all refused it,the King applied to Philip de Breusa.In the meantime,a relative of the deceased ruler possessed himself of theplace, and governed it, without making any submission tothe King of England or his ministers, because of theirduplicity, and the evil they had done without cause to thepeople of Ireland.(regisMonoculi occisi a regalibus), vir potens et fortis, regnumde Limeric invasit, cepit, et potenter rexit, nullam subjec-tionem faciens regi Angliae ; nee suis obedlre voluit, prop-ter infidelitatem eorum, et mala quae faciebant populoRex vero Corcensis et alii multiHiberniae sine merito.divites Hibernise insurrexerunt in regem Hibernise,^ etet erant novissima eorum pejora prioribus, et sesuos :mutuo interfecerunt. "(Hoveden, p. 324.)" Quidam de progenie illius' This word is evidently a mistake.Angliae is the word in theedition of Roger de Hoveden, by William Stubbs, M.A. LondonLongmans, 1869.Vol. ii., p. 136.Trans.OPOPE ADRIAN IV.,a littleBut inI have named Hugh de Lacy : his tragic death revealsthe proceedings to which Henry H. had recourse in orderHere is what weto extend his domination in Ireland.read in William of Newbridge, at the year 1 183 : —" Hughde Lacy was regarded as the principal and most powerfulof the barons of the King of England that were in Ireland.After the death of the valiant Earl Richard, the King hadgiven him vast possessions, and entrusted him with theadministration of his domains.whileDe Lacy so extended his limits, and so increased his richesand his forces, that he made himself feared not only by hisenemies, but even by his own companions, that is to say,the other barons of the King ; for he ill-treated them, ifthey did not obey him in everything. He seemed to labourin Ireland for himself rather than for the King of England,and it was positively asserted that he was aiming at aroyal diadem. When the King was informed of this, herecalled Hugh to England, but De Lacy despised the com-mand.Shortly afterwards, fortune favoured the King ofEngland ; De Lacy was assassinated through the perfidyof a young man whom he had made his friend, and whobelonged to a band of confederated Irish.Henry thenhappened to be at the extremity of England. On hearingof the rnurder of De Lacy, he manifested extraordinary joy.Affairs in Ireland soon received from him a more circum-spect organisation." (William of Newbridge, lib. 3, c. 9.)All these facts, attested by English chroniclers, and evenby those who were dependent on the Court, show the pre-carious state of English rule in Ireland under Henry II.They cannot be reconciled with the hypothesis of a Ponti-fical Bull that had made a donation of the land of Irelandto the King of England.