CHAPTER XIX.DIPLOMA ATTRIBUTED TO ALEXANDER II".GiRALDUs Cambrensis, who, it seems, was the first topublish the diploma of Pope Alexander, in Hibernia, Ex-pugnata, disclaimed it afterwards in another work that hepublished towards the close of his life, entitled De Instruc.Some assure us, he says, or pretend totione Principis.believe, that the diploma was obtained ; but others denySicut a quibusdam impetratumthat it was ever obtained.asseritur : ab aliis autem unquam impetratum fuisse nega-There is no chance of making capital out of thistur.document.!Like the Apocryphal Bull, this diploma is without date ;neither does it express the name of the King- to whom it isO'Callaghan has not failed to publish it, ob-addressed.serving-, with Dr. Lanigan, that " the attempts to dis-guilty of injustice. The conviction will grow on the reader's mind thatAdrian, being a native of England, knew better than others what tothink of the Plantagenets, and that probably he never even once in hislife wrote to Henry.Trans.Migne gives over 1,500 letters attributed to Pope Alexander III.He then adds two under the heading " Spuria." One of these isaddressed to Henry II., and is specially interesting as giving himauthority over the Bishops of England : " Insuper, fili charissime, siepiscopi tui regni in nostro mandato apostolica et archlepiscopatuexstiterint, volumus quod manusnimis negligentes, quod absit !adjutrices extendas ad sustentandam Romanse Ecclesise libertatemet sic obtinebis apostolicam benedictionem; quia post sententiamlatam si incorrigibiles perstiterint, sacrosancta Ecclesia non potestultra facere nisi invocare brachium seculare." Henry II. in his desireto be Head of the Church, and in several other respects, bore a greatresemblance to Henry VIII. Both had a furious hatred for St. Thomasof Canterbury. Henry VIII. summoned the dead Archbishop before theroyal tribunal on a charge of high treason. The writ was hung upAs the holy man did not appear on the day of trial,at his tomb.His name was blotted out pf thesentence was passed against him.calendar of the saints, the memory of him totally condemned, hisbones burned, his ashes thrown into the river, and all the preciousornaments—gold, silver, jewels, &c.—of his shrine, said to have beenthe richest in Europe, were carried away to the royal coffers.Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.65prove the authenticity of Alexander's, as well as Adrian'sBull, have been equally unsuccessful."I turn to the document in the recent edition of theworks of Gilraldus Cambrensis.(Vol. v., p. 318.)It is unnecessary to discuss at any great length the valueof a diploma that, as I have said above, has been dis-claimed by the very man who was most deeply interestedin maintaining it.1. H/jw strange that Alexander III., who knew nothingof Adrian's Bull when he wrote the three letters of whichI have spoken above (Chapter XIIL), now comes forwardto confirm a donation of Ireland to the King of England,without naming this prince.that2. One might sayPope AlexanderconfirmedAs a matterAdrian's Bull, without ever having seen it.of fact, the pretended authority given by Adrian to enterIreland, and the recommendation to welcome him as lord,are transformed by Alexander into a grant of the dominionof the Irish kingdom: Concessionem ejusdem super Hiber.. ratani habemus etnici regni dominio vohis indulto .confirmamus. Was Ireland a kingdom, or did it bearthis title in any public acts? The plural vobis takes us bythe forger would have us believe that Irelandsurprise :was given to all the Kings of England in perpetuity..3. The mention of Peter's Pence shows beyond ques-tion the falsity of the diploma, as I have established in theIt is inadmissible that Popes Adrianpreceding chapter.and Alexander should have authorised or accepted a tri-bute which was never paid, and which the Holy See neverasked.4. Although Lanigan believed in the genuineness of thediploma, he exclaims against the charge of barbarism andinfamous morals with which the Pontiff is supposed tohe says,reproach the people ofIreland." seems to have known nothing of the state of the IrishChurch, except what he heard from the lying accounts ofthe enemies of Ireland."[Macarice Excidium, p. 247.)5. We find in the diploma the same confusion betweenthe two powers, ecclesiastical and secular, as I have notedin the Apocryphal Bull.It is not to bishops, but to aworldly prince, that Pope Alexander is seen to confide themission of workin;af the moral reformation of a barbarousThe Pope,F—OPOPE ADRIAN IV.,people, Christian only in name—of reforming the Church,heretofore without order in Ireland—of making the nationAre such ideas tolerable?really Christian. iHenry II.,at the time of his dreadful conflict withSt. Thomas of Canterbury, asked much less than PopeAlexander is here supposed to grant him. He submitted,no doubt, but he reserved to himself the taking- of revenge,' Archdeacon Lynch, in his valuable work Cambrensis Eversus,subjects the alleged Bulls of Adrian and Alexander to a long andlearned examination. "I am confident," he says, "that these Bullsare full of errors, and that most of their statements are utterly ground-less, an assertion which can be more easily substantiated by examiningtheir blunders in detail." He scouts the idea of a Pope employingsuch an agent as Henry II., a man full of evil propensities, for agreat and difficult work of moral reformation ; of writing letters sodifferent from the true papal style, so abusive, so devoid of allpaternal tenderness for the Irish people ; and of departing so farfrom the spirit of the Holy See as to treat the Irish Bishops withan utter want of ceremony—reducing them to a rank of secondaryimportance in presence of an English King, at the head of an invadingarmy. "Tyranny of that kind," he says, "was never known underthe mild government of the Popes, whose pious and learned delegatesemployed gentle and persevering persuasion, not violence and platoons,to civilise the hearts of men, lighting by admonition the path forvoluntary obedience, not goading them against their will at the pointof the sword. When the Apostles went forth to propagate the faith,they were not allowed to carry even a staff ; and can it be lawful fortheir successors in that sacred duty to force by arms some namelesssort of reformation on men eminently instructed in religion ? Armsrather barbarise than civihse man. War destroys learning and law,levels cities, burns houses, devastates lands, tramples the corn fields... in a word, throws everything into disorder. A most contemptiblefool the man must be, who first invented the story of the adoptionby the Apostolic See of so preposterous a mode of reforming the moralsDr. Lynch thus goes on to prove by innumerableof any nation."arguments that the aforesaid Bulls were mere forgeries.Vol. ii.,Ed. by the Rev. Dr. Mat. Kelly.chap. 22-25.If the English translation of Cambrensis Eversus by Dr. Kelly,which is done in very good style, were published in one volume byitself, it would be a great boon ; for few readers can be expected totake up the three large volumes, containing both Latin and EnglishUnfortunately, however, the notes attached by Dr. Kelly,texts.though according to the views held by many persons in his day, areusually out of all harmony with the remarks made by the Author.A correcting or reconciling hand would therefore be required, andthis would entail trouble, but far less than that of making anotherConsidering the many new lights thrown on historytranslation.during the past fifty years, a great advance towards truth might begxpected.Trans.——A FRIPND OF IRFI.ANn,67thanks to the diplomas which he would one day haveforged under his eyes.