CHAPTER VSOME DOCTEINES OF THE ANGLO-SAXONCHUECHTHE question of the doctrines of the Anglo-SaxonChurch has been exhaustively treated by Dietrich,and it must be evident to any one who studiesthem with the simple desire to find out what theywere, rather than what he would like them to be,that they are those of the Eoman Church of thatage, and this has not been adequately acknowledgedby Anglican writers. Here, then, the Eomans score,as against writers who seek for Protestant doctrine.But, on the other hand, it is evident that a consider-able number of superstitions have been added bythe mediaeval church and the Papacy since thatAmong these we reckon the doctrine ofperiod.transubstantiation ; which, as our Article has it," overthroweth the nature of a sacrament; themutilation of the Holy Communion by the with-1 and the asser-drawal of the cup from the laity,"1 A kindly High Churchman refers to this as follows :" Denialof the Cup has been one of the most grievous sins of Rome. Andwe may pardon many faults of the Reformers for restoring the Cupto lay people, and ending the abuse of a mutilated Sacrament"(Addresses of the late Archdeacon Bourke).Oxford ; Mowbrays.1911.DOCTRINES OF ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH 67tion that Peter is the Eock on which the ChurchNone of these errors find a place inis to be built.the Catholic faith of the Saxon Church. We willnow pass some of these doctrines in review.ANGLO-SAXON DOCTRINE AS TO THE VIRGIN MARYAND THE SAINTS"The teaching of Mlfa'ic about the Virgin Marywas that of the Church of his day, but he protestedagainst the introduction of new superstitions abouther which some persons indulged in.She hadthe Mother of God "so,often been spoken of asfor example, we have already seen in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, as to an attack on London thatoccurred A.D. 994, it is said that the "holy Motherof God on that day showed her mercy to the citizens,and delivered them from their foes," and .Mfricalso uses this expression, and approves it ; thoughto us it cannot seem otherwise than distressing.Her intercession is soughton the Festivalof the AnnunciationHomily of MIMc(Thorpe,Catholic Homilies, vol. i. p. 205) :" Let us pray the blessed and happy Virgin Mary,that she intercede for us to her own Son and Creator,Jesus Christ, Who governs all things, with the Fatherand the Holy Ghost, ever to Eternity.Amen."Also of the comfort derived from Mary (Homilies,"Verily, Mary is thep. 449):Thorpe, vol.i,68AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTbegreatest comfort and support of Christian men,which is very often manifested, as we read inThere seems some confusion of thoughtbooks."to have existed in those days, between the doctrine,clearly held, that the prayers of Mary and theasked for,Saints shouldthey mightintercede with God for us, and the statement thatthe Virgin Mary could herself be a help and support.It is, however, certain that the Anglo-Saxon doctrinemade a decided distinction between the worship andadoration due to God only, one God in Three Persons,and the requests addressed to Mary and the Saintsfor their intercession and succour.thatAt the same time ^Ifric discountenances anynewly introduced superstitions. At first he was notinclined to provide a homily for the birthday of theVirgin Mary. When he decided to do so, he says :1" We will not give the false story which her-etics have told of Mary's birth, for wise teachersHer holy Father was namedhave forbidden it.Joachim, and her mother Anna.They lived inhonourable marriage under Moses' law.This dayis sacred to the honour of Mary, throughout allChristendom. We observe the birthdays of noneother in our Church, save of Christ, of His pureMother, and of St. John, who baptized Him."In the Homily of the festival of the Assumptionof the Virgin, she is designated as "a heavenly1 He denied the " immaculate conceptionof the Virgin Mary."DOCTRINES OF ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH 69Queen," and all the hosts of heaven are describedas welcoming her.In another homily on the same festival, ^Elfricobserves :" What more shall we say to you of this feastday, but that Mary, the Mother of Christ, was onthis day, from this world of toil, taken up to thekingdom of heaven, to her dear Son, Whom she hadborne in life, with Whom she rejoices in eternalIf we say of this feast daymirth to all eternity.more than we read in the holy books that havebeen composed by the inspiration of God, thenshould we be like to those heretics, who from theirown imagination, or from dreams, have recordedmany false traditions; but the orthodox teachersAugustine, Jerome, Gregory, and many othershave,through their wisdom, rejected them.These heret-ical books, nevertheless, yet exist, 'both in Latinand in English, and ignorant men read them.Itis enough for believing men to read and to saywhat is true; and few are those men who canperfectly examine all the holy books that have beeninspired by God's mouth, or by the Spirit of God.Let everyone cast away the heretical leasings thatperdition, and let everyonelead the unwary toread, or listen to, the holy lore, which directsus to the kingdom of heaven, if we will hear it." Let us now fervently pray the blessed Mary,who was to-day raised and exalted above the host ofangels, that she intercede for us to the Almighty God,Who liveth and reigneth for ever and ever. Amen."70AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTIt was held that the Saints should be asked to inter-cede, but that they should not be directly worshipped.This appears throughout the writings of ^Elfric, andLingard,' vol. i. p. 315, in referring to the privateprayers of the layman, quotes Thorpe's Eccl. Institutes,where the directions run :" And this being done, and his Creator alone beingworshipped, let him call upon God's saints, that theymay intercede for him with God, calling first onSt. Mary, and then on all God's saints."So Lingard, vol. ii. p. 83, etc., remarks :"They learned to look up to the Saints in heavenwith feelings of confidence and affection ; to considerthem as friends and protectors, and to implore theiraid in the hour of distress, with the hope that Godwould grant to the prayer of the patron what Hemight otherwise refuse to the prayer of the suppliant."Again, p. 85, Lingard quotes from ArchbishopTheodore, who points out the difference between thelanguage of the Litany, when the petition is addressedto our Lord, and when it is addressed to the saints :" In primis dicitur,'Christe, audi nos/ ac deinde,pro' Sancta Maria, oradicitur,' Christe ora pro nobis, et Sancta Maria, vel SanctePetre audi nos 'c Christe audi nos, et Fili Dei,; sed,"Te rogamus, audi nos/; nequenobis 'Bede concludes a sermon on John the Baptistwith these words :"It is right that on this festival we seek his helpDOCTRINES OF ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH 71in our prayers, who was to us the herald of salvation.Let us then solicit him to obtain for us by his inter-cession, that we may come to that Saviour to whomhe bore testimony," etc.To this may be added the testimony of Alcuin, inhis litany for every day in the week :" Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis ; Sancta Maria, inter-Sancta Maria adjuva mecede pro me peccatore.in hora exitus mei ex hac prsesenti vita."Alcuin also says in his sermon on St. Willibrord :"blessed priest of Christ, do not abandon us wholabour here on earth, but assist us continually byWhile thou wast amongthy prayers from heaven.men, thy life was pleasing to God, let thy prayers,now that thou art with God, be directed to theLet us who celebrate thy festival,profit of men.experience the aid of thy intercession."An instance of how, while asking for their inter-cessions, the saints were not to be worshipped, isafforded by ^Elfric's words in one of the CatholicHomilies, Thorpe, vol. i. p. 175 :" We pray for their intercessions to holy men, thatthey may mediate for us with their Lord and our Lord ;still, we do not worship them as we do God, norwould they permit it, as the angel said to John the' Do thouApostle, when he would fall at his feet :it not, that thou bowest to me, I am God's servant,as thou and thy brethren, worship God alone.'" 11 If we are faithful to the Reformation we shall firmly repudiateasking for the Intercession of the Saints.72AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTThe later Eoman doctrine on St. Peter not yetheld.Sermon on St. Peter, Thorpe, vol. ii. p, 391.Augustine is referred to as the source of thisis, thatsermon, and the important point in itin St. Peter's confession, Christ is described as theEock, and not Peter, as in the subsequent .teachingof the Eoman Church.' stone 'of stone '"Augustinus tractavit, quod Petrus in figuramsignificat ecclesiam, quia Christuspetra, Petrus" Before that time his namepopulus Christianus."was Simon, but the Lord appointed him this name,(thaet is staenen), to the end thatthat ishe might be typical of Christ's Church.Christ(stari), and fromis called petra, that isthat the whole Christian people is called petrus.Christ said, Thou art of stone, and over this stone,that is over the belief which thou now professest, IOver Myself I will buildwill build My Church.My Church, over Me I will build thee, and allPeter nowthe structure of the Christian Church.bears the semblance or type of the holy Church,in which he under Christ is chief, and by hiswalking on the sea betokened both the strong and. They are weak whoweak among God's people. .are slow to good works.".The passage about the rock and St. Peter is192 andby Bede,interpretedpp.similarly255:" Thou art Peter, and from this Eock from whichDOCTRINES OF ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH 73thou hast received thy name, that is upon Myself, Iwill build My Church.Upon this complete faith,which thou hast acknowledged (fidei perfectionem), Iwill build My Church ; and whosoever shall wanderfrom the company that holds this confession, thoughhe may seem to himself to do great things, does notbelong to the edifice of My 'Church."Lingard (vol. ii. p. 89) has an interesting noteon the canonisation of saints :"During the period of which! am writing, the powerof canonizing saints was exercised by the provincialThe first instance ofbishops and national councils.a solemn canonization by the Pope (the oppositearguments of Benedict xiv. do not appear convincing,de canon, I. i. ch. vii.) occurs in the year 993, whenJohn xv., after a diligent inquiry into the life andvirtues of Ulric, bishop of Augsburg, enrolled himIt wasamong the saints (Butler, vol. i. p. 44).not, however, till the beginning of the twelfthprivilege of canonization wascentury thatrestored to the Eoman See by Alexander m."the'S VIEWS OF THE ATONEMENTsays that Satan outwitted himself in hisattack on our Lord."It was as if a hook held his jaws as he swallowedit, the bodily food which the devourer intended toseek being visible, while the Divinity of the Suffererwhich would prove fatal to him was for the time74AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTconcealed. The devil was caught in the hook of HisIncarnation, and while seeking to devour bodily food,he was pierced with the barb of our Lord's Divinity.So he lost the mortals whom he held by right,because he endeavoured to attack by means of deathHim over Whom he had no right, as He wasimmortal."The idea that Satan had a right over mankindthe views of some of the oldwas derived fromFathers.They thought that the price paid by ourLord's death, the ransom effected by Him, wasgiven as compensation to the devil, as mankind bytheir sin had become his captives.They supposedthat Christ, wishing to be strictly just even toSatan, would not forcibly take the human race fromhim, but gave Himself for their redemption.This,however (according to the teaching that .^Elfric hadreceived), was not clearly known to the Evil One,when he compassed the death of the innocent Jesus.Satan thought that our Lord was only a man, andsnatching at Him as such, was pierced and defeatedby the fact that He was God.So ^Elfric observesin his sermon on creation :" Christ came to us because He would suffer deathfor us, and so by His own death redeem all man-kind who believe in Him from hell's torment. Hewould not take us forcibly from the devil's power,unless he had forfeited that power, but the devil didforfeit it entirely when he whetted and instigatedDOCTRINES OF ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH 75the hearts of the Jewish men to the slaying ofChrist."Dietrich remarks as to JElfric's views of theredemption :"If we turn now to the question in whatmanner the personality of Christ, God and man,accomplished the redemption, in other words, wherethe merit of Christ's death lay, we find the theoryof Gregory to be chiefly followed, though notThe task inexpressed quite in the same way.hand was to combine the mercy of God in ChristOrigen had heldto humanity with His justice.that Christ gave His life to the devil as a ransom,to render it just that man should be delivered.Gregory also started from the justice of the divinejudgment, whereby humanity had allowed itself toBut -ZElfric didfall under the power of the devil.not limit himself to the views of any one or moreauthors, as to the meaning of spiritual mysteries."Dietrich (in Medner's Zeitschrift, volume for 1 85 5)adds the following as expressing .ZElfric's doctrine :"It was the custom in England that any one whocould not produce compensation-money for a crimeshould become aserf, and in consequence hisThis fitted in with what thedescendants also.Fathers had taught, that the devil forfeited thewhole of mankind which had before been his pro-perty, by inviting the Jews to kill the InnocentFor in the legal principles of the Anglo-One.76\AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTSaxons, not only every fatal blow, but also theincitement thereto was to be paid for by forfeitureto the King."This .ZElfric applies to men as being the propertyof Satan :"We have often said, and say again, that thejustice of Christ is so great that He would not takemankind from the devil by force, unless SatanBut the devil did forfeit it,forfeited that power.when he led astray the people to killing the Christof Almighty God, and through His innocent deathwe are set free from eternal death, if we do notdestroy ourselves."Another aspect, however, is elsewhere set forthby JElfric, where he says of the Lamb of God-"that he offered Himself in sacrifice to the Father."Commenting on John iii. 1 4, ^351fric remarks :" By His being lifted up on the cross He healedour sins, His death led to life ; we look to His death,that the death may not hurt us that was caused bythe serpent ; Christ by His death brought death tonought."So in the sermon for Pentecost :" The offered Lamb betokened the slaying of Christ,Who, innocent, was offered to His Father for ourEedemption. Now is His passion and His resurrec-tion our Eastertide, because He redeemed us fromthe thraldom of the devil."DOCTRINES OF ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH 7 iTAgain, in the Sermon on the Nativity (CatholicHomilies, vol. ii.) :"hell-torment.Adam, the first man, sinned against God, andbrake his Creator's commandment, and obeyed thedevil's teaching, and was delivered to the devil,Thenhe and all mankind, intoGod ever meditated from the beginning of theworld how He might help mankind, and resaveThen He wouldthem from the power of the devil.not send to our redemption either angel, or arch-angel, or prophets, or apostles, but the Father sentHis only-begotten Son to suffering and to death forThen God manifestedthe redemption of mankind.how great love He had and hath for us, when Hesent His own Child to be slain for us. Who durstdesire that the Almighty King should urge todeath His only-begotten Prince, and so save theThe Son was not forced to become man,servant ?and afterwards to suffer for us, but He was everobedient to His Father unto death. He was only-begotten with His Father in heaven ; then wouldHe not be alone, but would have brothers, andcame to us, because He would bring us to Hiskingdom, to which we had been created."PREDESTINATIONAs regards predestination (Dietrich, in Niedner,volume for 1855, p. 564) ^Elfric did not follow theteaching of St. Augustine, but agreed with John78AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTScotus Erigena. MIMc holdsthat God knowsbeforehand how men will act, He therefore fore-theirneverdestiny, butdesigns any toseesperdition by arbitrary decree, or fails to give theman opportunity of choosing the right.So, in hisHomily on the Epiphany, ^Elfric remarks :"It is true that God loved Jacob and hated Esau(Kom. ix. 13) ; but this was not from ordering of fate,but on account of their divergent merits."In this common-sense conclusion, ^Elfric shows adifference of theological view from Gregory the Greatalso, whom he often follows, as the Apostle of Eng-land, who sent the mission to convert the Saxons.Gregory held to predestination rather than a deci-Further ^Elfric says :sion by merit." God knows certainly the number of the chosenangels, and the chosen human beings, and also thenumber of the spirits that would be lost by pride,and the number of godless men who would go underowing to their godlessness ; but He appointed noone to evil, for He is altogether good, and appointedno one to destruction, because He is true Life.He appointed the chosen to eternal life, because Heknew that in the future they would be such, throughHis Grace and their obedience. He would notdestine the godless to His kingdom because Heknew that they would be godless through their ownwrong-headedness."c> though closely following Eatramnus onDOCTRINES OF ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH 79the subject of the Holy Eucharist, did not followhis views on predestination, a Jurther proof that hethought for himself where he considered it allow-able to do so.On the difficult questions as to freedom andpredestination, JElfric took a practical and common-sense view. He remarks {Lives of the Saints, vol.i. p. 381):..practiseth."God compelleth us not to do good, neitherdoth He debar us from working evil, becauseHe hath given us our own choice.. Thisis the gift, that a man may do what he will,and this is the law, that God recompenseth to everyman according to his works, both in this world, andthat which is to come, whether good or evil, which-Now if any man shouldever hewonder, why God willeth to give to evil men theirown freedom, when He knoweth beforehand, thatthey will do evil, then say we, that it becometh notany rich king, that they all should be slaves whohave to serve him, and that there should not beone free man in his dominion.So likewise itbefitteth not the Almighty Lord that in all Hiskingdom there should not be any who should notbe strictly compelled in doing service. Now ourfreedom ever needeth God's assistance, because wecan do no good thing without God's help ; may Heever guide us in this world, and bring us throughHimself to the eternal life even as He promised toTo Him be praise andall them that love Him.glory for ever and ever,Amen,"80AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTThe same teaching occurs in The Lives of theSaints (vol. i. p. 383) on Auguries:"God compelleth us not to do good,Neither doth He debar us from working evil,Because He hath given us our own choice.He gave a most stedfast gift and a most stedfast lawTogether with that gift, to every man until his end,both to poor and rich.This is the gift, that a man may do what he will,And this is the law, that God recoinpenseth to everyman according to his works,Both in this world, and in that which is to come,Whether good or evil, whichsoever he practiseth.Now if any man should wonder why God willedTo give to evil men their own freedom,When He knoweth beforehand, that they will do evil,Then say we, that it becometh not any rich kingThat they all should be slaves who have to serve him,And that there should not be one freeman in hisdominion.So likewise it befitteth not the Almighty Lord,That in all His kingdom there should not be anycreatureWho should not be strictly compelled to serve Him."ON THE SEVEN ORDERSThorpe's Ancient Laws and Institutes of England,From the Pastoral Epistle writtenvol. ii. p. 379.by JElfric, Abbot, for Wulfstan, Archbishop ofYork :" 34. Beloved, seven orders are appointed inChrist's Church.books for God's ministriesinOne is ostiarius, the second islector, the thirdDOCTRINES OF ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH 81exorcista, the fourth aeoluthus, the fifth subdiaconus,the sixth diaconus, the seventh presbyter or epis-Ostiarius is the doorkeeper, who holds thecopus.Lector is the reader whokeys of the church.Exorcista is an adjuror, whoreads in church.reads over men diseased in mind, and the infirm.Acoluthus is he who bears the lightat God'sSubdiaconus is the under deacon, whoministries.bears the chalice and the dish at the mass, andDiaconus the minister isministers to the deacon.called who ministers to the mass-priest, or to thethe mass, and reads the gospel, hebishop, atmay also give the bread, and baptize children, ifneed be."35. Beloved, understand that both are of one1 the bishop and the mass-priest, that is, oforder,the seventh church order, as holy books tell us ;and both celebrate mass, and preach to men, andboth ought, alike to observe chastity, and preachrighteousness to other men, and set good example ;and no order is reckoned for the holy ministry,except the seven orders which we have beforementioned."36. The bishop is, however, appointed in somedegree for greater benediction than the mass-priest ;that is, to hallow churches, and to ordain priests,to confirm men, and to bless the oil: because itmass-priests mustwere toodo this."37. It is proper for priests, however, on account1 1 commend this statement that priests and bishops belong tothe same order to the consideration of experts in theology, both tothose who are Presbyterian and those who are Episcopalian.multifariousallif682AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTof that seniority, to be humbly subordinate to theirbishop, and live by his direction and wisdom ; andthat he superintend them, and head their courses,so as his name represents, his name is called epis-copus, that is in English, overseeing, because heconstantly oversees his subordinates, and directsthem to proper manners, even as he can mostearnestly."THE ANGLO-SAXON DOCTRINE OF PENITENCEAn Address on Confession and Penitence (inAnglo-Saxon), and with an English translation,will be found in Thorpe's Catholic Homilies, vol. ii.In this, confession is regarded as obligatory.p. 603." No man shall delay to atone for his sins, becauseGod promises to every penitent forgiveness of hissins, but he promises not to any procrastinatorLet no man be ashamedcertain life till the morrow.to make known his sins to one teacher, for he whowill not in this world confess his sins with truerepentance, shall be put to shame before GodAlmighty, and before His hosts of angels, andbefore all men, and before all devils, at the greatdoom, where we shall all be gathered.There willthe deeds of us all be made known to all thosehosts, and he who cannot now for shame confess hissins to one man, shall then be put to shame beforeheaven's inhabitants, and earth's inhabitants, andhell's inhabitants and his shame shall be endless.For no man obtains forgiveness of his sins fromDOCTRINES OF ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH 83God, unless he confess them to some man of Godand by his doom expiate them."It appears that in the Anglo-Saxon Churchprivate confession and absolution were regarded asthe normal way of obtaining forgiveness ; whereas,in our own Eeformed Church, it is evident that ,these are intended to be exceptional, as is shownby the sentence referring to the matter in ourCommunion Serviceand we hold that sins con-fessed in penitence to God only are blotted out bythe merits of our Lord Jesus Christ.The Church of England has respect for the in-dividual conscience. Compare the First Prayer Bookof Edward vi.End of the second Exhortation :"Eequiring such as shall be satisfied with ageneral confession, not to be offended with themthat do use, to their further satisfying, the auricularand secret confession of the priest ; nor those alsowhich think needful or convenient, for the quietnessof their own consciences, particularly to open theirsins to the priest, to be offended with them thatare satisfied with their humble confession to Godand the general confession to the Church ; but inall things to follow and keep the rule of charity ;and every man to be satisfied with his own con-science, not judging other men's minds or con-sciences; whereas he hath no warrant of God'sword to the same."One of -SSlfric's latest writings was a Treatise on84AN ANGLO-SAXON ABBOTPurity (Clcennysse) addressed to a thane namedSiegfyrth, in whose domain a hermit resided whohad written in defence of the marriage of theThe arguments adduced by this hermit doclergy.As he was himself annot appear to be recorded.ascetic they would have all the more weight indefence of family life. We can imagine himsaying that the Pastoral Epistles evidently con-template a married clergy ; that as St. Paul chosethe image of marriage to describe the union ofChrist and His Church, there can be nothingdegrading in it, and that St. Paul himself repre-sents St. Peter as at liberty to take his wife aboutwith him if he thought fit.Further, that St. Paulwhere he advises celibacy plainly says that hisThe hermitadvice is for the "present distress."may have gone on to represent the arguments de-rivable from observation and experience of humanIt was all very well to associate peopleaffairs.together in a monastery, where they might giveeach other social help towards a career of devotion.But priests residing alone in remote villages wouldbe exposed to great temptations to a selfish life,and would miss the divinely ordained training toself-denial and constant thought for others, whicha wife and family must bring with them. Hewould add that if celibacy had any superior meritin itself, it could only develop that merit where itwas voluntary, for no compulsory goodness can beDOCTRINES OF ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH 85meritorious.To ourselves it must appear that theevils of obligatory celibacy in the ministers of theChurch are shown by history to have far outweighedits advantages. Among these drawbacks it madethe clergy too much into a separate caste.